CITY CODE
of
RIVERDALE CITY, UTAH
2001
Code current through: Res. 2020-02, passed 1-7-2020
Published by:
STERLING CODIFIERS
an
American Legal Publishing Company
One West Fourth Street  *  3rd Floor  *  Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
This code of the City of Riverdale, as supplemented, contains legislation up to
and including Res. 2020-02, passed 1-7-2020.  Legislation of the City adopted
after said legislation supersede the provisions of this code to the extent that
they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City office in
order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has been
amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Cincinnati, Ohio
PENDING ORDINANCES
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 587
   AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE MUNICIPAL CODE
   FOR THE CITY OF RIVERDALE, UTAH
   WHEREAS, the City Code of the City of Riverdale, Utah, has been prepared by
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. containing the compilation of all ordinances of a
general nature together with the changes made to said ordinances, under the
direction of the governing body of the City, shall be accepted in all courts
without question as the official code and law of the City as enacted by the
Mayor and City Council; and
   WHEREAS, there is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification, the
loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions
of the official City Code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted
in the proper place in each of the official copies, one copy of which shall be
maintained in the office of the City Recorder, certified as to correctness and
available for inspection at any and all times that said office is regularly
open; and
   WHEREAS, all ordinances of a general nature included in this official City
Code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and the
fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing
body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous effectiveness
of ordinances included in said official City Code. All ordinances of a special
nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating
ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in full force and effect
unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of the City Code. Such
ordinances are not intended to be included in the official City Code; and
   WHEREAS, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change
or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or to
insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be
misrepresented thereby; and
   WHEREAS, all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are, to
the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed;
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT HEREBY ORDAINED AND ENACTED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE
CITY OF RIVERDALE:
   This ordinance and the Code adopted by the same shall be recorded and shall
be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and
publication in pamphlet form as provided by law.
   This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon its adoption and posting.
   PASSED, ADOPTED AND ORDERED POSTED this 11th day of April, 2001.
[IMAGE]
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-5: Conflicts With State Law
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the city council, this city code is hereby declared to be
and shall hereafter constitute the official city code of Riverdale. This city
code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the RIVERDALE CITY CODE and is
hereby published by authority of the city council and shall be supplemented to
incorporate the most recent legislation of the city as provided in section
1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this city code by title in any legal documents. (2001 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The city code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (2001 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the city code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this city code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this city code. Each such replacement page
shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of
the city code. (2001 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this city code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Said code, while in
actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and
remain the property of the city and shall be returned to the office of the city
recorder when directed so to do by order of the city council. (2001 Code)
1-1-5: CONFLICTS WITH STATE LAW:
Whenever anything contained in this code shall be or becomes in conflict with
any provision of the laws of the state, such provision of these ordinances
shall be deemed to be repealed and to be of no effect for such period as such
law so in conflict herewith shall remain in effect and such law shall govern.
(1985 Code § 1-1-7)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
   A.   All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this
city code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this city code or
are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation
ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise
ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; fee ordinances;
ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public
places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to
elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by
or from the city; and all special ordinances.
   B.   The repeal of the ordinances as provided in subsection A of this
section, shall not affect any debt or fee which is accrued, any duty imposed,
any penalty incurred, nor any action or proceeding commenced under or by virtue
of the ordinances repealed or the term of office of any person holding office
at the time these ordinances take effect; nor shall the repeal of any ordinance
have the effect of reviving any ordinance heretofore repealed or superseded.
(2001 Code)
   C.   All prior ordinances which are in conflict or are in any way
inconsistent with the provisions of this code are hereby repealed; provided,
however, that those prior ordinances which have been excluded from this code
but which have not been expressly repealed nor are in conflict with any of the
provisions of this code, shall remain in full force and effect. (1985 Code §
1-1-1; amd. 2001 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this city code or by virtue of the
preceding section, excepting as the city code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this city code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (2001 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former
ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any
offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such
offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any
action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the city
herein repealed, and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this
code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the
same provisions; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
city under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this city code. (2001 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this city code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this code, or any part thereof. The city council
hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective. (2001 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
   A.   Whenever any word in any section of this city code importing the plural
number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons,
any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or
person is referred to in this city code by words importing the singular number
only, or a particular gender, several matters, parties or persons and the
opposite gender and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided,
that these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this
city code which contains any express provision excluding such construction or
where the subject matter or context may be repugnant thereto.
   B.   The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city has been
changed in the content of this city code to "title", "chapter", "section" and/
or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification
purposes only. Such change to the city's ordinances is not meant to amend
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (2001 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
In the construction of this code and all amendments thereto, the following
rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with
the manifest intent of the city council or repugnant to the context of the
ordinance:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
CITY: The city of Riverdale, county of Weber, state of Utah.
CITY CODE: The city code of the city of Riverdale.
CITY COUNCIL: Unless otherwise indicated, the city council of the city of
Riverdale.
COUNTY: The county of Weber, state of Utah.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city employee by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the city of
Riverdale".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the city for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any
act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the city, or any activity which by its perpetuation can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the city of
Riverdale".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
STATE: The state of Utah.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
WHOLESALER: The terms "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this code,
unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the
sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things to persons who purchase for the
purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case such person is unable to write, by such
person's proper mark. (1985 Code §
1-1-4; amd. 2001 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of the city code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted. (2001 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: Sentencing
1-4-2: Offenses Designated; Classified
1-4-3: Limitations And Special Provisions On Sentences
1-4-4: Misdemeanor Citations
1-4-1: SENTENCING:
   A.   Term Of Imprisonment For Misdemeanors 1 : A person who has been
convicted of a misdemeanor may be sentenced to imprisonment as follows:
      1.   In the case of a Class B misdemeanor, for a term not exceeding six
(6) months;
      2.   In the case of a Class C misdemeanor, for a term not exceeding
ninety (90) days. (1985 Code § 13-3-2.2)
   B.   Infractions 2 :
      1.   A person convicted of an infraction may not be imprisoned but may be
subject to a fine, forfeiture and disqualification, or any combination. (1985
Code § 13-3-2.3; amd. 2001 Code)
      2.   Whenever a person is convicted of an infraction and no punishment is
specified, the person may be fined as for a Class C misdemeanor. (1985 Code §
13-3-2.3)
   C.   Fines Of Persons 3 : A person convicted of an offense may, in addition
to any term of imprisonment imposed, be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed:
      1.   Class B Misdemeanor: One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) when the
conviction is of a Class B misdemeanor;
      2.   Class C Misdemeanor: Seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) when the
conviction is of a Class C misdemeanor;
      3.   Infraction: Seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) when the
conviction is of an infraction. (1985 Code § 13-3-3.1)
   D.   Fines Of Corporations 4 : The sentence to pay a fine, when imposed upon
a corporation, association, partnership or governmental instrumentality for an
offense defined in this code, or the ordinances of the city, or for an offense
defined outside of this code over which this city has jurisdiction, for which
no special corporate fine is specified, shall be sentenced to pay an amount,
fixed by the court, not exceeding:
      1.   Class B Misdemeanor: Five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) when the
conviction is for a Class B misdemeanor; and
      2.   Class C Misdemeanor; Infraction: One thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
when the conviction is for a Class C misdemeanor or for an infraction. (1985
Code § 13-3-3.2)
 
Notes
1 1. U.C.A. § 76-3-204.
2 2. U.C.A. § 76-3-205.
3 3. U.C.A. § 76-3-301.
4 4. U.C.A. § 76-3-302.
1-4-2: OFFENSES DESIGNATED; CLASSIFIED:
   A.   Sentencing In Accordance With Chapter:
      1.   A person adjudged guilty of an offense under this code or the
ordinances of this city shall be sentenced in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
      2.   Ordinances enacted after the effective date of this code which
involve an offense should be classified for sentencing purposes in accordance
with this chapter, unless otherwise expressly provided. (1985 Code § 13-3-1.1)
   B.   Designation Of Offenses: Offenses are designated as misdemeanors or
infractions. (1985 Code § 13-3-1.2)
   C.   Misdemeanors Classified 1 :
      1.   Misdemeanors are classified into two (2) categories:
         a.   Class B misdemeanors;
         b.   Class C misdemeanors.
      2.   An offense designated as a misdemeanor or any act prohibited or
declared to be unlawful in this code or any ordinance of this city when no
other specification as to punishment or category is made, is a Class B
misdemeanor. (1985 Code § 13-3-1.3)
   D.   Infractions 2 :
      1.   Infractions are not classified.
      2.   Any offense which is made an infraction in this code or other
ordinances of this city, or which is expressly designated an infraction and any
offense designated by this code or other ordinances of this city which is not
designated as a misdemeanor and for which no penalty is specified is an
infraction. (1985 Code § 13-3-1.4)
   E.   Continuing Violation: In all instances where the violation of this code
or any ordinance hereinafter enacted is a continuing violation, a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which the violation
occurs or continues to occur. (1985 Code § 13-3-1.5)
 
Notes
1 1. U.C.A. § 76-3-104.
2 2. U.C.A. § 76-3-105.
1-4-3: LIMITATIONS AND SPECIAL PROVISIONS ON SENTENCES:
The provisions of Utah Code Annotated section 76-3-401 through 76-3-405, are
hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference, as such limitations and
special provisions on sentences apply to misdemeanors. (1985 Code § 13-3-4.1)
1-4-4: MISDEMEANOR CITATIONS:
   A.   Citation For Misdemeanor: A peace officer of this city, in lieu of
taking a person into custody, or any public official of this city charged with
the enforcement of the laws of this city, may issue and deliver a citation
requiring any person subject to arrest or prosecution on a misdemeanor charge
to appear at the justice court. (1985 Code § 13-15-1)
   B.   Court Appearance; Time; Failure To Appear:
      1.   Persons receiving misdemeanor citations shall appear before the
justice court judge on or before the time and date specified in the citation.
      2.   No citation shall require a person to appear sooner than five (5)
days or later than fourteen (14) days following its issuance.
      3.   Any person who receives a citation and who fails to appear on or
before the time and date and at the court specified shall be subject to arrest.
The justice court judge may issue a warrant of arrest. (1985 Code § 13-15-2;
amd. 2001 Code)
   C.   Contents Of Citation:
      1.   If a citation is issued pursuant to subsection A of this section,
the peace officer or public official shall issue one copy to the person cited
and shall within five (5) days file a duplicate copy with the justice court.
      2.   Each copy of the citation issued under authority of this chapter
shall contain:
         a.   The name, Riverdale City justice court;
         b.   The name of the person cited;
         c.   A brief description of the offense charged;
         d.   The date, time and place at which the offense is alleged to have
occurred;
         e.   The date on which the citation was issued;
         f.   The name of the peace officer or public official who issued the
citation, and the name of the arresting person if an arrest was made by a
private party and the citation was issued in lieu of taking the arrested person
before a magistrate;
         g.   The time and date on or before and after which the person is to
appear;
         h.   The address of the justice court; and
         i.   A notice containing substantially the following language:
   Read Carefully
This citation is not a complaint and will not be used as a complaint without
your consent. If a complaint is filed, you will be provided a copy by the
court. You MUST appear in court on or before the time set in this citation. IF
YOU FAIL TO APPEAR, A COMPLAINT WILL BE FILED AND THE COURT MAY ISSUE A WARRANT
FOR YOUR ARREST.
      (1985 Code § 13-15-3)
   D.   Citation In Lieu Of Complaint; Exceptions:
      1.   Whenever a citation is issued pursuant to the provisions of
subsection A of this section, the copy of the citation filed with the justice
court may be used in lieu of a complaint to which the person cited may plead
guilty or on which bail may be posted and forfeited.
      2.   If the person cited wilfully fails to appear pursuant to a citation
issued under subsection A of this section or pleads not guilty to the offense
charged, or does not deposit bail on or before the date set for his appearance,
a complaint shall be filed and proceedings held in accordance with the Utah
rules of criminal procedure and all other applicable provisions, which
complaint shall be deemed an original pleading; provided, however, that the
person cited may by written agreement waive the filing of the complaint and
thereafter the prosecution may proceed on the citation notwithstanding any
provisions to the contrary. (1985 Code § 13-15-4)
   E.   Wilfully Failing To Appear; Misdemeanor: Any person who wilfully fails
to appear before a court pursuant to a citation issued under the provisions of
subsection A of this section is guilty of a class B misdemeanor, regardless of
the disposition of the charge upon which he was originally cited. (1985 Code §
13-15-5; amd. 2001 Code)
   F.   Fix-It Tickets:
      1.   Established: There is hereby established in the city a fix- it
ticket program for the enforcement of city zoning, business license, building
code and fire code violations. Said fix-it tickets may be issued by the
following personnel: building official, animal control officer, police officers
and selected fire department personnel. The city administrator shall designate
which persons from the fire department may issue said citations. (Ord. 815, 9-
25-2012)
      2.   Applicability: Fix-it tickets shall only be issued for zoning,
business license, building code and fire code violations which are designated
in this code as misdemeanors or infractions.
      3.   Time Period For Correction Of Violation; Extension: After a fix-it
ticket is issued, the citizen will enjoy a fourteen (14) day period in which to
correct the violation before any penalty attaches. An extension of this
correction period may be authorized at the discretion of the city
administrator. The fix-it ticket will be dismissed if the violation is
corrected and one of the officials listed in subsection F1 of this section
subscribes to that fact.
      4.   Failure To Correct: If the violation is not corrected within
fourteen (14) days, it will then be prosecuted as any other misdemeanor or
infraction. (1985 Code § 13-15-6)
CHAPTER 5
OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-5-1: Seal
1-5-1: SEAL:
The seal provided for the city, circular in form, one and two-thirds inches
(12/3") in diameter, the impression of the word "Corporate Seal" in the center,
and the inscription, "City of Riverdale, Weber County, Utah" shall be and the
same is hereby established and declared to be the seal of the city.
[image]
(1985 Code § 2-1-3)
CHAPTER 6
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-6-1: Eligibility And Residency Requirements
1-6-2: Membership; Terms
1-6-3: Mayor As Member Of City Council
1-6-4: City Council
1-6-5: Meetings; Procedure And Conduct
1-6-6: Ordinances And Resolutions; Procedures
1-6-1: ELIGIBILITY AND RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Declaration Of Candidacy: A person filing a declaration of candidacy
for a city office shall:
      1.   Have been a resident of the city for at least one year immediately
before the date of the election; and
      2.   Meet the other requirements of Utah Code Annotated section 20A-9-
203.
   B.   Annexed Areas: A person living in an area annexed to the city meets the
residency requirement of this section if that person resided within the area
annexed to the city for at least one year before the date of the election.
   C.   Registered Voter: Any person elected to city office shall be a
registered voter in the city.
   D.   Residency Maintained: Each elected officer of the city shall maintain
residency within the boundaries of the city during his term of office.
   E.   Residence Outside City: If an elected officer of the city establishes
his principal place of residence as provided in Utah Code Annotated section
20A-2-105 outside of the city during his term of office, the office is
automatically vacant.
   F.   Continuous Absence From City: If an elected city officer is absent from
the city any time during his term of office for a continuous period of more
than sixty (60) days without the consent of the city council, the city office
is automatically vacant. (2001 Code)
1-6-2: MEMBERSHIP; TERMS:
   A.   Composition: The governing body shall be a council of six (6) persons,
one of whom shall be the mayor and the remaining five (5) shall be council
members.
   B.   Election; Terms: The election and terms of office of the officers shall
be as follows:
      1.   The offices of mayor and two (2) council members shall be filled in
municipal elections held in 1977. The terms shall be for four (4) years. These
offices shall be filled every four (4) years in municipal elections.
      2.   The offices of the other three (3) council members shall be filled
in a municipal election held in 1979. The terms shall be for four (4) years.
These offices shall be filled every four (4) years in municipal elections.
      3.   The offices shall be filled in at large elections which shall be
held at the time and the manner provided for electing municipal officers.
      4.   Where both two (2) year and four (4) year terms are to be filled by
election or appointment, the election ballot or appointment shall clearly state
which persons are to be elected or appointed to the shorter term and to the
longer term.
   C.   Vacancy In Office: Mayor or city council vacancies shall be filled as
provided in Utah Code Annotated section 20A-1-510. (2001 Code)
1-6-3: MAYOR AS MEMBER OF CITY COUNCIL:
   A.   Authority Of Mayor: The mayor is the chief executive officer of this
city. He shall supervise the conduct of all city officers and may suspend any
appointive officer from office for sufficient cause; such suspension, however,
will terminate at the next regular meeting of the city council, unless such
officer is, after a hearing and opportunity to present his defense, thereupon
removed from office by action of the city council.
   B.   Presiding Officer; Mayor Pro Tempore: The mayor shall be the
chairperson and preside at the meetings of the city council. In the absence of
the mayor or because of his inability or refusal to act, the city council may
elect a member of the city council to preside over the meeting as mayor pro
tempore, who shall have all the powers and duties of the mayor during his
absence or disability. The council shall, as soon as practicable or at its
first meeting following each regular city election, and after the newly elected
members take office, elect one of its members to serve as mayor pro tempore,
for a term expiring at the first council meeting following each regular city
election. The election of a mayor pro tempore shall be entered in the minutes
of the meeting. (Ord. 852, 2-4-2014)
   C.   Voting; No Vote Except In Tie: The mayor shall not vote, except in the
case of a tie vote of the city council.
   D.   Powers And Duties: The mayor shall:
      1.   Keep the peace and enforce the laws of the city;
      2.   Remit fines and forfeitures and may release any person imprisoned
for violation of any city ordinance;
      3.   Report such remittance or release to the city council at its next
regular session;
      4.   Perform all duties prescribed by law, resolution or ordinance;
      5.   Ensure that all the laws and ordinances and resolutions are
faithfully executed and observed;
      6.   May at any reasonable time examine and inspect the books, papers,
records or documents of the city or of any officer, employee or agent of the
city;
      7.   Report to the city council the condition of the city and recommend
for city council consideration any measures as deemed to be in the best
interests of the city;
      8.   When necessary, call on the residents of the city over the age of
twenty one (21) years to assist in enforcing the laws of the state and
ordinances of the city;
      9.   Appoint, with the advice and consent of the city council, persons to
fill city offices or vacancies on commissions or committees of the city; and
(2001 Code)
      10.   Sign all contracts, leases, deeds and other writings on the part of
the city, authorized by the city council, or required by law or any ordinance
of this city. (1985 Code § 2-2-2)
   E.   No Veto: The mayor shall have no power to veto any act of the city
council, unless otherwise specifically authorized by statute. (2001 Code)
   F.   Bond, Oath Of Office: Before entering upon the discharge of his
official duties, the mayor shall give a bond to the city in the sum of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00), conditioned upon the faithful performance of his
duties, and shall take and subscribe the constitutional oath of office. (1985
Code § 2-2-3)
1-6-4: CITY COUNCIL:
   A.   General Duties Of Council Members: The city council shall perform all
the duties prescribed by statute and by the city ordinances, and all such other
duties consistent with law as may be necessary for the efficient government of
the city; and it shall be the duty of each council member to faithfully perform
the duties of his office.
      1.   The Riverdale City council hereby adopts the "Riverdale City Council
Rules And Procedures" to guide and direct the governing body in its transaction
of city business and purposes and to inform the public of the processes, rules
and procedures used by the city council. The council is hereby empowered to
change, modify or amend the rules and procedures as set forth therein, or as
needed, by resolution duly presented and voted upon by said council. A true and
correct copy of the currently adopted "Riverdale City Council Rules And
Procedures" shall be made available to the public during regular business hours
and posted upon the city website. (Ord. 775, 11-3-2010)
   B.   Regulation Of Officers: The city council shall have power to formulate
and adopt by ordinance or resolution all necessary rules and regulations
prescribing the duties and conduct of the other officers of the city, including
the management of the respective offices, not in conflict with these ordinances
or with the laws of the state. (1985 Code §
2-3-2)
   C.   Approve Claims: It shall be the duty of the city council to examine
carefully the list of all claims presented against the city which list
constitutes the warrant register, and such of them as are found to be valid
obligations of the city shall be approved and ordered paid. (1985 Code §
2-3-3)
   D.   Bond; Oath Of Office: Each member of the city council before assuming
the duties of his office, shall file a bond with the city recorder in the sum
of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), for the faithful performance of his duty,
and shall take and subscribe the constitutional oath of office. (1985 Code §
2-3-4)
1-6-5: MEETINGS; PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT:
   A.   Regular Meetings: The city council shall conduct twenty four (24)
regular meetings which shall be held on the first and third Tuesday of each
month at the Riverdale Civic Center, Riverdale, Utah, which meetings shall
begin promptly at six o'clock (6:00) P.M., but if the meeting date is a legal
holiday, then the meeting shall be held at the same time and place above
described on the day next following that is not a legal holiday. (Ord. 597, 12-
5-2001)
   B.   Special Meetings: If at any time the business of the city requires a
special meeting of the city council, such meeting may be ordered by the mayor
or any two (2) members of the city council. The order shall be entered in the
minutes of the city council. The order shall provide at least three (3) hours'
notice of the special meeting and notice thereof shall be served by the city
recorder on each member who did not sign the order by delivering the notice
personally or by leaving it at the member's usual place of abode. The personal
appearance by a council member at any specially called meeting constitutes a
waiver of the notice required in this subsection. (1985 Code § 2-1-1; amd. 2001
Code)
   C.   Open Meetings: Every meeting is open to the public, unless closed
pursuant to Utah Code Annotated sections 52-4-4 and 52-4-5. (2001 Code)
   D.   Quorum: The majority of the council elected shall constitute a quorum
to do business; but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time, and are
hereby empowered to compel the attendance of absent members, and may, when
necessary, direct the police chief or his/her designee to bring in such member
or members under arrest. Should any member of the council, when notified by the
police chief or other proper officer, that his presence is necessary to form a
quorum (unless he shall present an excuse satisfactory to the council at its
next regular meeting), or should any member leave the council when in session
without the consent of the council, when such leaving would break the quorum,
he may be fined in any sum not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 815, 9-
25-2012)
   E.   Voting:
      1.   How Vote Taken: A roll call vote shall be taken and recorded for all
ordinances, resolutions and any action which would create a liability against
the city and in any other case at the request of any member of the city council
by an "aye" or a "nay" vote and shall be recorded. Every resolution or
ordinance shall be in writing before the vote is taken. (Ord. 710, 7-15-2008)
      2.   Minimum Vote Required: The minimum number of votes required to pass
any ordinance, resolution or to take any action by the city council, unless
otherwise prescribed by law, shall be a majority of the members of the quorum,
but shall never be less than three (3).
         a.   Any ordinance, resolution or motion of the city council having
fewer favorable votes than required herein shall be deemed defeated and
invalid, except a meeting may be adjourned to a specific time by a majority
vote of the city council even though such majority vote is less than that
required herein.
         b.   A majority of the members of the city council, regardless of
number, may fill any vacancy in the city council.
      3.   Reconsideration: Any action taken by the city council shall not be
reconsidered or rescinded at any special meeting unless the number of members
of the city council present at the special meeting is equal to or greater than
the number of members present at the meeting when the action was approved.
(2001 Code)
   F.   Electronic Meetings:
      1.   Authorized: Any public body of Riverdale City may, by following the
procedures and requirements of this subsection F and those outlined by state
law, convene and conduct an electronic meeting.
      2.   Definitions:
    ANCHOR LOCATION: The physical location where a public meeting is held and
from which the electronic meeting originates or from which the participant(s)
is/are connected.
   ELECTRONIC MEETING: A Riverdale City meeting convened or conducted by means
of a telephonic, telecommunications, or computer conference.
   ELECTRONIC NOTICE: Electronic mail or fax.
   MONITOR: To hear live, by speaker or by other equipment, all of the public
statements of each member of the public body who is participating in a meeting;
or see, by computer screen or other visual medium, all public statements of
each member of the public body who is participating in a meeting.
   PARTICIPATE: The ability to communicate with all of the members of the
public body, either verbally or electronically, so that each member of the
public body can hear or see the communication.
   PUBLIC BODY: The city council or other official city body or commission that
is created by city ordinance or resolution and consists of two (2) or more
persons and expends, disburses, or is supported by tax revenue and is vested
with the authority to make decisions regarding the public's business.
   PUBLIC HEARING: A meeting at which comments from the public will be
accepted. At public meetings, participation of the public is through
observation/listening with public input being provided during any approved
period of the meeting agenda that has been designated for such participation.
   PUBLIC STATEMENT: A statement made in the ordinary course of business of the
public body with the intent that all other members of the public body receive
it.
   REMOTE LOCATION: Any place, other than the anchor location, where a member
is at, who participates in a telecommunications meeting.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS MEETING: A formal meeting of the city where one or more
members participates from a remote location via telephone, internet,
television, or other telecommunication means now known or yet to be developed.
      3.   Procedures:
         a.   Procedures Same As For Nonelectronic Meeting: The meeting
procedures to be followed at the electronic meeting shall be the same as those
followed by the public body in a nonelectronic meeting.
         b.   Roll Call Method Used: A speakerphone, or similar amplifying
electronic device, will be connected in such a manner that comments made by the
members participating electronically will be broadcast through the public
address system at the anchor location. Full participation of each member
present and those participating electronically will be given to make inquiries
and participate in the discussion through a roll call method. Votes taken in
these circumstances shall be by roll call method, with each member audibly
verbalizing their vote in accordance with subsection E of this section.
         c.   Electronic Participants Considered Present: Riverdale City
elected and appointed representatives and city staff shall be considered
present as if the individuals were physically on site and present. Any form of
telecommunication may be used, as long as it allows for real time interaction
in the way of discussions, questions and answers, and voting.
         d.   Public Participation: Designated sites at which an electronic
meeting is held will be open to the public unless specifically closed to the
public under state law. Members of the public attending such a meeting may
provide input during any meeting that is designated for public participation.
Space and facilities will be provided at the anchor location so that interested
persons and the public may attend, monitor, and participate in the open
portions of the meeting.
         e.   Minutes To Record Participation: Minutes of the meeting shall
record the presence of members participating through electronic means. The roll
call for members present will be taken verbally and recorded.
         f.   Discussion Of Motions; Voting: Discussion of motions will take
place in accordance with usual procedures with the exception of those present
electronically must declare their intent verbally with their accompanying name
(s). All voting and consensus requests shall be made verbally and by roll call
when a voting participant is present electronically.
         g.   Public Notice: Public notice of the meeting shall be made in the
manner and within the time frame as set forth in Utah Code Annotated section
52-4-202.
         h.   Premeeting Contact: Any member(s) participating from remote
locations shall make contact with the city fifteen (15) minutes prior to the
start of the meeting to ensure that the equipment to be used is in proper
working order.
         i.   Quorum: Members participating via telecommunications are to be
considered present for purposes of establishing a quorum, as defined by law. In
the event of failure of equipment, or other factor, which causes a lack of
communications with a member(s) causing lack of a quorum, no additional
business may be conducted until the quorum can be reconstituted. Continuances
may be granted as set forth by law. Business already conducted remains binding.
         j.   Location: Whenever a meeting is to be held with a member(s) via
telecommunications, the anchor location identified in all notices shall be the
city offices, 4600 South Weber River Drive, Riverdale City, Weber County, Utah,
or such other location as determined by the council in accordance with law.
Public participation is limited to the anchor location. Members participating
via telecommunications may do so from any location where access can be had and
the criteria of this subsection F met.
         k.   Method: Any telecommunications method now known or hereafter
developed may be used to conduct a telecommunications meeting, so long as the
criteria set forth herein can be met. All persons at the anchor location shall
be required to have real time video and/or audio contact with member(s)
participating from remote locations, so as to know the entire discussion and
deliberations of the council. Members participating from remote locations shall
have the obligation to use appropriate equipment or take other precautions to
eliminate static or other disturbances to the orderly conduct of the meeting.
If available, and not cost prohibitive, an audio and video feed is the
preferred method of conducting a telecommunications meeting. (Ord. 709, 7-1-
2008)
1-6-6: ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS; PROCEDURES:
   A.   Power Exercised By Ordinance: The city council may pass any ordinance
to regulate, require, prohibit, govern, control or supervise any activity,
business, conduct or condition authorized by statute or any other provision of
law. An officer of the city shall not be convicted of a criminal offense where
he relied on or enforced an ordinance he reasonably believed to be a valid
ordinance. It shall be a defense to any action for punitive damages that the
officer acted in good faith in enforcing an ordinance or that he enforced an
ordinance on advice of legal counsel.
   B.   Penalty For Violation: Unless otherwise specifically authorized by
statute, the city council may provide a penalty for the violation of any city
ordinance by a fine not to exceed the maximum class B misdemeanor fine under
Utah Code Annotated section 76-3-301 or by a term of imprisonment up to six (6)
months, or by both the fine and term of imprisonment. The city council may
prescribe a minimum penalty for the violation of any city ordinance and may
impose a civil penalty for the unauthorized use of city property, including,
but not limited to, the use of parks, streets and other public grounds or
equipment. Rules of civil procedure shall be substantially followed.
   C.   Form Of Ordinance: Any ordinance passed by the city council shall
contain and be in substantially the following order and form:
      1.   A number;
      2.   A title which indicates the nature of the subject matter of the
ordinance;
      3.   A preamble which states the need or reason for the ordinance; (2001
Code)
      4.   An enacting clause which states: "It is hereby ordained and enacted
by the city council of the city of Riverdale as follows:" and no enacting
clause shall be used in any action of any ordinance except the first; (1985
Code §
1-1-5; amd. 2001 Code)
      5.   The body or subject of the ordinance;
      6.   When applicable, a statement indicating the penalty for violation of
the ordinance or a reference that the punishment is covered by an ordinance
which prescribes the fines and terms of imprisonment for the violation of the
city ordinance; or, the penalty may establish a classification of penalties and
refer to such ordinance in which the penalty for such violation is established;
      7.   A statement indicating the effective date of the ordinance or the
date when the ordinance shall become effective after publication or posting as
required by this section;
      8.   A line for the signature of the mayor or acting mayor to sign the
ordinance; and
      9.   A place for the city recorder to attest the ordinance and affix the
seal of the city.
   D.   Requirements As To Form; Effective Date:
      1.   Ordinances passed or enacted by the city council shall be signed by
the mayor, or if he is absent, by the mayor pro tempore, or by a quorum of the
city council, and shall be recorded before taking effect. No ordinance shall be
void or unlawful by reason of its failure to conform to the provisions of Utah
Code Annotated sections 10-3-704(1) through (4).
      2.   Ordinances shall become effective twenty (20) days after publication
or posting or thirty (30) days after final passage by the city council,
whichever is closer to the date of final passage, but ordinances may become
effective at an earlier or later date after publication or posting if so
provided in the ordinance.
      3.   Ordinances which do not have an effective date shall become
effective twenty (20) days after publication or posting, or thirty (30) days
after final passage by the city council, whichever is sooner.
   E.   Publication And Posting Of Ordinances: All ordinances, except those
enacted pursuant to Utah Code Annotated sections 10-3-706 through 710, before
taking effect shall be deposited in the office of the city recorder and a short
summary of the ordinance published at least once in a newspaper published
within the city, or if there is no newspaper published therein, then by posting
complete copies in three (3) public places within the city. Any ordinance, code
or book, other than the state code, relating to building or safety standards,
city functions, administration, control or regulations, may be adopted and
shall take effect without further publication or posting, if reference is made
to the code or book and at least three (3) copies have been filed for use and
examination by the public in the office of the city recorder prior to the
adoption of the ordinance by the city council. Any state law relating to
building or safety standards, city functions, administration, control or
regulations, may be adopted and shall take effect without further publication
or posting if reference is made to the state code. The ordinance adopting the
code or book shall be published in the manner provided in Utah Code Annotated
sections 10-3-709 and 10-3-710.
   F.   Recording, Numbering And Certification Of Passage:
      1.   The city recorder shall record, in a book used exclusively for that
purpose, all ordinances passed by the city council. The city recorder shall
give each ordinance a number, if the city council has not already so done.
Immediately following each ordinance, or codification of ordinances, the city
recorder shall make or cause to be made a certificate stating the date of
passage and of the date of publication or posting, as required. The record and
memorandum, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of the
contents, passage and publication or posting of the ordinance or codification.
(2001 Code)
      2.   The city recorder shall continue to number all ordinances
consecutively adopted after this code, beginning with the number consecutively
following the number of the last ordinance adopted prior to the adoption of
this code and shall continue thereafter to consecutively number all ordinances
filed and spread upon his records in the order of their passage and shall
assign appropriate section numbers in conformity with the system of numbering
ordinances used in this code. (1985 Code § 1-1-6)
   G.   Resolutions:
      1.   Purpose: Unless otherwise required by law, the city council may
exercise all administrative powers by resolution, including, but not limited
to: a) establishing water and sewer rates; b) charges for garbage collection
and fees charged for city services; c) establishing personnel policies and
guidelines; and d) regulating the use and operation of the city property.
Punishment, fines or forfeitures may not be imposed by resolution.
      2.   Form: Any resolution passed by the city council shall be in a form
and contain sections substantially similar to that prescribed for ordinances.
      3.   Publication; Effective Date: Resolutions may become effective
without publication or posting and may take effect upon passage or at a later
date as the city council may determine, but resolutions may not become
effective more than three (3) months from the date of passage. (2001 Code)
CHAPTER 7
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-7-0: Undue Influence In Hiring Practices
1-7-1: Human Resource Manual
1-7-2: Salaries
1-7-3: Appeal Board
1-7-0: UNDUE INFLUENCE IN HIRING PRACTICES:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any Riverdale City official, elected or
appointed, department head or supervisor to request, suggest, or discuss the
hiring of a relative, or otherwise attempt to influence anyone holding hiring
authority unless such contact is a result of a statutory duty and performed in
the manner and procedure as established by law. Anyone found guilty of making
such attempts will be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor, subject to prosecution
under this section and penalties under subsection 1-4-1A1 of this title. (Ord.
672, 12-5-2006)
1-7-1: HUMAN RESOURCE MANUAL:
Matters relating to personnel, including, but not limited to, job position
descriptions, job classification and compensation, and personnel policies and
procedures, shall be administered within guidelines set forth in the Riverdale
City Corporation Human Resource Manual. Three (3) copies of said manual shall
be filed in the Office of the City Recorder for the use and examination of the
public. Amendments to said manual shall be made by resolution duly adopted and
enacted by the City Council and signed by the Mayor. (1985 Code §
7-1-1)
1-7-2: SALARIES:
   A.   Salaries: Members of the City Council shall be paid seven hundred
thirty dollars seventy six cents ($730.76) per month; the salary of the Mayor
is one thousand eight hundred seven dollars eighty four cents ($1,807.84) per
month. The Mayor's compensation includes attendance and/or performance of other
mayoral duties; i.e., meetings outside of Council meetings, appearances made on
behalf of the City, etc. (Ord. 890, 6-20-2017, eff. 7-1-2017)
1-7-3: APPEAL BOARD:
The policies and procedures of Riverdale City concerning an Appeal Board shall
be established and recognized more fully in, and as a part of, the City's
personnel policy.
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish a procedure
whereby the City can establish an Appeal Board to hear appeals of all
appointive officers and employees of the City, except for members of the Police
Department, Fire Department and heads of departments, who are discharged or
transferred from one (1) position to another.
   B.   Procedure:
      1.   Membership Of Board: The Appeal Board shall consist of three (3)
members and two (2) alternates, chosen by and from the appointive officers and
employees of the City who are not involved in any issue before the Board.
      2.   Members: The three (3) members and two (2) alternates shall be
selected by secret, written ballot in the following manner:
         a.   The three (3) members and two (2) alternates of the Appeal Board
shall be chosen through an election process administered by the City
Administrator. No more than one (1) member from the same department shall sit
on the Board at the same time. The City Administrator shall distribute a blank
ballot to each appointive officer and employee, including himself. All
appointive officers and employees of the City, unless prohibited herein, are
eligible to be members of the Appeal Board and to vote for the members of the
Appeal Board without restriction.
         b.   The City Administrator, City Attorney and HR Manager shall not be
a part of the Appeal Board.
         c.   Each appointive officer and employee shall select one (1) person
from the eligible appointive officers and employees of the City and place that
person's name on the ballot for election to the Appeal Board and return it to
the City Administrator.
The ballots shall be counted at one time by the city administrator and HR
manager together. The names of the three (3) persons receiving the highest
number of votes shall be certified as members of the appeal board and the next
two (2) highest vote receivers shall be considered the two (2) alternates and
all their names posted in a conspicuous place in the city municipal building.
         d.   In the event of a tie vote for one or more of the three (3)
appeal board members and two (2) alternates, the tiebreaking criteria shall be
tenure determined by earliest date of hire.
      3.   Term Of Office: The appeal board members shall hold office for no
more than two (2) years from the date of their selection. A board member may
serve more than one term on the board so long as there is a minimum two (2)
year gap of time between each period of service. If a member ceases to be
employed by the city or the board member is directly involved in the issue
before the board, the city administrator shall appoint one of the alternates to
serve the remaining term of that board member for the remainder of the
unexpired term only or only for the matter that involved the conflict.
      4.   Necessity Of Establishment: The appeal board shall be established by
the above procedure whenever the city council determines by majority vote that
such establishment is necessary. The city council may from time to time amend
these rules or hold a special meeting to address any conflicts or unforeseen
situations concerning this section, which would include appointment of a
special board member in cases where a current serving board member would have a
conflict of interest. (Ord. 842, 8-20-2013)
ARTICLE A.  CITY ADMINISTRATOR
SECTION:
1-7A-1: General Duties
1-7A-2: Specific Duties
1-7A-1: GENERAL DUTIES:
The city administrator shall serve as the chief administrative officer of the
city and shall be responsible for overseeing the day to day operations of the
city departments (supervision of the police chief is required to remain with
the mayor). All city employees, through their department heads, shall be
responsible to the city administrator, who shall in turn be responsible to the
mayor and city council on matters of policy, procedure and business affecting
the city. (Ord. 815, 9-25-2012)
1-7A-2: SPECIFIC DUTIES:
   A.   Long Range Plan Maintained: The city administrator will maintain a long
range plan for the city. It will be used in draft form with the formulation of
the budget and will be finalized and presented for approval by the mayor and
city council no later than July 1 of each fiscal year. The plan will include a
mission statement, goals and measurable objectives for each department or
function. Such plans will also take into consideration the city council's
policy objectives for the operation of city government, ordinances, resolutions
and approved budgets. These goals and objectives will be realistically
attainable and represent initiative and innovation for improvement. If
additional funding is required for attainment, the amount and suggested source
will be identified.
   B.   Monitor Current Year Objectives: Current year objectives from the long
range plan will be monitored by the city administrator against progress
indicators and reported on to the mayor and city council at least quarterly.
   C.   Conduct Staff Meetings: The city administrator will hold staff meetings
with department heads no less than once each month to coordinate and give
overall direction to city affairs and meet one on one with each department head
no less than once each month to review:
      1.   Each department's ongoing productivity in accordance with agreed
upon performance standards; and
      2.   Each department's progress toward completion of annual measurable
objectives.
   D.   Represent, Defend City Council: The city administrator will represent
and defend the decisions of the city council and keep the city council informed
of all important decisions and activities affecting the city. The city
administrator shall advise the mayor and city council on matters of policy,
procedure and business requiring city council awareness or approval.
   E.   Management Seminar: The city administrator will plan and carry out a
management seminar with the mayor, city council and department heads at least
once each year.
   F.   Other Prescribed Duties: The city administrator shall perform such
other duties as may be stated in his/her job description. (1985 Code § 2-8-2;
amd. 2001 Code)
ARTICLE B.  CITY RECORDER
SECTION:
1-7B-1: General Duties
1-7B-2: Specific Duties
1-7B-3: Other Prescribed Duties
1-7B-4: Bond, Oath Required
1-7B-5: Deputy City Recorder
1-7B-1: GENERAL DUTIES:
The city recorder shall have the custody of and safely keep the corporate seal,
records, books and papers entrusted to him/her by the city council and shall
attend all meetings of the city council and record all its proceedings. (1985
Code §
2-4-1)
1-7B-2: SPECIFIC DUTIES:
The city recorder shall:
   A.   Sign and attest all ordinances passed by the city council and signed by
the mayor.
   B.   Certify to the publications of all ordinances or resolutions in the
record book thereof.
   C.   Attest all papers signed by the mayor officially and affix the
corporate seal. (1985 Code §
2-4-2)
   D.   Countersign all contracts made in behalf of the city. Every contract
made in behalf of the city, or to which the city is a party, may be void unless
signed by the city recorder. (1985 Code §
2-4-2; amd. 2001 Code)
   E.   Enter all contracts in a book properly indexed which book shall be open
to the inspection of all interested persons.
   F.   Have the power to administer oaths and to affix the seal of the city
thereto.
   G.   Maintain city council minute books, ordinances, resolutions, agreements
and contract files.
   H.   Be responsible for conducting municipal elections as required by Utah
Code Annotated title 20A. (1985 Code §
2-4-2)
1-7B-3: OTHER PRESCRIBED DUTIES:
The city recorder shall perform such other duties as the city council may
provide by ordinance or resolution or as may be stated in his/her job
description. (1985 Code §
2-4-3)
1-7B-4: BOND, OATH REQUIRED:
Before assuming the duties of his/her office, the city recorder must take and
subscribe the constitutional oath of office and must be bonded under the city's
blanket bond. (1985 Code §
2-4-4)
1-7B-5: DEPUTY CITY RECORDER:
The deputy city recorder or city recorder pro tempore shall perform any of the
above described duties that are assigned to him/her by the city recorder. The
deputy city recorder shall be bonded under the city's blanket bond. (1985 Code
§
2-4-5)
ARTICLE C.  CITY TREASURER
SECTION:
1-7C-1: General Duties
1-7C-2: Receipts For Payment
1-7C-3: Warrants; Order Of Payment
1-7C-4: Special Assessments; Application Of Proceeds
1-7C-5: Deposit Of City Funds; Commingling With Personal Funds
1-7C-6: Report To City Council
1-7C-7: Bond Required
1-7C-8: Deputy City Treasurer
1-7C-1: GENERAL DUTIES:
The city treasurer shall:
   A.   Be custodian of all money, bonds or other securities of the city;
   B.   Determine the cash requirements of the city and provide for the
investment of all monies by following the procedures and requirements of Utah
Code Annotated title 51, chapter 7, State Money Management Act;
   C.   Receive all public funds and money payable to the city, within three
(3) business days after collection, including all taxes, licenses, fines and
intergovernmental revenue, and keep an accurate detailed account thereof in the
manner provided in Utah Code Annotated title 10, chapter 6, and as the city
council may by ordinance or resolution from time to time direct; and
   D.   Collect all special taxes and assessments as provided by law and
ordinance. (1985 Code § 2-5-1; amd. 2001 Code)
1-7C-2: RECEIPTS FOR PAYMENT:
The city treasurer shall give or cause to be given to every person paying money
to the city treasury, a receipt or other evidence of payment therefor,
specifying, as appropriate, the date of payment and upon which account paid and
shall file the duplicate of the receipt, a summary report or other evidence of
payment in the office of the auditor or city recorder. (1985 Code § 2-5-2)
1-7C-3: WARRANTS; ORDER OF PAYMENT:
In the absence of appropriate monies, as set forth in Utah Code Annotated
section 10-6-140, the city treasurer shall pay all warrants in the order in
which presented and as money becomes available for payment thereof in the
appropriate funds of the city. The city treasurer shall note upon the back of
each warrant presented the date of presentation and the date of payment. (1985
Code § 2-5-4)
1-7C-4: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS; APPLICATION OF PROCEEDS:
All money received by the city treasurer on any special assessment shall be
applied to the payment of the improvement for which the assessment was made.
The money shall be used for the payment of interest and principal on bonds or
other indebtedness issued in settlement thereof, and shall be used for no other
purpose whatever, except as otherwise provided in Utah Code Annotated section
10-6-131. (1985 Code § 2-5-5)
1-7C-5: DEPOSIT OF CITY FUNDS; COMMINGLING WITH PERSONAL FUNDS:
The city treasurer shall promptly deposit all city funds in the appropriate
bank accounts of the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to commingle
city funds with his or her own money. Whenever it shall appear that the city
treasurer or any other officer is making profit out of public money, or is
using the same for any purpose not authorized by law, the city treasurer or
officer shall be suspended from office. (1985 Code § 2-5-6)
1-7C-6: REPORT TO CITY COUNCIL:
The city treasurer shall report to the city council at the second meeting of
the month the condition of the treasury, showing the receipts and disbursements
for the last previous month, the amount of money on hand and all other facts
which the city council may require. (1985 Code § 2-5-7)
1-7C-7: BOND REQUIRED:
The city treasurer's bond, or the bond of any person who acts as city
treasurer, may be set by resolution or ordinance in any amount, not less than
that established by the Utah State Money Management Council. (1985 Code § 2-5-
8)
1-7C-8: DEPUTY CITY TREASURER:
The deputy city treasurer shall be appointed by the city council and shall
perform such of the above described duties as are assigned to him/her by the
city treasurer. The deputy city treasurer shall be required to furnish a bond
to the city in the same amount as required of the city treasurer. (1985 Code §
2-5-9)
ARTICLE D.  CITY ATTORNEY
SECTION:
1-7D-1: Office Established
1-7D-2: Duties
1-7D-1: OFFICE ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby created in the city the office of city attorney. The individual
who fills this position shall be known as the city attorney and shall be a
full-time employee of the city. The city attorney shall not conduct a private
law practice from his/her city office nor on city time. (1985 Code §
2-6-1)
1-7D-2: DUTIES:
   A.   The city attorney shall have the duty to prosecute violations of city
ordinances and shall have the same powers in respect to violations of city
ordinances as may be exercised by a county attorney in respect to violations of
state law, including, but not limited to, granting immunity to witnesses for
violations of city ordinance.
   B.   The city attorney shall have such additional duties as the city council
or mayor may assign to him/her from time to time by ordinance, resolution or
job description. (1985 Code §
2-6-2)
ARTICLE E.  BUSINESS ADMINISTRATOR
SECTION:
1-7E-1: General Duties
1-7E-2: Specific Duties
1-7E-3: Other Prescribed Duties
1-7E-4: Bond Required
1-7E-1: GENERAL DUTIES:
The business administrator shall be responsible for the operation and
maintenance of the financial accounting systems for the cash fund of the city.
He shall perform or cause to be performed accounts payable functions, including
preauditing all invoices and claims, reviewing statements and preparing checks.
He shall perform general ledger functions and prepare monthly budget
statements. (1985 Code § 2-7-1; amd. 2001 Code)
1-7E-2: SPECIFIC DUTIES:
The business administrator shall perform the following functions:
   A.   Audit or cause to be audited all accounts allowed by the city council,
and annually make and keep posted in his office a statement showing the
financial condition of the city, including all receipts and disbursements,
debts due to or owing by the city, the names of the parties to or from whom
such debts are due, and on what account such debts were contracted, the source
from which all receipts were received, and upon what accounts such expenditures
were made.
   B.   Draw all orders upon the city treasurer in pursuance of any order or
resolution of the city council, and keep the full accurate account thereof in
books provided for that purpose.
   C.   Audit all claims and demands against the city before they are allowed
by the city council, and keep a record of claims presented and the action of
the city council thereon.
   D.   Pay over all monies belonging to the city and coming into his/her hand
by authority of his/her office to the city treasurer.
   E.   Assist the independent auditors in their examination of the city's
financial statements.
   F.   Monitor the city's finances for compliance with state and federal
regulations. (1985 Code § 2-7-2; amd. 2001 Code)
1-7E-3: OTHER PRESCRIBED DUTIES:
The business administrator shall perform such other duties as the city council
may provide by ordinance or resolution or as may be stated in his/her job
description. (1985 Code § 2-7-4; amd. 2001 Code)
1-7E-4: BOND REQUIRED:
Before assuming the duties of his office, the business administrator must be
bonded under the City's blanket bond. (1985 Code § 2-7-3; amd. 2001 Code)
ARTICLE F.  JUSTICE COURT JUDGE
SECTION:
1-7F-1: Appointment
1-7F-2: Vacancy And Disqualification
1-7F-3: Duties
1-7F-4: Report To City Council
1-7F-5: Pay Money To City Treasurer
1-7F-6: Wage
1-7F-1: APPOINTMENT:
The City Council may appoint a Justice Court Judge. (1985 Code §
10-1-1)
1-7F-2: VACANCY AND DISQUALIFICATION:
If the Justice Court Judge shall for any reason be unable or disqualified to
perform the duties of his office, or shall be absent, the Mayor shall appoint
some other Justice Court Judge residing within the County to act as Justice
Court Judge Pro Tempore, and he shall have the powers and shall discharge the
duties of such Justice Court Judge in the same manner and to the same extent as
the Justice Court Judge might have done, but during the existence of such
disability or absence only. (1985 Code §
10-1-2)
1-7F-3: DUTIES:
The Justice Court Judge shall perform the duties required of him by law and by
the ordinances of the City. (1985 Code §
10-1-3)
1-7F-4: REPORT TO CITY COUNCIL:
The Justice Court Judge shall report to the City Council, at such times as the
City Council may direct, the number of cases brought before him on behalf of
the City during the previous month, the amount of fines levied, the amount
collected and such other pertinent facts as may be required by the City
Council. (1985 Code §
10-1-4)
1-7F-5: PAY MONEY TO CITY TREASURER:
The Justice Court Judge shall, on or before the last day of each month, pay
into the Treasury all monies received by him for fines, or otherwise belonging
to the City, taking therefor, the City Treasurer's receipt. (1985 Code §
10-1-5)
1-7F-6: WAGE:
The wage of the part-time Justice Court Judge is four thousand nine hundred
seven dollars seven cents ($4,907.07) per month or fifty eight thousand eight
hundred eighty four dollars eighty four cents ($58,884.84) annually. (Ord. 899,
6-19-2018, eff. 7-1-2018)
CHAPTER 8
ELECTIONS
SECTION:
1-8-1: Conduct Of Municipal Elections
1-8-2: Campaign Finance Disclosure
1-8-3: Filing Fee
1-8-1: CONDUCT OF MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS:
Municipal elections in the city shall be conducted as specified in Utah Code
Annotated title 20A and all other applicable sections. Such elections shall be
conducted under a nonpartisan system. (1985 Code § 2-9-1)
1-8-2: CAMPAIGN FINANCE DISCLOSURE:
   A.   Compliance: All candidates for elective municipal office shall comply
with the following campaign disclosure requirements. (1985 Code § 2-9a-1)
   B.   Definitions:
    CANDIDATE: Any person who files a declaration of candidacy for an elective
office of the city; or is nominated by a committee or party; or received
contributions or made expenditures or consents to another person receiving
contributions or making expenditures with a view to bringing about such
person's nomination or election to such office; or causes on his behalf any
written material or advertisement to be printed, published, broadcast,
distributed or disseminated which indicates an intention to seek such office.
   CONTRIBUTION: Monetary and nonmonetary contributions such as in-kind
contributions and contributions of tangible things, but shall not include
personal services provided without compensation by individuals volunteering
their time on behalf of a candidate.
   ELECTION: Both primary and general elections.
   EXPENDITURE: A purchase, payment, distribution, loan, advance, deposit or
gift of money or anything of value made for the purpose of influencing the
nomination or election of any candidate. (1985 Code § 2-9a-2)
   C.   Filing Of Disclosure Reports:
      1.   Each candidate for municipal office who is eliminated at a municipal
primary election shall file with the city recorder a campaign finance statement
no later than thirty (30) days after the municipal primary election.
      2.   Each candidate for municipal office who is not eliminated at a
municipal primary election shall file with the city recorder a campaign finance
statement:
         a.   No later than seven (7) days before the municipal general
election; and
         b.   No later than thirty (30) days after the municipal general
election.
   D.   Contents Of Statements: Each statement filed, as required herein, shall
contain the following information:
      1.   A list of each contribution of an aggregate of more than fifty
dollars ($50.00) received by the candidate or pledged to the candidate from any
person, organization or persons from the same organization, and the name of the
donor or pledgor; and
      2.   An aggregate total of all contributions of fifty dollars ($50.00) or
less received by the candidate or pledged to the candidate; and
      3.   A list of all expenditures for political purposes made by the
candidate or pledged by the candidate, and the recipient of each expenditure or
pledge.
   E.   Public Information: The statements required by this section shall be
public documents and shall be available for public inspection and copying
during all regular city business hours.
   F.   Notice: Each recorder shall, at the time the candidate for municipal
office files a declaration of candidacy, and again fourteen (14) days before
each municipal general election, notify the candidate in writing of:
      1.   The provisions of statute or municipal ordinance governing the
disclosure of campaign contributions and expenditures;
      2.   The dates when the candidate's campaign finance statement is
required to be filed; and
      3.   The penalties that apply for failure to file a timely campaign
finance statement.
   G.   Penalty: Any candidate who fails to comply with this section is guilty
of an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this title. Penalty can also include the statutory provision that
requires removal of the candidate's name from the ballot for failure to file
the required campaign finance statement when required. (Ord. 654, 2-21-2006)
1-8-3: FILING FEE:
   A.   Individuals filing as candidates for the city council or for mayor
shall pay a fee established in section
1-12-12 of this title at the time of filing their candidacy with the city
recorder. This filing fee shall be refundable only if it is determined that the
person filing is not qualified to be a candidate, or who is found to have
improperly filed. In lieu of the filing fee, the option exists that a petition,
with at least fifty (50) registered voter signatures in support of the
candidate, may be filed with the city recorder. (Ord. 686, 6-19-2007)
CHAPTER 9
PURCHASING PROCEDURES
SECTION:
1-9-1: Definitions
1-9-2: Administration; Purchasing Authority
1-9-3: Competitive Bidding Requirements
1-9-4: Exemptions To Competitive Bidding Requirements
1-9-5: Interlocal Agreements In Letting Of Contracts For Commodities Or
Services
1-9-6: Disposal Or Lease Of Public Property
1-9-7: Donated Property
1-9-8: Personal Purchases
1-9-9: Approval Of Claims And Signing Of Checks
1-9-10: Business Administrator/Treasurer Designated Financial Officer
1-9-11: Prohibited Acts And Activities
1-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context requires otherwise, the terms as used in this chapter shall
have the following meanings:
BIDDING: Procedure used to solicit quotations on price and delivery from
various prospective suppliers of supplies, equipment, and contractual services.
CONTRACTUAL SERVICES: Professional services such as architectural, auditing,
banking, engineering, insurance, legal, or other consulting services.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any item of real or personal property owned by the city.
RESPONSIBLE BID: An offer submitted by a responsible bidder to furnish
supplies, equipment, or contractual services in conformity with the
specifications, delivery terms and conditions, and other requirements included
in the invitation for bids.
RESPONSIBLE BIDDER: A bidder who has furnished, when requested, information and
data to prove that his financial resources, production or service facilities,
service reputation and experience are adequate to make satisfactory delivery of
the supplies, equipment, or contractual services on which he bids; and who has
not violated or attempted to violate any provisions of this chapter.
SUPPLIES, MATERIALS, AND EQUIPMENT: Any and all articles or things which shall
be furnished to or used by any city department. (Ord. 553, 12-10-1998)
1-9-2: ADMINISTRATION; PURCHASING AUTHORITY:
   A.   The mayor and city administrator shall have approval authority for
budgeted purchases of up to twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00).
Department heads shall have approval authority for budgeted purchases of up to
fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00). Department heads may designate a person
or persons within their department to have approval authority for budgeted
purchases up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); all purchases being
authorized must be made pursuant to the approved city/RDA budget.
   B.   No purchases, including petty cash purchases, are to be made without
the prior knowledge and consent of the city administrator, or the department
head for his/her department or the department head's designee as stated in
subsection A of this section. Each department head is responsible for approving
all purchases by his/her department members subject to the provisions in
subsection A of this section which approval shall not be granted if such
approval will require expenditure of funds in excess of the departmental budget
or if the approval request is for more than the department head's approval
authority limit specified in subsection A of this section. Departmental
employees shall not otherwise obligate the city for any amount of money without
the prior approval of his/her department head or the department head's
designee. All purchases and petty cash withdrawals are to be documented on the
appropriate forms and to be properly receipted for at the point of the
transaction. The penalty for failure to comply with this subsection could be
liability for the expenses incurred or other disciplinary action. (Ord. 844, 8-
20-2013)
1-9-3: COMPETITIVE BIDDING REQUIREMENTS:
Except as hereinafter provided, purchases of supplies, equipment, and letting
of contracts shall follow one of the following procedures:
   A.   Formal Contract Procedure: Except as otherwise provided herein,
purchases of supplies, equipment or contractual services of an estimated value
greater than twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) shall be by written
contract with the lowest responsible bidder, pursuant to the procedure
hereinafter prescribed.
      1.   Approval Of Specifications: Prior to seeking bids for equipment or
contractual services having a unit cost in excess of twenty five thousand
dollars ($25,000.00) and not appropriated in the current budget, action of the
city council shall be required to approve specifications and to authorize
advertising for bids. (Ord. 833, 2-5-2013)
      2.   Notice Inviting Bids: Notice inviting bids shall include a general
description of the articles to be purchased, shall state where bid blanks and
specifications may be secured, and the time and place for opening bids. Notice
shall be distributed as widely as possible to solicit a large number of bids to
assure that the city gets the lowest price available for the product or service
being purchased or contracted for.
         a.   Published Notice: Notices inviting bids shall be published at
least ten (10) days before the date of opening of the bids. Notices shall be
published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.
         b.   Bidders List: Sealed bids shall be solicited from all responsible
prospective suppliers whose names are on the bidders list or who have made
written request that their names be added thereto.
         c.   Bulletin Board: Notices advertising pending purchases shall also
be posted on a public bulletin board in the city hall.
      3.   Bid Opening Procedure: Sealed bids shall be submitted as designated
in the notice with the statement "Bid for (item)" on the envelope. Bids shall
be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notice. A
tabulation of all bids received shall be open for public inspection during
regular business hours for a period of not less than thirty (30) days after the
bid opening.
      4.   Rejection Of Bids: In its discretion, the city council may reject
without cause any and all bids presented, and readvertise for bids pursuant to
the procedure hereinabove prescribed. If an acceptable bid is not received
after two (2) attempts, the city council may proceed as it sees fit.
      5.   Award Of Contracts: Except as otherwise provided herein, contracts
shall be awarded by the city council to the lowest responsible bidder. No
particular number of bids needs to be received in order to make a valid award
of a contract so long as the procedures in this section are followed.
      6.   Tie Bids: If two (2) or more bids received are the low bids and are
for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, and
if the public interest will not permit the delay of readvertising for bids, the
city council shall determine which bid, if any, to accept after negotiation
with the tied bidders at the time of the bid opening.
   B.   Public Improvement Contracts: The procedures established by Utah Code
Annotated shall govern all contracts for public improvements. (Ord. 668, 9-19-
2006)
   C.   Open Market Procedure: Purchases of supplies, equipment or contractual
services of an estimated value of twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or
less may be made in the open market pursuant to the procedure hereinafter
prescribed, and without observing the procedure prescribed in subsection A of
this section. All bidding may be dispensed with for purchasing having a total
estimated value of less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
      1.   Minimum Number Of Bids: Open market purchases shall, whenever
possible, be based on at least three (3) bids (price quotations) and shall be
awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. However, no particular number of bids
needs to be received in order to make a valid award of a contract so long as
the procedures in this section are followed.
      2.   Solicitation Of Bids: Bids (price quotations) shall be solicited
from prospective vendors by oral, written, or telephone requests. (Ord. 828,
12-4-2012)
   D.   Professional Service Contracts Procedure: Contracts for professional
services shall be awarded at the discretion of the city council to include, but
not be limited to, the following services: architectural, auditing, banking,
engineering, insurance, and legal. Contracts shall be awarded at the discretion
of the city council based on the evaluation of professional qualifications,
serviceability, cost of service, and other criteria deemed applicable by the
city council. (Ord. 668, 9-19-2006)
1-9-4: EXEMPTIONS TO COMPETITIVE BIDDING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Special Contracts: Contracts which by their nature are not adapted to
being awarded by competitive bidding shall not be subject to the bidding
requirements of this chapter. Some examples of such contracts are: contracts
for items which may only be purchased from a single source; contracts for
additions to equipment owned by the city which may be more efficiently added to
by a certain person or firm; contracts for repairs and maintenance of equipment
owned by the city which may be more efficiently repaired or maintained by a
certain person or firm; contracts for equipment which is similar to existing
city owned equipment on which city personnel are already trained; and contracts
for equipment which is compatible with existing city owned equipment for which
the city maintains an inventory of replacement parts.
   B.   Auction, Closeout, Bankruptcy Sales: If the purchasing agent determines
the supplies, materials or equipment can be purchased at any public auction,
closeout sale, bankruptcy sale or other similar sale, and if a majority of the
city council at a regular or special meeting concurs in such determination and
makes a finding that a purchase at any such auction or sale will be made at a
cost below the market cost in the community, a contract or contracts may be
let, or the purchase made, without complying with the competitive bidding
requirements of this chapter.
   C.   Exchanges: Exchanges of supplies, material or equipment between the
city and any other public agency which are not by sale or auction shall be by
mutual agreement of the respective public agencies.
   D.   State Contract: The city may purchase any goods or services from the
vendor who has the contract to sell that item to agencies of the state of Utah
without complying with the competitive bidding requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 553, 12-10-1998)
1-9-5: INTERLOCAL AGREEMENTS IN LETTING OF CONTRACTS FOR COMMODITIES OR
SERVICES:
The city shall have the power to enter into joint purchase agreements with any
or all other public agencies within the state for the purchase of any commodity
or service, wherein it is determined by the city council to be in the best
interest of the city. (Ord. 553, 12-10-1998)
1-9-6: DISPOSAL OR LEASE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY:
All disposals, leases, and subleases of public property of the city shall be
made under the same conditions and limitations as nearly as possible, as
required by this chapter in the purchase of public property, but the city
council, at its discretion, may also authorize:
   A.   The sale of any such property at public auction if it deems such a sale
desirable and in the best interest of the city;
      1.   The city may dispose of a significant parcel of real property after
giving at least fourteen (14) days' notice before receiving public comment on
the proposed disposition of real property, and
      2.   After giving at least fourteen (14) days' notice, the city shall
hold a public hearing for the public to comment on the proposed disposition of
real property, and
      3.   Said notice and hearing for public comment shall be given and held
on the proposed disposition of significant parcels of real property. A
significant parcel of real property is any real property owned by the city
having a land mass of one-half (1/2) acre or more, or a value of twenty five
thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or more, whichever is greater; or
   B.   Any property with a pecuniary value of less than one hundred dollars
($100.00), as determined by a reasonable market inquiry made by the department
head or city administrator, is exempt from surplus procedures, as set forth in
this chapter, and from sale at public auction, and shall be sold or disposed of
in such a manner as is reasonable and in the best interest of the city, upon
written authorization by the city administrator. Any proceeds received from the
sale of such property shall be placed in the general fund of the city. The sale
or disposal of such property is hereby authorized by the city council, and no
further authorization is needed from the city council; or
   C.   The lease or sublease of any such property at a properly advertised
public hearing under such terms and conditions as it may deem desirable, fair,
and appropriate considering intended land use, equivalent property tax value,
and the best interest of the city. (Ord. 629, 10-21-2003)
1-9-7: DONATED PROPERTY:
All items of property donated, gifted, or transferred to the city, in any
manner whatsoever, is property owned by the city and the sale or disposal of
such property shall be subject to the requirements set forth in section
1-9-6 of this chapter.
Gifts and donations made from the city to outside groups or interests are
strongly discouraged and shall be subject to and handled according to the
provisions set forth in Utah Code Annotated section
10-8-2, concerning the appropriation of public funds. (Ord. 770, 9-21-2010)
1-9-8: PERSONAL PURCHASES:
Purchases of supplies or equipment for the personal use of an official or
employee of the city shall be made only when the item or items are required
parts of his or her equipment and are necessary to the successful performance
of the duties of such city official or employee. Other personal purchases shall
not be permitted and will be the cause for disciplinary action. (Ord. 553, 12-
10-1998)
1-9-9: APPROVAL OF CLAIMS AND SIGNING OF CHECKS:
   A.   Approval Required: All checks drawn on the accounts of the city of
Riverdale and all claims against the city of Riverdale must be approved either
by the mayor or the city council before they are paid. (Ord. 553, 12-10-1998)
   B.   Two Signatures Required; Exceptions:
      1.   Unless otherwise designated in this section, all checks drawn on the
accounts of the city of Riverdale must be signed by two (2) separate
individuals. The city treasurer or his deputy shall determine that a sufficient
amount is on deposit in the appropriate bank account of the city to honor the
check. (Ord. 553, 12-10-1998; amd. 2001 Code)
      2.   The city treasurer or his deputy may sign the following checks
without the necessity of a second signature after adoption of the annual budget
by the city council:
Semimonthly payroll checks;
Withholding deposits for federal, state, FICA, Utah state retirement, fireman's
fund;
Withholding for health and life insurance. (Ord. 553, 12-10-1998)
1-9-10: BUSINESS ADMINISTRATOR/TREASURER DESIGNATED FINANCIAL OFFICER:
   A.   Authority: Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated, title 10, chapter 6, the
business administrator/treasurer is hereby designated as the city's financial
officer and is authorized to:
      1.   Approve the following items:
         a.   Any payroll checks prepared for an authorized city employee hired
in accordance with personnel policies established by city ordinance or
resolution. The amount paid to any such authorized employee shall also be in
agreement with a specific salary assigned to such employee pursuant to a salary
schedule adopted by the city council or a salary amount assigned by ordinance
or resolution of the city council.
         b.   Payment of routine expenditures, such as utility bills and
payroll related expenses (e.g., insurance payments, tax remittance, etc.).
         c.   Any payments in accordance with an authorized city contract that
was made pursuant to established purchasing procedures, referenced in the
budget document, and approved by an appropriation resolution adopted for the
current fiscal year budget, provided that the expenditure does not cause the
budget to be exceeded.
         d.   Payments for capital purchases which were made pursuant to
established purchasing procedures, referenced in the budget document and
approved by an appropriation resolution adopted for the current fiscal year
budget.
      2.   Approve payment for other items not included in subsection A1 of
this section, provided that the amounts do not exceed the amount limits
specified in section
1-9-2 of this chapter.
   B.   Approval By City Council: All other checks and claims must be approved
by the city council before they are paid. (Ord. 674, 12-19-2006)
   C.   Restrictions: The above purchasing approval authority delegated to the
mayor, city administrator, and department heads is hereby subject to the
following restrictions:
      1.   No purchase may be approved by the mayor or his designees which is
not within the duly and legally adopted or adjusted budget.
      2.   No purchase may be approved which was not made in accordance with
personnel and purchasing procedures established by ordinance or resolution.
(Ord. 828, 12-4-2012)
   D.   Verified Claims: The above authorization shall not prevent the city
council from approving all or part of a list of verified claims, including a
specific claim in an amount in excess of the stated maximum, where certified by
the business administrator/treasurer.
   E.   Preaudit: The business administrator/treasurer shall preaudit all
claims pursuant to state statute requirements and shall not disburse any
payments without appropriate approval. Procedures shall be established whereby
documented approval is obtained as authorized by this chapter. At least monthly
a detailed expenditure report shall be prepared and submitted to the council.
   F.   Procedures Established By Resolution: Specific budgetary and
administrative procedures consistent with this chapter may be established by
resolution. (Ord. 674, 12-19-2006)
1-9-11: PROHIBITED ACTS AND ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Conflicts Of Interest: No member of the city council or city employee
may have a direct or indirect interest in any contract entered into by the
city. A violation of this provision shall be cause for removal or other
disciplinary action.
   B.   Collusion Among Bidders: Any agreement or collusion among bidders or
prospective bidders, in restraint of freedom of competition, by agreement to
bid a fixed price, or otherwise, shall render the bids of such bidder void.
   C.   Advance Disclosures: Any disclosure about the bids in advance of their
opening made or permitted by a member of the city council or a city employee
shall render the bids void. This applies whether the bids were solicited by
advertisement or by request.
   D.   Gratuities; Exceptions: No elected or appointed officer shall knowingly
receive, accept, take, seek or solicit, directly or indirectly, any gift or
loan for himself or another if the gift or loan tends to influence him in the
discharge of his official duties, but this subsection does not apply to:
      1.   An occasional nonpecuniary gift having a value of less than fifty
dollars ($50.00); or
      2.   An award publicly presented; or
      3.   Any bona fide loan made in the ordinary course of business; or
      4.   Political campaign contributions actually used in a political
campaign. (Ord. 553, 12-10-1998)
CHAPTER 10
FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
1-10-1: Special Purpose Budgetary Funds
1-10-1: SPECIAL PURPOSE BUDGETARY FUNDS:
   A.   Capital Improvement Fund: There is hereby established in the city a new
special purpose budgetary fund to be called the capital improvement fund. The
purpose of said fund is to account for financial resources to be used for the
acquisition or construction of major capital facilities. This fund shall be an
independent fiscal and accounting entity with a self-balancing set of accounts.
(1985 Code § 2-11-1)
   B.   Internal Service Fund: There is hereby established in the city a new
special purpose budgetary fund to be called the internal service fund. The
purpose of said fund is to provide financing for services rendered to various
funds and departments of the city on a cost-reimbursement basis, to reduce the
likelihood of duplication and excessive costs and to provide for the proper
maintenance and use of city equipment and proper use of city personnel. This
fund shall be an independent fiscal and accounting entity with a self-balancing
set of accounts. (1985 Code § 2-11-2)
   C.   Motor Pool Fund: There is hereby established in the city a special
purpose budgetary fund to be called the motor pool fund. The purpose of said
fund is to provide for the most economical purchase, repair and maintenance of
city equipment used by various city departments. This fund shall be an
independent fiscal and accounting entity with a self-balancing set of accounts.
(1985 Code § 2-11-3)
   D.   Economic Development Fund: There is hereby established in the city a
special purpose budgetary fund to be called the economic development fund. The
purpose of such fund is to stimulate projects and improvements that will
contribute to economic development in the city. Initial funding shall be a
transfer of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) from the fiscal year
1988 general fund, which transfer is hereby authorized. This shall be an
independent fiscal and accounting entity with a self-balancing set of accounts.
(1985 Code § 2-11-4)
CHAPTER 11
PUBLIC RECORDS
SECTION:
1-11-1: Purpose And Adoption Of Utah Code Annotated Sections
1-11-2: Fees
1-11-3: Requesting A Record
1-11-4: Access To, Classification Of And Information On City Records
1-11-5: Appeals
1-11-6: Retention Schedule
1-11-1: PURPOSE AND ADOPTION OF UTAH CODE ANNOTATED SECTIONS:
In amending this chapter, it is the purpose and intent of the city council to
adopt an ordinance acknowledging and complying with the government records
access and management act as contained in chapter 2 of title 63G of the Utah
Code Annotated 1953, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the act), and
specifically to conform with the act which provides that the city may adopt an
ordinance or a policy relating to information practices of the city and its
agencies including classification, designation, scheduling, access, denials,
segregation, appeals, management, retention and amendment of records.
The Riverdale City council hereby adopts and incorporates by reference the
following provisions of the act as part of this chapter as though fully set
forth herein:
Utah Code Annotated sections 63G-2-101 through 107; 63G-2-201; 63G-2-202; 63G-
2-205; 63G-2-206; 63G-2-207; 63G-2-301 through 309; 63G-2-402 through 405; 63G-
2-601 through 603; 63G-2-801; 63G-2-803; 63G-2-804, all of which are contained
in that certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city
recorder, being marked and designated as Utah Code Annotated, are hereby
adopted as part of the public records ordinance of the city and are made part
of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. Records listed and designated as
private, controlled, or protected in the act, that may be included under each
of the respective sections if "properly classified by the entity" are hereby
recognized and adopted by Riverdale City as being included and classified under
each designated section of the act, as well as with other additions that may be
made separately under this chapter. The numerical designations of the above
referenced Utah Code Annotated sections shall be as specified above with the
addition of the numbers "1-11" in front. (Ord. 781, 2-15-2011)
1-11-2: FEES:
   A.   Specified: There is no charge for viewing or inspecting public records.
A city employee shall make all requested copies for the individual for a fee as
provided in the consolidated fee schedule set forth in section
1-12-1 of this title. Requests for city employee assistance shall be subject to
the employee's normal work schedule and may include additional charges.
   B.   Removal From Public Facility Prohibited: Under no circumstances shall
public records be allowed to be taken from any public facility. The city
employee who is locating documents for a citizen shall make every effort to
ensure that no documents are lost, destroyed or taken from the city offices by
the citizen inspecting the public records. In this regard, all briefcases,
purses, bags, sacks or other personal items belonging to the citizen shall be
checked with a city employee and left outside of the room where the documents
are being examined or copied. (Ord. 781, 2-15-2011)
1-11-3: REQUESTING A RECORD:
   A.   Required: A person making a request for a record shall complete a
records request form provided from the city or in accordance with city
requirements which shall include a minimum of his or her name, mailing address,
daytime telephone number, if available, a description of the record(s)
requested that identifies the record with reasonable specificity and the basis
establishing that the person requesting the record is legally entitled to
receive or review the record. A lawfully recognized personal identification
form or card, with an included picture, must also be presented in conjunction
with the records request. Failure to provide this information will result in an
automatic record denial. All record requests presented to the city will be
reviewed by the city attorney for legal compliance prior to release.
   B.   Response; Time Limit: As soon as reasonably possible, but no later than
ten (10) business days after receiving a written request, or five (5) business
days after receiving a written request, if the requester demonstrates that
expedited response to the record request benefits the public rather than the
person, the city employee shall respond to the request by:
      1.   Approving the request and providing the record; or
      2.   Denying the request; or
      3.   Notifying the requester that, because of extraordinary
circumstances, the city will need to delay approval or denial. (Ord. 781, 2-15-
2011)
1-11-4: ACCESS TO, CLASSIFICATION OF AND INFORMATION ON CITY RECORDS:
The city may classify a particular record, record series or information within
a record at any time, and is not required to classify a particular record,
record series or information until access to the record is requested. The city
may redesignate or reclassify records at any time. Any record or record series
generated in the future shall also be so designated, classified and scheduled
for retention. Records classification, designation and scheduling for retention
shall be conducted under the supervision of the city recorder. If more than one
provision of the act and this chapter could govern the classification of a
record, the city shall classify the record by considering the nature of the
interests intended to be protected and the specificity of the competing
provisions. No provision of this chapter shall require the city to classify a
record or record series as private, controlled or protected.
   A.   Right To Inspect: Persons shall have the right to inspect, review,
examine and take copies of city records designated as "public" under the act or
this chapter, upon compliance with the procedures provided in this chapter.
   B.   No Obligation To Create New Record: The city has no obligation to
create a new record or record series in response to a request from a member of
the public, if the record requested is not otherwise regularly maintained or
kept.
   C.   Public Records: All city records are considered public unless they are
designated or classified otherwise in accordance with procedures established by
this chapter consistent with the act, or made nonpublic by other applicable
law, including records for which access is governed or restricted as a
condition of participation in a state or federal program or for receiving state
or federal funds. Public records include those records listed in section 301 of
the act and shall be made available to any person.
   D.   Private Records:
      1.   "Private" records shall include the following:
         a.   City records defined as "private" in the act listed in Utah Code
Annotated sections 63G-2-302(1), (2) and (3);
         b.   City records classified or designated as private in accordance
with this chapter;
         c.   As provided in section 63G-2-302 of the act, private records
include records containing data on individuals, the disclosure of which
constitutes a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy.
         d.   Private records include, but are not limited to, medical history,
records, reports, statements, history, diagnosis, conditions, treatment,
evaluation or similar medical data of an individual.
      2.   Private records shall be made available to the following persons:
         a.   The subject of the record;
         b.   The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor who is the
subject of a record;
         c.   The legal guardian of a legally incapacitated individual who is
the subject of the record; or
         d.   Any insurance provider, agent or other person who has a power of
attorney or notarized release, dated not more than ninety (90) days prior to
the request, from the subject of the record or the subject's legal
representative; or
         e.   Any person presenting an order issued by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
   E.   Controlled Records:
      1.   "Controlled" records shall be those city records defined as
"controlled" in section 63G-2-304 of the act or as classified or designated as
"controlled" pursuant to this chapter.
      2.   Controlled records shall be made available to a physician,
psychologist, certified social worker, government public health agency, who
submits a notarized release from the subject of the record, dated not more than
ninety (90) days prior to the request, from the subject of the record or any
person presenting an order issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
      3.   The city may deny release of any controlled record to anyone if it
reasonably believes releasing the information would be detrimental to the
subject's mental health, the safety of any individual or if it would constitute
a violation of normal professional practice and medical ethics.
   F.   Protected Records:
      1.   Protected records shall be:
         a.   City records defined as "protected" in section 63G-2-305 of the
act;
         b.   City records designated or classified as "protected" according to
this chapter;
         c.   "Drafts", as provided in section 63G-2-305(22) of the act, which
may include records of the mayor's office or the city council relating to
budget analysis and fiscal notes of proposed budgets before issuance of their
final recommendations;
         d.   As provided in section 63G-2-305(9) of the act, records which, if
released, could reasonably be expected to interfere with investigations
undertaken for discipline purposes including city records pertaining to
internal investigation of city employees such as investigations by the internal
affairs division of the city's police department;
         e.   As provided in section 63G-2-305(9) of the act, records created
or maintained for discipline purposes against city employees unless:
            (1)   All available remedies have been exhausted by the employee,
including the internal grievance procedures and proceedings before
administrative agencies,
            (2)   All time periods for appeal have expired, and
            (3)   The disciplinary action was sustained.
      2.   Notwithstanding subsections F1e(1), F1e(2) and F1e(3) of this
section, a record or parts of a record maintained for discipline purposes shall
not be disclosed if the release of the record or part of the record:
         a.   Reasonably could be expected to interfere with investigations
undertaken for discipline or enforcement purposes,
         b.   Reasonably could be expected to disclose the identity of a source
who is not generally known outside of government or disclose information
furnished by a source not generally known outside of government if disclosure
would compromise the source,
         c.   Reasonably could be expected to disclose investigative
techniques, procedures, policies or orders not generally known outside of
government if disclosure would interfere with enforcement or audit efforts, or
         d.   Reasonably could be expected to jeopardize the life or safety of
an individual.
      3.   Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, initial
contact reports concerning ongoing civil or criminal law enforcement
investigations shall not be disclosed while the investigation continues, if
disclosure would impair or jeopardize the success of the investigation or could
deprive a person of a right to a fair trial or impartial hearing.
      4.   Protected records shall be made available to:
         a.   The person who submitted the information in the record;
         b.   A person who has a power of attorney or notarized release, dated
not more than ninety (90) days prior to the request, from all persons or
entities whose interests were sought to be protected by the protected
classification or their legal representative; or
         c.   Any person presenting an order issued by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
         d.   The city otherwise may at its discretion disclose records that
are private only to the extent that the act authorizes such disclosure.
   G.   Segregation Of Records:
      1.   Record Containing Entitled And Unentitled Information:
Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter, if the city receives a
request for access to a record that contains both information that the
requester is entitled to inspect and information that the requester is not
entitled to inspect in this chapter, and, if the information the requester is
entitled to inspect is intelligible, the city:
         a.   Shall allow access to information in the record that the
requester is entitled to inspect under this chapter; and
         b.   May deny access to information in the record if the information
is exempt from disclosure to the requester, issuing a notice of denial as
provided in this chapter.
      2.   Multiple Subjects: If there is more than one subject of a private,
controlled, protected or nonpublic record, the portion of the record that
pertains to another subject shall be segregated from the portion that the
requester is entitled to inspect.
   H.   Limited Records: Limited records shall be those records whose access is
limited by a specific state or federal statute, federal regulations or court
rule. Limited records shall be made available as provided in the specific
statute, regulation and rule which protect the record.
   I.   Sharing Records: The city may disclose a record classified as
"private", "controlled" or "protected" to another governmental entity if the
other governmental entity complies with section 63G-2-206 of the act. The city
may provide a private, protected or controlled record to another governmental
entity if the record is necessary to the performance of the governmental
entity's duties and functions; the record will be used for a purpose similar to
the purpose for which the information in the record was collected or obtained;
and the use of the record produces a public benefit that outweighs the
individual privacy right that protects the record.
   J.   Privacy Interest In A City Record:
      1.   The city recognizes and upholds the personal right of privacy
retained by persons who may be the subject of government records. The city also
recognizes that the act establishes a presumption that governmental records
will generally be considered open and public with certain exceptions. The city
may, at its discretion, disclose records that are "private" or "protected" as
defined in the act and this chapter to persons other than those specified
herein, if the mayor or the city council determines that there is no interest
in restricting access to the record, or that the interest favoring access
outweighs the interest favoring restriction of access. Public access is favored
when countervailing interests are of equal weight. The city shall not release
any record when to do so would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of
privacy in accordance with the act and procedures established in this chapter.
Under circumstances and procedures established by this chapter, certain data in
a record may be rendered nonpublic, although the record itself may be
classified or designated as "public".
   K.   Business Confidentiality Claims:
      1.   Any person who provides to the city a record that the person
believes should be protected under Utah Code Annotated section 63G-2-305(1) or
(2) shall provide with the record a written claim of business confidentiality
and a concise statement of reasons supporting the claim of business
confidentiality.
      2.   The claimant shall be notified by the city if a record subject to a
claim under subsection K1 of this section is classified public or if the city
determines that the record should be otherwise released.
      3.   Except as otherwise provided by court order or applicable law, the
city may not disclose records claimed to be protected under subsection K1 of
this section until the period in which to bring an appeal expires or the end of
the appeals process, including judicial appeal unless the claimant, after
notice, has waived the claim by not appealing or intervening before the appeals
body.
   L.   Record Amendments: Government records held by the city may be amended
or corrected as needed. An individual may contest the accuracy or completeness
of any public, or private, or protected record concerning him or her by
submitting a written request to the city to amend the record. However, this
section does not affect the right of access to private or protected records.
The request shall contain the requester's name, mailing address and daytime
telephone number and a detailed statement explaining why the city should amend
the record. The city shall issue a decision either approving or denying the
request to amend no later than sixty (60) days after receipt of the request.
The city shall inform the requester in writing of its decision. The requester
may appeal the denial of the request to amend a record pursuant to the
provisions contained herein regarding appeals. This section does not apply to
records relating to title to real or personal property, medical records,
judicial case files, or any other records that the city determines must be
maintained in their original form to protect the public interest and to
preserve the integrity of the record system.  (Ord. 781, 2-15-2011)
1-11-5: APPEALS:
   A.   Authority; Time Limit: Any person aggrieved by the city's access
determination, claim of extraordinary circumstances or specified time for
providing records under this chapter, including a person not a party to the
city's proceeding, may appeal the determination within thirty (30) days to the
mayor by filing a notice of appeal.
   B.   Information Required In Notice: The notice of appeal shall contain the
following information:
      1.   The petitioner's name, mailing address and daytime telephone number;
and
      2.   The relief sought.
   C.   Statement Of Facts: The petitioner may file a short statement of facts,
reasons and legal authority in support of the appeal.
   D.   Business Confidentiality Claims: If the appeal involves a record that
is the subject of a business confidentiality claim, the mayor shall:
      1.   Send notice of the requester's appeal to the business
confidentiality claimant within three (3) business days after receiving notice,
except that it shall be given as soon as reasonably possible; and
      2.   Send notice of the business confidentiality claim and schedule for
the recorder's determination to the requester within three (3) business days
after receiving notice of the requester's appeal. The claimant shall have seven
(7) business days after notice is sent by the recorder to submit further
support for the claim of business confidentiality.
   E.   Determination; Time Limit: The mayor shall make a determination on the
appeal within the following period of time:
      1.   Within five (5) business days after the mayor's receipt of the
notice of appeal; or
      2.   In the case of a business confidentiality claim, within twelve (12)
business days after the city sends the requester's notice of appeal to the
business confidentiality claimant.
   F.   Failure To Make Determination: If the mayor fails to make a
determination within the time specified in subsection E of this section, the
failure shall be considered the equivalent of an order denying the appeal.
   G.   Extension Of Time: The provisions of this section notwithstanding, the
parties participating in the proceedings may, by agreement, extend the time
periods specified in this section.
   H.   Release Of Private, Protected Records: The mayor may, upon
consideration and weighing of the various interests and public policies
pertinent to the classification and disclosure or nondisclosure, order the
disclosure of information properly classified as private under Utah Code
Annotated section 63G-2-302 or this code, or protected under Utah Code
Annotated section 63G-2-304 or this code, if the interests favoring access
outweigh the interests favoring restriction of access.
   I.   Notice Of Determination; Notice Of Appeal Rights: The city shall send
written notice of the determination of the mayor to all participants. If the
mayor affirms the denial in whole or in part, the denial shall include a
statement that the requester has the right to appeal the denial to either the
city council or district court and the time limits for filing an appeal. The
appellant shall follow the procedure set forth in Utah Code Annotated section
63G-2-403.
   J.   Appeal: A person aggrieved by the city's classification or designation
determination under this chapter, but who is not requesting access to the
records, may appeal that determination using the procedures provided in this
section. If a nonrequester is the only appellant, the procedures provided in
this section shall apply, except that the determination on the appeal shall be
made within thirty (30) days after receiving notice of appeal.
   K.   Delegation Of Duties: The duties of the mayor under this section may be
delegated. (Ord. 781, 2-15-2011)
1-11-6: RETENTION SCHEDULE:
The Utah municipal general records retention schedule, 1998, a copy of which is
on file in the office of the city recorder, is hereby adopted as the city's
records retention schedule and made part of this chapter as if fully set out
herein. (Ord. 781, 2-15-2011)
CHAPTER 12
CONSOLIDATED FEE SCHEDULE
SECTION:
1-12-1: Public Records
1-12-2: Business Licenses
1-12-3: Liquor Licenses
1-12-4: Animal Fees
1-12-5: Planning And Zoning Fees
1-12-6: Public Works Fees
1-12-7: Police Department Fees
1-12-8: Fire Department Fees
1-12-9: Court Fees
1-12-10: Dishonored Item Charge
1-12-11: Community Services Fees
1-12-12: Election Fees
1-12-13: Annexation Fees
1-12-14: Amendments
1-12-1: PUBLIC RECORDS:
 
A. General GRAMA Fees:
   Fee for photocopies:
      Standard size, non-color white copies, which includes staff time to  $0.25 per
   copy                                                                       page
      Standard size, color copies, which includes staff time to copy       0.40 per
                                                                              page
      11 X 17 copies, which includes staff time to copy                    1.00 per
                                                                              page
      Other odd sized copies                                               Actual
                                                                              costs
                                                                              $1.00 per
                                                                              page plus
                                                                              telephone
   Fee for faxing documents, which includes staff time to fax                 charges for
                                                                              long
                                                                              distance
                                                                              over 10
                                                                              pages
                                                                              Actual
                                                                              cost, not
                                                                              to exceed
                                                                              salary
                                                                              (i.e.,
                                                                              wages only)
                                                                              of lowest
                                                                              paid
   Staff time required to search, compile and otherwise prepare to provide a  employee
   record. Staff time for photocopying, faxing and making CDs and DVDs is     who, in the
   included in the fee for those items                                        discretion
                                                                              of the
                                                                              record's
                                                                              custodian,
                                                                              has the
                                                                              necessary
                                                                              skill and
                                                                              training to
                                                                              perform the
                                                                              request
                                                                              $2.00 for
                                                                              staff mail
                                                                              preparation
                                                                              time, plus
   Mailing and shipping costs                                                 actual
                                                                              mailing
                                                                              costs if
                                                                              greater
                                                                              than $2.00
   Other supplies (CDs, DVDs) and associated staff services:
      CD, which includes staff time to make CD                             $ 5.00
      DVD, which includes staff time to make DVD                           10.00
      Other media/supplies                                                 Actual cost
   Other services (e.g., fees for third party services)                       Actual cost
B. Prepared Items: Fees for prepared items shall be based on the City's cost as follows:
   Title 10                                                                   $15.00
   Contractor's standards                                                     15.00
   Developer's standards                                                      10.00
   General Plan                                                               15.00
   General Plan land use map                                                  2.50
   Business license listing                                                   10.00
   8.5" x 11" black and white street map                                      Free
   11" x 17" or 17" x 22" color City map                                      5.00
   Custom mapping (minimum 1 hour)                                            70.00/hour
   CD recording of meeting (per meeting)                                      5.00
 
(Res. 2019-19, 7-16-2019)
1-12-2: BUSINESS LICENSES:
 
A. Base Fee: Base fees for business licenses are as follows:       
   1.  General business license                  $ 75.00
        Transfer fee                             25.00
   2.  Fair, circus and carnival:
        First day                                550.00
        Each succeeding day                      137.50
       Temporary sales (auctions, Christmas
   3.  tree lots, fireworks stands and car,      330.00
       truck and RV sales from parking lots)
   4.  Cleanup deposit for temporary sales       110.00
       Temporary sales in permanent commercial
   5.  establishments (45 days or less per       55.00
       year)
   6.  Home occupation license (not prorated)    30.00
        Inspection (if needed)                   20.00
        Administrative fee (for fee exempt home
        occupations who request to have a        15.00
        printed license)
        Fee exempt home occupations              No charge
   7.  Residential rental triplex or more (per
       unit):
        All nonowner occupied dwellings          $ 17.00
       Peddler, solicitor, vendor license (per
   8.  person, with each company to furnish a    50.00
       list of solicitors operating within the
       City)
       Sexually oriented business (not
   9.  prorated) (additional to other licenses/
       fees required):
        a. Adult business or seminude dancing    110.00
        bar
        b. Outcall business                      220.00
        c. Seminude dancing agency or seminude   165.00
        entertainment business
        d. Initial investigation fee (onetime    110.00
        fee in addition to above)
       Sexually oriented business employee (per
   10. individual, not prorated) (additional to
       other licenses/fees required):
        a. Employee providing outcall business   165.00
        services away from business premises
        b. Employee of subsections A9a through
        A9c of this section who is not a         55.00
        performer or provides no services
        outside licensed premises
        c. Employee of subsection A9c of this
        section personally providing seminude    165.00
        entertainment to patrons
        d. Professional dancer performing in     110.00
        seminude dancing bar
        e. Any individual applying for more
        than 1 license under this subsection
        shall pay the higher fees, plus an       22.00
        additional fee per each additional
        license
   11. Food trucks:
        a. If not licensed (includes fire        85.00
        inspection)
        b. If licensed with another city in      50.00
        Utah
   12. Special event permit                      125.00
        a. Special event vendor's license        $10.00 per vendor
        b. Law enforcement police officer        $55.00
        hourly rate
        c. Additional fees may apply for use of
        City services
        d. Failure to secure a special event
        permit is a Class B misdemeanor and
        upon conviction thereof shall be
        subject to penalties in accordance with
        the Utah State Code which may include
        fines or imprisonment or both. Each
        person shall be guilty of a separate
        offense for each and every day or        Fine to be determined in court
        portion thereof during which any
        violation of any of the provisions of
        this subsection is committed. Violators
        may be prohibited from organizing
        another special event in Riverdale for
        12 months, or longer with Council
        consensus
   13. New business (prorated per month of       $5.50/mont h
       business after April 30 of each year)
       Federal, State, County and local
   14. government agencies and nonprofit         No charge
       organizations
       Nonprofit organizations must be
       registered with the IRS as a 501(c)(3)
       organization
   Variable Fees: Variable fees for business licenses are as follows (in
B. addition to general fees, with the exception of home occupations, where no
   variable fees apply):       
   1.  Barber and beauty shops per chair         $ 11.00
       Car dealership exterior display area
   2.  (per 5,000 square feet or portion         55.00
       thereof)
   3.  Car wash (per wash bay)                   25.00
   4.  Off premises advertising sign (per sign)  50.00
   5.  Billiard or pool table (per table)        55.00
   6.  Bowling lane (per lane)                   25.00
   7.  Food establishment (per individual seat)  5.00
   8.  Golf course (per hole)                    11.00
   9.  Mobile home park (per rental space)       7.50
   10. Motel, hotel or other rental unit (per    5.00
       unit)
   11. Movie theater or drive-in (per screen)    110.00
   12. Service station (per hose)                25.00
   13. Storage units (per rental unit)           2.50
   14. Storage space - open (per 1,000 square    3.50
       feet or portion thereof)
   15. Coin or token operated gaming devices     25.00
       (per device)
   16. Pawnshops                                 300.00
   17. Swap meet:
          Operator                            55.00
          Individual vendors (per day)        2.00
       New business variable fees shall be
       prorated after April 30 for all new
       business applications. This fee will be
   18. calculated by taking the yearly variable
       fee and dividing by 12 and multiplying
       this by the number of months the
       business will operate to December 31 of
       the same year.
   Square Footage: If none of the variable fees listed in subsection B of this
   section are applicable, apply square footage fee of $55.00 per 5,000 square
C. feet or portion thereof (with the exception of home occupations, where no
   variable fees apply). The square footage fee will be prorated at $5.50 per
   month of business per 5,000 square feet for new business applications that
   are received after April 30 of each year.
   Late Fee: A late fee of 25 percent of the total owing shall be assessed if a
   business fails to renew their business license on or before February 15.
D. (Res. 2015-19, 6-16-2015; amd. Res. 2017-10, 6-20-2017, eff. 7-1-2017; Res.
   2017-25, 10-17-2017, eff. 10-17-2017; Res. 2018-19, 7-17-2018; Res. 2018-24,
   10-2-2018; Res. 2019-19, 7-16-2019)
 
1-12-3: LIQUOR LICENSES:
Fees for liquor licenses are as follows (in addition to general fees and
variable fees):
 
A. Beer license fees:    
   1. Off premises                          $  100.0 0
   2. On premises                           200.00
   3. Tavern                                200.00
   4. Temporary                             300.00
B. Liquor license fees:    
   1. Single event permit                   200.00
   2. Package agency                        200.00
   3. Restaurant (includes liquor and beer) 300.00
   4. General                               300.00
 
(Res. 2019-02, 1-15-2019)
1-12-4: ANIMAL FEES:
 
A. Dog license fees for citizens under the age of 55 shall be as follows:
         
   1. Unaltered dogs                                                    $50.00
   2. Spayed or neutered dogs (must furnish proof)                      15.00
   3. Exotic/nontraditional                                             30.00
   4. Additional late fee if payment is received after March 1          10.00
B. Dog license fees for citizens who furnish proof of being 55 years of age or
   older or a disabled American veteran shall be as follows:          
   1. Unaltered dogs                                                    $25.00
   2. Spayed or neutered dogs (must furnish proof)                      5.00
   3. Lifetime license (life of animal) for spayed or neutered dogs     25.00
   4. Exotic/nontraditional                                             25.00
   5. Additional late fee if payment is received after March 1          10.00
C. The fee for an owner of a licensed dog from another city to obtain a City
   dog license for the rest of the year shall be as follows:       
   1. Unaltered dogs                                                    $25.00
   2. Spayed or neutered dogs (must furnish proof)                      5.00
D. Animal trap rental fees shall be as follows:       
   1. Lost or damaged trap fee                                          65.00
   2. Pick up trapped animal                                            10.00
E. Permit fees for kennels, catteries, groomeries, pet shops, veterinary
   clinics or hospitals shall be as follows:
   1. Class A (3 - 15 animals)                                          $ 50.00
   2. Class B (16 - 29 animals)                                         75.00
   3. Class C (30 or more animals)                                      100.00
   4. Riding stables                                                    30.00
   5. Sportsman's permits-dogs                                          40.00
   6. Additional late fee if payment is received after March 1          25.00
F. Impound and relinquish fees shall be as follows:       
   1. Owner relinquish fee                                              25.00
   2. Owner impound fee                                                 65.00
   3. Shelter fee (contracted kennel)                                   75.00
   4. Shelter fee (City kennel)                                         50.00
   5. Room and board (per day)                                          10.00
   6. Carcass disposal                                                  10.00
   7. Animal control officer has the authority to reduce or waive fees
      for licensed animals
 
(Res. 2015-19, 6-16-2015)
1-12-5: PLANNING AND ZONING FEES:
 
A. Fees for petitions and licenses shall be as follows:       
   1. Petition request for a PRUD                                     $500.00
   2. Conditional use permit                                          75.00
   3. Filing fee for an appeal to the City Appeal Authority           250.00
   4. Filing fee for a mobile home park construction permit           500.00
   5. Filing fee for a petition to change the zone of any property    250.00
B. Fees for submitting a site plan to the Planning Commission shall be as
   follows:
   1. Commercial or Manufacturing Zone (per acre or portion of)       $200.00
   2. Vending cart in Commercial or Manufacturing Zone (per acre or   200.00
      portion of)
   3. Commercial subdivision site plan (per lot/unit)                 50.00
   4. Residential subdivision site plan (per lot/unit)                100.00
   Where submitted building plans are found to be substantially identical to
C. plans reviewed by the building official any time within 1 year prior to
   the date of submission of such substantially identical plans, the plan
   review fees shall be 25 percent of building permit fee.
D. Water connection fees shall be as follows:
   1. Water connection (per inch line size)                           $200.00
   2. Water connection for commercial fire prevention sprinkling      200.00
      systems (per inch diameter)
E. Sewer installation fees and sewer lateral connection fees shall be as
   follows:
   1. Sewer hookup fee (main line)                                    $250.00
   2. Residential (per lot)                                           300.00
   3. Commercial                                                      500.00
   There shall be an additional $15.00 charge per foot of property
   frontage over 80 feet for residential and commercial lots.
   For commercial properties with narrow frontage or other special
   circumstances associated to lot size or use, the City Council may
   determine the appropriate lateral connection fee.
 
F.   Fee for engineer review of development/construction plans submitted to the
Community Development Department shall be as follows:
Any individual or development company that submits a site plan and/or
engineering calculations for review by the Riverdale City Engineer is
responsible for payment of review costs associated with each submittal and
review or reviews.
G.   Public Works Department engineering cost reimbursement:
Any individual or development company's development project that requires
review and/or inspection of the Riverdale City Engineer shall pay for the
review and/or inspection cost associated with said review and/or inspection to
Riverdale City.
 
H. Building and sign permit fee:
      Building permit fee for new construction is
   1. based on actual valuation. Valuation is the
      cost of code regulated construction materials
      and the costs for labor.
      Building permit fee for remodel, addition, or
      interior finish are based on actual valuation
   2. of materials and labor necessary to complete
      the job in compliance with applicable codes.
      The following are guidelines to follow for
      establishing valuation:
                                                        Same as that amount
                                                        adopted by the current
      Living area                                       International Code
                                                        Council (ICC) building
                                                        valuation data
      Basement (unfinished)                             $25.00 per square foot
      Garage                                            $20.00 per square foot
   3. Minimum building and sign permit fee              $48.36
      Permit fee for all signs shall be based on 1/
   4. 2 the actual value of the sign, including the
      cost of installation.
   5. The following are specific prescribed permit
      fees:
         Water heater installation                   48.36
         Furnace/AC installation                     48.36
         Reroof (shingle removal)                    48.36
         Power clearance                             48.36
         Water/sewer laterals                        48.36
         Mobile home setting                         81.30
         Replacement of exterior siding, stucco or   48.36
      windows
         Residential solar panel installation        48.36
                                                       Based on valuation (see
         Commercial solar panel installation        subsection H1 of this
                                                       section)
   6. All permit fees shall include a 1 percent State
      surcharge.
   7. Re-inspection fee                                $65.00
                                                       Actual costs including
   8. For use of outside consultants for plan          reasonable
      checking and inspections or both                 administrative and
                                                       overhead costs
   9. See schedule A attached to Resolution 2012-10
      for all other building and sign permit fees.
 
(Res. 2015-19, 6-16-2015; amd. Res. 2017-25, 10-17-2017, eff. 10-17-2017; Res.
2019-19, 7-16-2019)
1-12-6: PUBLIC WORKS FEES:
 
A. Fees for garbage cans and garbage or garbage recycling pick up per month shall be as
   follows:
   1. First can                                                                $  10.52
   2. Each additional can (minimum of 6 months)                                5.42
      Garbage fees will be taken off when a resident is out of town for at
   3. least 30 days and if the water is shut off. Garbage cans must be put in
      an inaccessible location (garage, shed, backyard, etc.). There will be
      no charge assessed for shutting off or turning on the water.
   4. Curbside garbage recycling per month (can and biweekly pick up):
      a.   Per can                                                          3.12
      A utility service fee waiver (water, sewer, garbage, recycle and storm)
   5. is available to all residents on active military deployment who submit
      a fee waiver form available at the Riverdale Civic Center or online at
      www.riverdalecity.com and provide a copy of their orders.
B. Right-of-way encroachment permit application fee                            35.00
C. Street cut fees shall be as follows:
   1. Deposit                                                                  1,500.00
   2. Permit                                                                   50.00
   3. Cut fee (per square foot)                                                3.10
   4. Additional fee to cut a road less than 2 years old                       500.00
D. The water meter setting fees shall be as follows, plus current cost of meter:
   1. Meters 1 inch or smaller                                                 $20.00
   2. Meters larger than 1 inch                                                50.00
E. Water usage fees shall be as follows:
   1. Residential:
         Base rate 3/4" meter (no water included in base rate)              15.10
      Water Usage     Cost Per
      Rates (Gallons) 1,000 Gallons
         0 to 15,00$0.25
         15,001 to 1.00
      30,000
         Over 30,001.50
   2. Large meter residential meter size base rate (no water included in base
      rate) plus:
      Meter Size Base Rate Table   
         1 inch or $  18.69
      less
         11/2 inche26.38
         2 inches  39.63
         3 inches  79.63
         4 inches  118.88
         6 inches  239.56
         8 inches  399.31
      Water Usage     Cost Per
      Rates (Gallons) 1,000 Gallons
         0 to 15,00$0.25
         15,001 to 1.00
      30,000
         Over 30,001.50
   3. Commercial meter size base rate (no water included in base rate) plus:
      Meter Size Base Rate Table   
         1 inch or $  18.69
      less
         11/2 inche26.38
         2 inches  39.63
         3 inches  79.63
         4 inches  118.88
         6 inches  239.56
         8 inches  399.31
      Water Usage     Cost Per
      Rates (Gallons) 1,000 Gallons
         0 to 15,00$0.25
         15,001 to 1.50
      30,000
         Over 30,002.00
   4. Mobile home parks meter size base rate (no water included in base rate)
      plus:
      Meter Size Base Rate Table   
         1 inch or $  15.19
      less
         11/2 inche21.44
         2 inches  32.25
         3 inches  64.50
         4 inches  96.69
         6 inches  194.75
         8 inches  324.63
      Water Usage     Cost Per
      Rates (Gallons) 1,000 Gallons
         0 to 15,00$0.25
         15,001 to 1.00
      30,000
         Over 30,001.25
   5. Delinquent utility letter fee                                            $10.00
   6. Water reconnect fee:
         Restore water after first disconnect                               25.00
         Restore water for a second or subsequent time because of a
      delinquent bill of the same occupant within 1 year from the date of the  50.00
      most recent termination
         Surcharge for reconnections made during nonbusiness hours          25.00
      A billing adjustment of up to 50% of the leak amount for underground
   7. water service lines is available to all residents and businesses with
      verification that the water service line has been repaired within 2
      weeks of notification of the leak.
      A service line is the main service line from the water meter to the
      home or business, which includes the connection for the sprinkler
      system from the stop and waste valve to the main service line.
      A utility service fee waiver (water, sewer, garbage, recycle and storm)
   8. is available to all residents on active military deployment who submit
      a fee waiver form available at the Riverdale Civic Center or online at
      www.riverdalecity.com and provide a copy of their orders.
F. Sewer usage fees shall be as follows:       
         Residential per unit                                               23.80
                                                                               Consumpti
                                                                               on based
         Commercial                                                         plus
                                                                               water
                                                                               meter
                                                                               size fee
         Sewer Based On Water Meter Size
            3/4 inch    $  28.99
            1 inch    41.45
            11/2 inches    81.76
            2 inches    130.89
            3 inches    244.23
            Overage rate    0.39/1,000 gallons
         Mobile home                                                        $19.36
         Multi-family                                                       28.99
         Residential out of City                                            47.58
         Commercial out of City                                             82.89
   A utility service fee waiver (water, sewer, garbage, recycle and storm) is
   available to all residents on active military deployment who submit a fee
   waiver form available at the Riverdale Civic Center or online at
   www.riverdalecity.com and provide a copy of their orders.
G. Fire hydrant use fees shall be as follows:       
   1. Use fee (up to 30 days)                                                  50.00
   2. Plus each 1,000 gallons of water used                                    2.50
H. Stormwater fees shall be as follows:       
      Residential                                                           2.20
      Commercial and commercial/residential (per 2,600 square feet equivalen2.20
   services unit "ESU", with credit process for certified mitigation)
   A utility service fee waiver (water, sewer, garbage, recycle and storm) is
   available to all residents on active military deployment who submit a fee
   waiver form available at the Riverdale Civic Center or online at
   www.riverdalecity.com and provide a copy of their orders.
I. Fire line fee (per inch of line size)                                       1.10
 
(Res. 2015-19, 6-16-2015; amd. Res. 2016-16, 6-30-2016; Res. 2017-10, 6-20-
2017, eff. 7-1-2017; Res. 2018-19, 7-17-2018; Res. 2019-19, 7-16-2019)
1-12-7: POLICE DEPARTMENT FEES:
 
A. Fingerprinting:
      Residents (per card)             $10.00
      Nonresidents (up to 2 cards      25.00
B. Initial police reports                 10.00
C. Full package police report             25.00
D. Video evidence                   $25.00 per video plus $25.00 per hour
E. Discovery video requests               $25.00
F. Sex offender registration              25.00
 
(Res. 2017-25, 10-17-2017, eff. 10-17-2017)
1-12-8: FIRE DEPARTMENT FEES:
 
   Annual inspection fee (collected as part of the business license fee):
A. Nonprofits registered with the IRS as a 501(c)(3) organization are exempt
   from paying this annual fire inspection fee.
      Under 5,000 square feet                   $30.00
      Over 5,000 square feet (per square        0.01
   foot)
B. HAZMAT cleanup fee:
      Initial fee                         See attachment D attached to
                                             Resolution 2018-19
      Time                                See attachment D attached to
                                             Resolution 2018-19
      Materials                           See attachment D attached to
                                             Resolution 2018-19
C. Ambulance fees:                           See attachment B attached to
                                             Resolution 2019-19
      Materials                           See attachment C attached to
                                             Resolution 2018-19
D. CPR certification for outside agencies          $20.00
   (per person)
E. False fire alarms                         $48.00 per 15 minute increment
 
(Res. 2019-19, 7-16-2019)
1-12-9: COURT FEES:
   A.   Fees assessed for parking violations shall be determined by the Judge
in the Justice Court.
   B.   Court fines and fees to file small claims are established by the Utah
Uniform Fine/Bail Schedule.
   C.   All other court fees and fines shall be in compliance with the criteria
set forth in Utah Code Annotated or as determined by the Utah Supreme Court.
(Res. 2015-19, 6-16-2015)
1-12-10: DISHONORED ITEM CHARGE:
All dishonored payments (including all electronic forms) that are returned to
the City, shall be assessed a twenty five dollar ($25.00) dishonored item
charge. (Res. 2018-19, 7-17-2018)
1-12-11: COMMUNITY SERVICES FEES:
 
A. Old Glory Days fees shall be as follows:
   1. Booth rental for residents                                             $25.00
   2. Booth rental for nonresidents                                          50.00
   3. Booth electrical hookup                                                10.00
   4. Parade sales for residents                                             25.00
   5. Parade sales for nonresidents                                          50.00
B. Fees for the community center shall be as follows:    
   1. Gym and exercise room - open public use - daily fee:
      a.   Individual:
         Resident                                                         1.00
         Nonresident                                                      2.00
      b.   Senior citizens (55 and older)                                 No
                                                                             charge
      c.   Family:
         Resident                                                         $  5.00
         Nonresident                                                      10.00
      d.   Business (per employee)                                        2.00
      e.   City employees, appointed officials and immediate household    No
      family members                                                         charge
   2. Gym and exercise room - open public use - monthly fee:
      a.   Individual:
         Resident                                                         $10.00
         Nonresident                                                      20.00
      b.   Senior citizens (55 and older)                                 No
                                                                             charge
      c.   Family:
         Resident                                                         $20.00
         Nonresident                                                      40.00
      d.   Business (per employee)                                        20.00
      e.   City employees, appointed officials and immediate household    No
      family members                                                         charge
   3. Gym and exercise room - open public use - annual fee:
      a.   Individual:
         Resident                                                         $100.00
         Nonresident                                                      200.00
      b.   Senior citizens (55 and older)                                 No
                                                                             charge
      c.   Family:
         Resident                                                         $200.00
         Nonresident                                                      400.00
      d.   Business (per employee)                                        200.00
      e.   City employees, appointed officials and immediate household    No
      family members                                                         charge
   4. Reservation/rental:
      a.   Security deposit for all uses (refundable) minimum, or as      $100.00
      determined by business administrator based upon use
      b.   Gymnasium - hourly fee (2 hour minimum):
         (1) City residents and employees                                 150.00
         (2) Approved nonprofit and civic groups                          150.00
         (3) Noncity residents                                            450.00
         (4) Business                                                     450.00
      c.   Exercise room - hourly fee (1 hour minimum):
         (1) City residents and employees                                 25.00
         (2) Approved nonprofit and civic groups                          25.00
         (3) Noncity residents                                            75.00
         (4) Business                                                     75.00
      d.   Large meeting room - fee per hour (inclusive of setup and
      cleanup times):
         (1) City residents and employees                                 20.00
         (2) Approved nonprofit and civic groups                          20.00
         (3) Noncity residents                                            60.00
         (4) Business                                                     60.00
      e.   Small meeting room - fee per hour (inclusive of setup and
      cleanup times):
         (1) City residents and employees                                 15.00
         (2) Approved nonprofit and civic groups                          15.00
         (3) Noncity residents                                            45.00
         (4) Business                                                     45.00
      f.   Executive meeting room - fee per hour (inclusive of setup and
      cleanup times):
         (1) City residents and employees                                 15.00
         (2) Approved nonprofit and civic groups                          15.00
         (3) Noncity residents                                            45.00
         (4) Business                                                     45.00
      g.   Kitchen - fee per hour (inclusive of setup and cleanup times):
         (1) City residents and employees                                 15.00
         (2) Approved nonprofit and civic groups                          15.00
         (3) Noncity residents                                            45.00
         (4) Business                                                     45.00
C. Riverdale parks and pavilions - use fees:
   1. Small pavilion                 No fees or reservations, small pavilions are
                                     available on a first come, first serve basis
   2. Medium pavilion:
      a.   City residents and                                             $ 25.00
      employees
      b.   Noncity residents and                                          100.00
      businesses
   3. Large pavilion:
      a.   City residents and                                             50.00
      employees
      b.   Noncity residents and                                          150.00
      businesses
      In exchange for community service, the fee may be waived by administration for
      Riverdale area church and civic groups.
D. The charge for governmental agencies shall be reviewed on a case by case basis.
E. Field rental: Only the Golden Spike Park east field is available for rental:
   1. Classification of renter (same day use):
      a.    Resident: $20.00 first game/$15.00 per each additional game
      b.    Nonresident: $25.00 first game/$20.00 per each additional game
      c.    Nonprofit: $20.00 first game/$15.00 per each additional game
      d.    For profit: $25.00 first game/$20.00 per each additional game
      e.    Business: $25.00 first game/$20.00 per each additional game
   2. Prep of fields (onetime prep)                                          $ 
                                                                             30.00
   3. Security deposit                                                       100.00
   4. Scoreboard (per field per day)                                         10.00
   5. Supervisor (per hour)                                                  20.00
 
(Res. 2015-19, 6-16-2015; amd. Res. 2016-27, 12-6-2016)
1-12-12: ELECTION FEES:
   A.   Individuals filing as candidates for the City Council or for Mayor
shall pay a twenty five dollar ($25.00) fee at the time of filing their
candidacy with the City Recorder. This filing fee shall be refundable only if
it is determined that the person filing is not qualified to be a candidate, or
who is found to have improperly filed. In lieu of the filing fee, the option
exists for a petition with at least fifty (50) registered voter signatures in
support of the candidate. (Res. 2015-19, 6-16-2015)
1-12-13: ANNEXATION FEES:
 
Annexation fees:
 0 - 5 acres    $  500.00
 < 5 - 10 acres 1,000.00
 > 10 acres     1,500.00
Additional costs:
 Reimbursement for all publication costs associated with annexation
 Reimbursement for review fee from contracted City Engineer
 Any unforeseen costs associated with the annexation process
 
(Res. 2019-02, 1-15-2019)
1-12-14: AMENDMENTS:
Amendments to this chapter may be effected by resolution adopted by the
Governing Body. (Res. 2019-02, 1-15-2019)
CHAPTER 13
CITATION AND COMPLAINT
SECTION:
1-13-1: Authority
1-13-2: Citation
1-13-3: Failure To Appear
1-13-4: Jurisdiction
1-13-1: AUTHORITY:
   A.   Any Riverdale law enforcement officer may issue citations authorized
under this chapter as well as any other part of this code.
   B.   The fire chief or his/her designee is authorized to issue citations for
violations of the fire code adopted in title 4, chapter 2 of this code, as well
as parking violations around the fire station, in fire zones or at or near fire
hydrants.
   C.   The community development director or his/her designee is authorized to
issue citations for violations of the building, zoning, utility and housing
codes adopted in this title and titles 3, 4, 7, 8, 9 and 10 of this code.
   D.   The public works director or his/her designee is authorized to issue
citations for violations of the public ways, utilities and building codes
adopted in this title and titles 4, 7, 8, 9 and 10 of this code. (Ord. 771, 9-
21-2010)
   E.   The code enforcement officer or his/her designee is authorized to issue
citations for city code violations under all titles of this code. (Ord. 827,
12-4-2012)
   F.   The animal control officer may issue citations for animal offenses or
violations under title 5, chapter 4 of this code.
   G.   The designations of subsections B through F of this section are in
addition to the authority under subsection A of this section. Nothing shall be
construed to limit the authorization of a law enforcement officer to issue
citations for any of these violations nor shall this chapter invalidate any
other code provision currently in place granting authority for that party to
issue citations on behalf of Riverdale City. (Ord. 771, 9-21-2010)
1-13-2: CITATION:
The citation shall conform to the requirements set forth in Utah Code Annotated
77-7-20 and such other information necessary to identify and give the person
cited, notice of the charges against him, and state a specific date and place
for the offender to appear and answer the charges against him. (Ord. 771, 9-21-
2010)
1-13-3: FAILURE TO APPEAR:
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to appear in court to answer to
said charge, regardless of the disposition of the charge for which the citation
in lieu of arrest was issued. Conviction of a failure to appear to a citation
issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a class B
misdemeanor, regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he was
originally cited. (Ord. 771, 9-21-2010)
1-13-4: JURISDICTION:
Issuance of a citation by a person authorized to do so in this chapter or any
other chapter of this code is deemed adequate process to give the appropriate
court subject matter jurisdiction over the offense. (Ord. 771, 9-21-2010)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
RESERVED
CHAPTER 2
RESERVED
CHAPTER 3
PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-3-1: Created
2-3-2: Membership
2-3-3: Removal And Vacancies
2-3-4: Oath Of Office
2-3-5: Chairman Designated
2-3-6: Rules Of Procedure And Conduct
2-3-1: CREATED:
There is hereby created a planning commission for the city, pursuant to the
municipal land use development and management act of the state, which said
planning commission shall have the powers and perform the duties as prescribed
by statute and applicable ordinances of the city. (Ord. 752, 1-19-2010)
2-3-2: MEMBERSHIP:
The planning commission shall consist of seven (7) members to be appointed by
the mayor by and with the advice and consent of the city council; with each of
said members to serve for a term of four (4) years; provided, however,
effective January 1, 2009, the mayor shall reappoint all members of the
planning commission and their terms of office shall be as follows: one member
shall be appointed to a one year term; two (2) members shall be appointed to a
two (2) year term; two (2) members shall be appointed to a three (3) year term;
and two (2) members shall be appointed to a four (4) year term and thereafter
shall be appointed quadrennially, each to serve a term of four (4) years. The
terms of office of the members of the planning commission expire on the first
Monday of February on the years their respective terms end. (Ord. 752, 1-19-
2010)
2-3-3: REMOVAL AND VACANCIES:
Any member of the planning commission may be removed from office by the mayor
with the concurrence of a majority of the members of the city council. Any
replacement for a vacancy arising from the resignation or removal of an
incumbent commissioner shall be appointed by the mayor by and with the advice
and consent of the city council for the remainder of the vacant term. (Ord.
752, 1-19-2010)
2-3-4: OATH OF OFFICE:
The members of the planning commission shall qualify by taking the
constitutional oath of office and filing the same in the office of the city
recorder. (Ord. 752, 1-19-2010)
2-3-5: CHAIRMAN DESIGNATED:
The members of the planning commission shall designate one of its members to
act as chairman; subject, however, to the approval of the mayor and the city
council. (Ord. 752, 1-19-2010)
2-3-6: RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT:
The planning commission may adopt rules governing their procedures and conduct;
provided that any such rules shall not be inconsistent with any governing law
or ordinance. Should any provision of such rules conflict with any law or
ordinance, that provision shall not be enforceable, but such conflict shall not
affect the validity of the remaining rules. (Ord. 752, 1-19-2010)
CHAPTER 4
APPEAL AUTHORITY
SECTION:
2-4-1: Appointment, Term And Removal
2-4-2: Organization And Meetings
2-4-3: Appeals
2-4-4: Stay Of Proceedings Pending Appeal
2-4-5: Notice Of Meeting On Appeal; Right Of Appearance
2-4-6: Powers Of Appeal Authority On Appeal
2-4-7: Decision On Appeal
2-4-8: Vote Necessary For Reversal
2-4-9: Judicial Review Of Appeal Authority's Decision; Time Limitation
2-4-10: Time Limitation Of Variance
2-4-11: Filing Fee
2-4-12: Compensation Of Appeal Authority
2-4-13: Definitions
2-4-1: APPOINTMENT, TERM AND REMOVAL:
The appeal authority shall be a single individual, appointed by the mayor, with
the advice and consent of the city council, for a term of three (3) years and
thereafter may be appointed for succeeding three (3) year terms. The appeal
authority may be removed for cause by the appointing authority upon written
charges and after public hearing, if such public hearing is requested.
Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of the appeal authority whose
term becomes vacant.
   A.   The appeal authority shall, as a minimum, have such training and
experience as will qualify them to conduct administrative or quasi-judicial
hearings regarding land use, land development, and regulatory codes dealing
with issues related to land use and have knowledge and familiarity with
constitutional due process rights.
   B.   The mayor may remove the appeal authority for cause upon receipt of
written charges filed against the appeal authority and upon the advice and
consent of the city council.
   C.   In the case of death, resignation, removal or disqualification, the
position of appeal authority shall be promptly filled by a replacement
appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council for the
unexpired term of the previous appeal authority.
   D.   The appeal authority shall be considered an independent contractor.
   E.   The mayor may, from time to time, appoint an appeal authority pro
tempore on a temporary basis when necessitated by the absence, unavailability,
incapacity or disqualification of the regularly appointed appeal authority,
upon the advice and consent of the city council. Each appeal authority pro
tempore shall, as a minimum, have qualifications which are similar to those
specified in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 757, 3-16-2010)
2-4-2: ORGANIZATION AND MEETINGS:
The appeal authority shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of
state law, this chapter and any other applicable ordinance. Meetings of the
appeal authority shall be held at such times as the appeal authority may
determine. The appeal authority may administer oaths and compel the attendance
of witnesses. All meetings of the appeal authority shall be open to the public.
   A.   Minutes; Records: The appeal authority shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official
actions; all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the city
recorder and shall be a public record.
   B.   Routine, Uncontested Matters: The mayor, with the advice and consent of
the city council, may appoint a zoning administrator to decide routine and
uncontested matters of the appeal authority, in concurrence with the city
attorney, as designated by the appeal authority, and pursuant to its
established guidelines. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the zoning
administrator may appeal the decision to the appeal authority, as provided in
this chapter. (Ord. 757, 3-16-2010)
2-4-3: APPEALS:
Appeals to the appeal authority may be taken by any person aggrieved by his
inability to obtain a building permit, or by the decision of any administrative
officer or agency based upon or made in the course of the administration or
enforcement of the provisions of this title. Appeals to the appeal authority
may be taken by any officer, department, board or bureau of the city affected
by the grant or refusal of a building permit or by other decision of an
administrative officer or agency based on or made in the course of the
administration or enforcement of the provisions of this title.
   A.   Time To Appeal: Any appeal, pursuant to this section must be filed in
writing with the city recorder within fourteen (14) calendar days of the
issuance of the written decision applying the land use ordinance.
   B.   Time For Hearing Appeal: The appeal authority should hear the appeal
within fifteen (15) to thirty (30) days of the date the appeal was filed.
   C.   Written Statement Setting Forth Theories Of Relief Required: The
appellant shall deliver to the appeal authority and all other participants,
five (5) business days prior to the hearing, a written statement setting forth
each and every theory of relief he intends to raise at the hearing, along with
a brief statement of facts in support thereof.
   D.   Condition Precedent To Judicial Review: No theory of relief may be
raised in the district court unless it was timely and specifically presented to
the appeal authority.
   E.   Standard Of Review And Burden Of Proof On Appeal: The appeal authority
shall, on appeal, presume that the decision applying the land use ordinance is
valid and determine only whether or not the decision is arbitrary, capricious,
or illegal. The burden of proof on appeal is on the appellant.
   F.   Due Process Rights: The appeal authority shall respect the due process
rights of each participant. (Ord. 757, 3-16-2010)
2-4-4: STAY OF PROCEEDINGS PENDING APPEAL:
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from,
unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the appeal
authority after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that by
reason of facts stated in the certificate, the stay would in his opinion cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be
stayed otherwise than by restraining order which may be granted by the appeal
authority or by the district court on application and notice and on due cause
shown. (Ord. 757, 3-16-2010)
2-4-5: NOTICE OF MEETING ON APPEAL; RIGHT OF APPEARANCE:
The appeal authority shall fix a reasonable time for the meeting of the appeal,
give public notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties in interest and
shall decide the same within a reasonable time. At the meeting, any party may
appear in person or by agent or by attorney. (Ord. 757, 3-16-2010)
2-4-6: POWERS OF APPEAL AUTHORITY ON APPEAL:
The appeal authority shall have the following powers:
   A.   Appeals: To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the
appellant that there is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal
made by administrative official or agency based on or made in the enforcement
of this title.
   B.   Special Exceptions: To hear and decide, in accordance with the
provisions of this title, requests for "special exceptions" or for
interpretation of the map or for decisions on other special questions on which
such authority is authorized by this title to pass.
   C.   Variances: To authorize, on an appeal, a variance from strict
application of the regulations where, by reason of exceptional narrowness,
shallowness or shape of a specific piece of property at the time of the
enactment of the regulation, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions
or other extraordinary and exceptional situations or conditions of such piece
of property, the strict application of any regulations enacted would result in
peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional and undue
hardships upon, the owner of such property. The variance from such strict
application can be granted so as to relieve such difficulties or hardships,
provided such relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public
good and without substantial impairment to the intent and purpose of the master
plan and this title. Before any variance may be authorized, however, it shall
be shown that:
      1.   The variance will not substantially affect the comprehensive plan of
zoning in the city and that adherence to the strict letter of this title will
cause difficulties and hardships, the imposition of which upon the petitioner
is unnecessary in order to carry out the general purpose of the plan.
      2.   Special circumstances are attached to the property covered by the
application which do not generally apply to the other property in the same
zone.
      3.   Because of said special circumstances, property covered by the
application is deprived of privileges possessed by other properties in the same
zone; and that the granting of the variance is essential to the enjoyment of a
substantial property right possessed by other property in the same zone.
   D.   Nonconforming Uses: To permit the enlargement of, addition to, or
relocation of a building or structure, nonconforming as to use regulations, as
follows:
      1.   For a nonconforming use located in a residential zone, the
enlargement, addition or relocation shall either:
         a.   Comply with all the height, yard and area requirements for a
single-family dwelling in the zone in which the nonconforming building is
located; or
         b.   The proposed enlargement, addition or relocation will either:
            (1)   Improve the area by increasing the off street parking; or
            (2)   Improve the general appearance, convenience or safety of the
area.
      2.   For a nonconforming use located in any zone other than a residential
zone, the enlargement, addition or relocation shall comply with all height,
yard and area requirements for a main building, other than dwellings, in the
zone in which it is located.
      3.   Before granting a permit for any enlargement, addition or relocation
as provided above, the appeal authority shall find in its public meeting that
the proposed changes will not hinder or obstruct the attainment of the
objectives listed in section
10-1-2 of this code more than does the existing nonconforming use.
   E.   Nonconforming Yard, Height Or Area Regulations: To allow those
enlargements of, additions to or relocation of buildings and structures,
nonconforming as to yard, height or area regulations, in those cases where an
undue hardship will result to the owner of the land involved unless granted and
the attainment of the objectives listed in section
10-1-2 of this code will not be hindered or obstructed, and provided the
proposed enlargement, addition to or relocation of will either:
      1.   Improve the area by increasing needed off street parking; or
      2.   Improve the general appearance, convenience or safety of the area.
   F.   Extension Of Use: To permit, where a zone boundary line divides a lot
in single ownership at the time of establishment of said boundary, a use
authorized on either portion of such lot to extend to the entire lot, provided
such permission shall not authorize the use to extend more than thirty five
feet (35') beyond the zone boundary line or extend to an area greater than five
thousand (5,000) square feet beyond the said boundary line.
   G.   Changes In Nonconforming Uses: To permit a nonconforming use to be
changed to another use allowed in the same or a more restrictive zone than the
one in which the nonconforming use would be allowed; provided, that the appeal
authority finds in its public meeting that such change will not hinder or
obstruct the attainment of the objectives listed in section
10-1-2 of this code more than does the existing nonconforming use.
   H.   Use Permitted Without Street Frontage: To permit the construction and
use of a dwelling upon a lot which does not have frontage on a street, but does
have frontage on a dedicated right of way.
   I.   Lot Splitting: To permit the splitting of a lot wherein such lot split
creates a lot which does not have the required width of the zone in which the
lot is located, provided the created nonconforming lot meets the area
requirements of the zone and the structure placed on the lot meets all required
site standards of the zone; and furthermore, that before building permits are
issued for the nonconforming split, the lot split shall be reviewed by the city
engineer.
   J.   Burden Of Proof: The applicant shall bear the burden of proving that
all of the conditions justifying a variance have been met.
   K.   Variances Run With Land: Variances run with the land.
   L.   Additional Requirements: In granting a variance, the appeal authority
may impose additional requirements on the applicant that will:
      1.   Mitigate any harmful effects of the variance; or
      2.   Serve the purpose of the standard or requirement that is waived or
modified. (Ord. 757, 3-16-2010)
2-4-7: DECISION ON APPEAL:
In exercising the above mentioned powers, such appeal authority may, in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm wholly or
partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination
appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination
as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer
from whom the appeal is taken. (Ord. 757, 3-16-2010)
2-4-8: VOTE NECESSARY FOR REVERSAL:
The favorable finding of the appeal authority shall be necessary to reverse any
order, requirement or determination of any such administrative official, or to
decide in favor of the appellant on any matter upon which it is required to
pass under title 10 of this code, or to effect any variation in such title.
(Ord. 757, 3-16-2010)
2-4-9: JUDICIAL REVIEW OF APPEAL AUTHORITY'S DECISION; TIME LIMITATION:
The city or any person aggrieved may have and maintain a plenary action for
relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, provided petition for
such relief is presented to the court within thirty (30) days after the filing
of such decision in the office of the city recorder. (Ord. 757, 3-16-2010)
2-4-10: TIME LIMITATION OF VARIANCE:
In the event the appeal authority does grant a variance in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, alterations in accordance with the variance must be
activated within six (6) months after the date the variance is granted or the
variance becomes null and void. The time limit of the variance may be extended
an additional six (6) months by the appeal authority, and then only if the
petitioner shows adequate cause to the appeal authority that circumstances
necessitate a time extension. (Ord. 757, 3-16-2010)
2-4-11: FILING FEE 1 :
Upon filing of any appeal or application to the appeal authority, the appellant
or applicant shall pay to the city a fee prescribed by the city council. The
said fee shall be collected by the officer in whose office said appeal is filed
and shall be deposited with the city treasurer and credited to the general
fund. No appeal or application shall be considered by the appeal authority
unless and until such fee has been paid. (Ord. 757, 3-16-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. See section 1-12-5 of this code for specific fees.
2-4-12: COMPENSATION OF APPEAL AUTHORITY:
The appeal authority shall be considered an independent contractor; and as such
will enter into a three (3) year contract for services at the beginning of each
appointed term. Terms for compensation and reimbursement will be determined and
agreed upon in the aforementioned contract. The terms and conditions of the
contract shall ultimately be approved by the city council prior to any
individual entering into an agreement with the city to serve as the appeal
authority. (Ord. 757, 3-16-2010)
2-4-13: DEFINITIONS:
APPEAL AUTHORITY: A person, board, commission, agency or other body designated
by ordinance to decide an appeal of a decision of a land use application or a
variance.
LAND USE APPLICATION: An application required by a municipality's land use
ordinance.
LAND USE AUTHORITY: A person, appeal authority, commission, agency, or other
body designated by the local legislative body to act upon a land use
application.
LAND USE ORDINANCE: A planning, zoning, development, or subdivision ordinance
of the municipality, but does not include the general plan. (Ord. 757, 3-16-
2010)
CHAPTER 5
RESERVED
CHAPTER 6
DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE
SECTION:
2-6-1: Created
2-6-2: Membership
2-6-3: Duties
2-6-4: Chairperson Designated
2-6-5: Rules Of Procedure And Conduct
2-6-6: Decisions
2-6-1: CREATED:
There is hereby created a design review committee for the city, which committee
shall have the powers and perform the duties as prescribed by statute and
applicable ordinances of the city. (Ord. 704, 5-6-2008)
2-6-2: MEMBERSHIP:
The city's design review committee shall consist of the mayor or his/her
designee, the city administrator, the planning commission chair or his/her
designee, the public works director, and the community development director.
(Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
2-6-3: DUTIES:
The design review committee shall function to fulfill the purposes described in
section
9-6-1 of this code. (Ord. 704, 5-6-2008)
2-6-4: CHAIRPERSON DESIGNATED:
The members of the design review committee shall designate one of its members
to act as chairperson, who shall be primarily responsible for meeting
scheduling, conducting of said meetings and for making reports back to the city
council when necessary. (Ord. 704, 5-6-2008)
2-6-5: RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT:
The design review committee may adopt rules governing their procedures and
conduct, provided that any such rules shall not be inconsistent with any
governing law or ordinance. Should any provision of such rules conflict with
any law or ordinance, that provision shall not be enforceable, but such
conflict shall not affect the validity of the remaining rules. (Ord. 704, 5-6-
2008)
2-6-6: DECISIONS:
In addition to any other committee rules as established by section
2-6-5 of this chapter, the design review committee shall vote in favor or in
opposition of all proposals presented to the committee. The majority vote
determines the approval or denial of all submitted design requests. All design
review committee meetings shall be open public meetings and shall have minutes
taken by the city recorder or a designee. (Ord. 704, 5-6-2008)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL LICENSE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Definitions
3-1-2: Administration
3-1-3: License Required; State Sales Tax Number
3-1-4: Application
3-1-5: Fee For License
3-1-6: License Period; Delinquent Date; Penalty
3-1-7: Conducting Business From Vehicle, Portable Structures
3-1-8: Vacant Lots, Parking Lots Or Areas For Used Vehicle Lots
3-1-9: Selling Items Not Ordinarily In Inventory
3-1-10: Public Information
3-1-11: Unlawful To Submit False Information
3-1-12: Suspension, Revocation Or Refusal To Renew
3-1-13: Penalty
3-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this title, the following terms shall have the meanings
herein prescribed:
BUSINESS: Means and includes all activities engaged in within the corporate
limits of Riverdale carried on for the purpose of gain or economic profit,
except that the acts of employees rendering service to employers shall not be
included in the term business, unless otherwise specifically prescribed.
ENGAGING IN BUSINESS: Includes, but is not limited to, the sale of tangible
personal property and the rendering of personal services for others for a
consideration by persons engaged in any craft, business, occupation or other
calling, except the rendering of personal services by an employee to his
employer under any contract of personal employment. "Engaging in business"
shall also include the renting by a lessor of space, whether enclosed or not,
to be used as office space for any use or endeavor, including, but not limited
to, commercial, medical, dental or other professional activities. Exemptions
include federal, state, county and local government agencies and nonprofit
organizations with 501(c)(3) status.
PERSON: Any individual, receiver, assignee, trustee in bankruptcy, trust,
estate, firm, copartnership, joint venture, club, company, joint stock company,
business trust, corporation, association, society or other group of individuals
acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit or
otherwise. (Ord. 835, 4-16-2013)
3-1-2: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   License Assessor: The community development director, or the designee,
as approved by resolution of the city council, is hereby appointed the license
assessor. The license assessor, or the approved designee, shall have business
license application approval authority, with the exception of liquor licenses
as stipulated in section
3-2-3 of this title, and shall have the same powers as granted to license
inspectors as provided in subsection B of this section. The city recorder is
hereby designated as the city employee who shall, upon approval of the license
application, sign and ensure delivery of the appropriate city business license.
(Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
   B.   License Inspectors: All police officers of this city and the building
inspector, or the building inspector's designee, as approved by resolution of
the city council, are hereby appointed license inspectors and shall have and
exercise the following powers and duties:
      1.   To enter, free of charge, at any reasonable time, any place of
business and to demand the exhibition of its business license for the current
term from any person engaged or employed in the transaction of such business.
      2.   To examine all places of business where a license is required and to
determine that at such place of business, no business other than the one
described in and covered by the license, is transacted.
      3.   To report to the City Administrator all persons doing business
without a proper and valid license for such business, to issue citations in
accordance with the provisions of this title, or to take other appropriate
action as directed by the City Council. (Ord. 662, 8-1-2006)
3-1-3: LICENSE REQUIRED; STATE SALES TAX NUMBER:
It is unlawful for any person to engage in business within Riverdale City
without first procuring the license required by this chapter. All persons doing
business in Riverdale City which are required to have a State Sales Tax number
shall report to the Utah State Tax Commission that Riverdale City is the point
of sale. Said persons or entities doing business in Riverdale City shall
provide to the City a copy of the State certificate listing the appropriate
Riverdale City point of sale code as a prerequisite to receiving a Riverdale
City business license. (Ord. 586, 3-21-2001)
3-1-4: APPLICATION:
All applications for licenses shall be made in writing to the license assessor
and shall include a copy of the Sales Tax certificate as required in section
3-1-3 of this chapter. The application shall show:
   A.   The name of the person or persons desiring a license.
   B.   The name of the business.
   C.   The kind of license desired, stating the business, calling, trade or
profession to be performed, practiced or carried on.
   D.   The place where such business, calling, trade or profession is to be
carried on, giving the street number, if such business, calling, trade or
profession is to be carried on in any building or enclosure.
   E.   The application shall also state any other matter or thing required by
ordinance, statute or the license assessor.
   F.   Any business license application not finalized within ninety (90) days
from the date of submission shall expire and a new application shall then be
required for that year. The original application fee shall be non-refundable.
(Ord. 906, 2-19-2019)
3-1-5: FEE FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Levied: There is hereby levied upon every person engaging in business
in the City, a license fee.
   B.   Change Of Fee Schedule By Resolution: The City Council is hereby
empowered to change, modify or amend the City business license fee schedule, as
set forth in section
1-12-2 of this Code, by resolution duly presented and voted upon by said
Council. Said change, modification or amendment by resolution may reflect
changes, modifications or amendments to dollar amounts levied as business
license fees and/or additions or deletions to the list of regulated businesses
which constitutes the City business license fee schedule.
   C.   License Fee Additional To All Other Licenses And Taxes: The license fee
imposed by this chapter shall be in addition to any and all other taxes or
licenses imposed by any other provisions of the ordinances of this City.
   D.   License Fee Declared Debt: Any license fee due and unpaid under this
chapter and all penalties thereon shall constitute a debt to the City and shall
be collected by court proceedings in the same manner as any other debt in like
amount. This remedy shall be in addition to all other existing remedies.
   E.   Exemptions To License Fee Requirements: No license fee shall be imposed
under this chapter upon any organization or person engaged in business for
solely religious, charitable, or other strictly nonprofit purpose if that
organization or person's activities are tax exempt under the laws of the United
States and the State; nor shall any license fee be imposed on any person
engaged in a business specifically exempted from Municipal taxation and fees by
the laws of the United States or the State. Also exempt from business license
fees are any Federal, State, County or local government agencies. Upon the
written request of a majority of the members of the City Council filed with the
City Recorder, any license provided for in this chapter shall be issued free of
charge to any person suffering from any physical or mental disability or who is
of such an age that they are incapable of performing manual labor, or any poor
person dependent on their own efforts for support. (Ord. 835, 4-16-2013)
   F.   Fee Not To Constitute Undue Burden On Interstate Commerce; Nor Be
Unfair:
      1.   None of the license fees provided for by this chapter shall be
applied so as to be an undue burden on interstate commerce. In any case where a
license fee is believed by a licensee or applicant for license to place an
undue burden upon interstate commerce, he may apply to the license assessor for
an adjustment of the fee, so that it shall not be discriminatory, unreasonable
or unfair as to such commerce. This application must be made before, at or
within six (6) months after payment of the prescribed license fee. The
applicant shall, by affidavit and supporting testimony, show his business and
the gross volume or estimated gross volume of his business and such other
information as the license assessor and collector may deem necessary in order
to determine the extent, if any, of the undue burden on interstate commerce.
(1985 Code § 11-1-14)
      2.   The license assessor shall then conduct an investigation, comparing
applicant's business with other businesses of like nature and shall make
findings of fact from which he shall determine whether the fee fixed by this
chapter is discriminatory, unreasonable or unfair as to applicant's business or
if it constitutes an undue burden on interstate commerce. The license assessor
shall recommend to the city council a license fee for the applicant in an
amount that is nondiscriminatory, reasonable and fair, and that does not unduly
burden interstate commerce. If the city council is satisfied that such license
fee is the amount that the applicant should pay, it shall fix the license fee
in such amount. If the regular license fee has already been paid, the city
council shall order a refund of the amount paid that is over and above the fee
fixed by the city council. In fixing the fee to be charged, the license
assessor shall have the power to base the fee upon the provisions set forth in
Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-203, or any other method which will assure
that the fee assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on businesses of like
nature; provided, however, that the amount assessed shall not exceed the fee
prescribed in section
1-12-2 of this code. (1985 Code § 11-1-14; amd. 2001 Code)
3-1-6: LICENSE PERIOD; DELINQUENT DATE; PENALTY:
   A.   Probationary Period: All licenses issued as provided in this chapter
for the first time to a person who commences a business within the city, shall
be issued for a period of six (6) months. This shall be a probationary period.
Upon expiration of this period, the license shall be automatically renewed for
the remainder of the calendar year in which the six (6) month period expires;
provided, that if the licensee has committed or omitted to do any act that
constitutes grounds for revocation of a business license as set forth in
section
3-1-12 of this chapter, the license shall be subject to revocation and
nonreinstatement as provided in section
3-1-12 of this chapter.
   B.   Term; Fee Due And Payable: Except as provided in subsection A of this
section, all licenses issued shall be for a calendar year. All license fees
that are imposed by this chapter, except the initial license fee, shall be due
and payable on or before February 15. In the event the fee is not paid on or
before that date, a penalty of twenty five percent (25%) of the amount due
shall be imposed and shall become a part of the license fee levied by this
chapter.
   C.   Final Notice; Remedy: On March 1 of each year, a final notice shall be
sent to all licensees whose annual license fee remains unpaid. This notice
shall state that unless the fee and any accrued penalties are paid by March 15,
legal action will be initiated by the city attorney for engaging in business
without a valid business license. (1985 Code § 11-1-8)
3-1-7: CONDUCTING BUSINESS FROM VEHICLE, PORTABLE STRUCTURES:
   A.   Vehicle: No business license shall be issued for any business to be
conducted at a fixed location to which customers are invited where such
business is conducted, in whole or in part, from an automobile, truck, van,
trailer, mobile home, motor home or other vehicle on wheels with or without its
own motive power, at any location within this city, except in the following
cases:
      1.   Temporarily during bona fide construction of a permanent building;
or
      2.   In connection with a duly licensed carnival; or
      3.   As an authorized concession stand at public functions; or (Ord. 631,
12-2-2003)
      4.   In connection with a city licensed and permanent Riverdale City
business' sale of merchandise, which is a part of the business' regular
inventory; all sales shall be made by employees of the permanent business and
all sales shall be through the permanent business' register. Any sale permitted
pursuant to this exception is limited to no longer than three (3) consecutive
days, and requires approval of the community development director or his/her
designee prior to vehicle setup; or
      5.   In connection with a city licensed, permanent, on site financial
lending institution that sponsors the temporary sales of vehicles from the site
of the lending institution and limited to no longer than three (3) consecutive
days. (Ord. 831, 2-5-2013)
   B.   Tent Or Table: No business shall be transacted from a tent, table or
other portable structure, unless otherwise specifically provided for in this
code, or unless the following requirements are met to the satisfaction of the
license assessor:
      1.   No tent, table or other portable structure shall restrict the flow
of either pedestrian or vehicle traffic.
      2.   No tent, table or other portable structure shall be set up for more
than five (5) consecutive days, or as approved by the license assessor.
      3.   No tent, table or other portable structure shall be utilized by a
business, nor on behalf of a business, for more than three (3) times in any
calendar year.
      4.   Tents, tables and other portable structures may be used to sell only
merchandise that is part of the regular inventory of a business licensed, and
which is doing business from a permanent structure, in the city 1 .
      5.   No tent may be used for temporary or seasonal sales such as
fireworks or Christmas trees.
      6.   Licensed businesses desiring to utilize a tent, table or other
portable structure for the sale of their merchandise shall, prior to setting up
said tent, table or other portable structure, notify and receive approval from
the license assessor or his appointed designee.
      7.   No tent, table or other portable structure shall be used in
connection with the authorized sale, if any, of merchandise along side of any
motorized or nonmotorized vehicles or other apparatus with wheels thereon.
(1985 Code § 11-1-18.1)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  3-1-9 of this chapter.
3-1-8: VACANT LOTS, PARKING LOTS OR AREAS FOR USED VEHICLE LOTS:
   A.   Prohibited; Exceptions: In an area zoned for commercial or
manufacturing uses, it shall be unlawful for the owner of a motor vehicle,
trailer or boat, or for any other person to allow such motor vehicle, trailer
or boat, to park on a vacant lot or parking lot or parking area owned by
another person for the purpose of displaying it for sale unless the owner or
lessee of the property on which it is parked has a city business license to
engage in the business of selling motor vehicles, trailers or boats at that
location. It shall also be unlawful for the owner or lessee of such property to
allow another person to park a motor vehicle, trailer or boat on the property
for the purpose of displaying it for sale unless the owner or lessee is duly
licensed to engage in the business of selling motor vehicles, trailers or boats
at that location.
      1.   However, the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to city
dealers who are licensed and bonded by the state and who already have a city
business license permitting them to engage in the business of selling motor
vehicles, trailers or boats. Neither shall this subsection apply to other
dealers licensed and bonded by the state who get a city temporary business
license approved by the city council. (1985 Code § 11-1-19)
      2.   In the event such other dealer applies for a city temporary business
license and its approval is reasonably necessary before the next regularly
scheduled city council meeting, the community development director may approve
such temporary business license after consultation with other appropriate city
officials when in his judgment such approval is justified. (Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
   B.   Nuisance Declared; Notice Of Removal: Any vehicle parked in violation
of this section is declared to be a public nuisance. A notice of violation
shall be placed upon the vehicle and if the vehicle is not removed within
twenty four (24) hours thereafter, if the property owner or lessee does not
have a current city business license authorizing him to engage in the business
of selling motor vehicles, trailers or boats at that location, the vehicle may
be impounded as a nuisance to be released to the owner or responsible party
only after the police department has received a receipt for the same
acknowledging responsibility of that person for the item being unlawfully
parked. Impoundments under this section shall be accomplished in accordance
with the provisions and procedures outlined under title 6, chapter 3 of this
code. (Ord. 815, 9-25-2012)
3-1-9: SELLING ITEMS NOT ORDINARILY IN INVENTORY:
All persons engaging in business in the city who desire to sell items at a
sidewalk or parking lot sale, which items are not ordinarily carried in their
inventory, must first apply to the planning commission and receive approval of
the city council 1 . (1985 Code § 11-1-20)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 3-1-7B4 of this chapter.
3-1-10: PUBLIC INFORMATION:
The following information submitted to the license assessor, as required by
this chapter, shall be released to anyone who requests it: the name of the
owner or owners if the business is a sole proprietorship; the name of the
general partner or general partners, if the business is a partnership; the
names of the officers, if the business is a corporation; the name of the
business; the address of the business; the kind of license desired/issued; and
the business telephone number. No other information submitted to the license
assessor as required by this chapter shall be made public nor shall it be
subject to the inspection of any person except the license assessor, his
authorized agent, or to those persons authorized by order of the city. It shall
be unlawful for any person to make public, tell any other person, or permit the
inspection of information required to be submitted by this chapter, except as
authorized in this section. (1985 Code § 11-1-10)
3-1-11: UNLAWFUL TO SUBMIT FALSE INFORMATION:
It is unlawful for any person knowingly to submit information that is false.
(1985 Code § 11-1-11)
3-1-12: SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR REFUSAL TO RENEW:
   A.   Reasons Specified: The city may suspend, revoke or refuse to issue or
renew a license for any of the following reasons:
      1.   Fraud or misrepresentation in its procurement.
      2.   Violation of this chapter or failure to comply with all of the
provisions of this chapter.
      3.   Failure to pay any license fee levied when due.
      4.   Failure to comply with the requirements imposed by the provisions of
title 10 of this code.
      5.   Violation of any city ordinance or state or federal statute
involving moral turpitude.
      6.   Conduct or act of the licensee or his employees, or any act
permitted by them, on the premises where such business is conducted tending to
render the premises a public nuisance or a menace to the health, peace or
general welfare of the city.
      7.   A violation of city ordinance or federal or state statute relating
to the business or activity which is licensed and resulting from the conduct of
such business or activity.
      8.   The licensee has refused to allow authorized representatives of the
city to make an inspection or has interfered with such representative while in
the performance of his/her duty in making such inspection.
      9.   The licensee is not complying with a requirement or condition set by
the planning commission or community development department, under a
conditional use permit; by the city council; or by agreement.
      10.   Upon reasonable grounds to believe that the licensee has engaged in
any conduct which immediately endangers the health or safety of persons or
protection of property within the city.
   B.   Enforcement:
      1.   The city administrator, or his/her designee, shall have the
authority to deny, suspend or revoke a license without a hearing, for reasons
provided for in this chapter.
      2.   The city administrator, or his/her designee, may, on his or her own
initiative or in response to complaints from the general public or any city
department or division, investigate and gather evidence of violation of this
title or other circumstances which may give rise to a denial, suspension or
revocation.
   C.   Procedure For Suspension Or Revocation: The city administrator, or his/
her designee, shall cause written notice to be given to the applicant or
licensee, as outlined herein below, of his or her decision to deny, suspend or
revoke a license, the reason for such decision, that operation of a business
after the effective date of the suspension or revocation is a class B
misdemeanor, the licensee's right to appeal the city administrator's, or his/
her designee's, decision and have a hearing, and the appeal procedure. However,
if that decision is appealed, the suspension or revocation shall not take
effect until the time period for appealing the decision as set forth in this
chapter has passed.
   D.   Appeal Procedure:
      1.   Appeals of the city administrator's, or his/her designee's, decision
to deny, suspend or revoke a license may be made by filing a written notice of
appeal to appear before the city council with the city recorder within fifteen
(15) days of receipt of the notice of denial, suspension or revocation.
      2.   The notice of appeal shall be in writing and shall set forth with
specificity the reasons for which the appeal is taken.
   E.   Hearing; Notice:
      1.   If the city administrator's, or his/her designee's, decision is
appealed, before the city council finalizes the suspension, revocation or
refusal to issue or renew any license as provided in this chapter, it shall
first afford the licensee an opportunity in a hearing to show cause why the
license should be issued or renewed or should not be suspended or revoked. If
the reason for the suspension, revocation or refusal no longer exists or has
been cured to the satisfaction of the city administrator prior to the date set
for hearing before the city council, the city administrator shall give written
notice to the licensee and cancel the hearing and the licensee shall not be
required to appear before the city council.
      2.   The date, time and place of the hearing shall be fixed by the city
council and notice thereof shall be personally served on the licensee or the
notice may be mailed to the licensee at the address shown in his last
application. The city council must take all possible steps to assure that the
licensee gets actual notice. The notice shall indicate the purpose of the
hearing and the action contemplated.
      3.   At the hearing, the licensee or applicant shall have the right to
appear personally or by counsel, to cross examine witnesses appearing, and to
produce evidence and witnesses in his behalf.
      4.   After such hearing and upon due deliberation, the city council shall
notify the licensee of its findings and determination. (Ord. 790, 2-7-2012)
3-1-13: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
class B misdemeanor and upon conviction, such person shall be punished as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each separate day a holder of a business license violates
any provision of this chapter shall be a separate violation. (1985 Code § 11-1-
21)
CHAPTER 2
LIQUOR CONTROL
SECTION:
3-2-0: Adoption Of State Statute
3-2-1: Definitions
3-2-2: Licenses Required
3-2-3: Application; Procedure
3-2-4: Fee For License
3-2-5: Granting Or Denying License
3-2-6: Expiration Of License
3-2-7: Alcohol Training And Education Seminar
3-2-8: License Requirements
3-2-9: Local Consent
3-2-10: Rules, Regulations And Requirements
3-2-11: Prohibited Acts And Activities
3-2-12: Search Of Licensed Premises
3-2-13: Streamlined Procedure
3-2-14: Suspension Or Revocation Of License
3-2-15: Penalty
3-2-0: ADOPTION OF STATE STATUTE:
   A.   For purposes of alcoholic beverage control within the corporate limits
of Riverdale City, the City incorporates herein the provisions of Utah Code
32B-1-101 et seq., the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act (hereinafter "Act").
   B.   All provisions of this local chapter not precluded by the Utah
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act regulating the sale, storage, service, or
consumption of alcoholic beverages shall supersede said Act, provided said
local regulations do not conflict with the provisions of said Act. (Ord. 905,
1-15-2019)
3-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
All words and phrases defined in this chapter shall be given such defined
meanings wherever used in this title and shall be subject to the Utah Alcoholic
Beverage Control Act, in strict compliance with said Act:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES: Means and includes "beer" and "liquor", as they are
defined herein.
APPLICATION: A formal written request for the issuance of a license.
BEER: A product that contains .5 percent of alcohol by volume, but not more
than four percent (4%) of alcohol by volume or 3.2 percent by weight; and is
obtained by fermentation, infusion, or decoction of malted grain. Beer may or
may not contain hops or other vegetable products. "Beer" includes products
referred to as: beer, ale, porter, stout, lager; or a malt or malted beverage.
Beer does not include a flavored malt beverage.
LICENSE: The right to engage in the type of conduct hereafter described, as
evidenced by a written document issued by Riverdale City. Licenses issued
pursuant to this chapter shall be of one of the following types and shall
authorize the type of conduct, and only the type of conduct, indicated after
each designation:
   A.   Single Event Permit: Authorizes the licensee, the storage, sale,
offering for sale, furnishing, and consumption of liquor for a period not to
exceed seventy two (72) consecutive hours or one hundred twenty (120)
consecutive hours.
         1.   No more than two (2) single event permits shall be issued to the
same group in any calendar year.
         2.   A single event permit may be issued to the following entities:
            a.   Partnership;
            b.   Corporation;
            c.   Limited liability company;
            d.   Religious organization;
            e.   Political organization;
            f.   Incorporated association;
            g.   State agency; or
            h.   Political subdivision of the State.
         3.   A single event permit may not be issued to an entity that has not
been in existence for at least one calendar year, before the date of the single
event.
         4.   Applicant must obtain a single event permit from the Utah
Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control as well as Riverdale City prior to the
event.
   B.   Package Agency Liquor License: Authorizes the licensee to operate a
"package agency", as defined by the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, in
strict compliance with said Act, upon the licensed premises.
   C.   Restaurant License (Includes Beer And Liquor): Authorizes the licensee
to sell liquor and/or beer on premises occupied by a restaurant, in strict
compliance with the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, and upon the licensed
premises; as defined in Utah Code.
         1.   For the purpose of this chapter restaurant shall include the
following:
            a.   A full-service restaurant;
            b.   A master full-service restaurant;
            c.   A limited-service restaurant;
            d.   A master limited-service restaurant;
            e.   A beer only restaurant license.
   D.   General Liquor License: Authorizes the licensee to sell liquor on
premises in strict compliance with the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
         1.   For the purpose of this chapter a general liquor license shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
            a.   A bar establishment;
            b.   An airport lounge;
            c.   An on-premises banquet;
            d.   A reception center;
            e.   A resort;
            f.   A hotel;
            g.   A club.
   E.   Off Premises Beer Retailer License: Authorizes the licensee to sell
beer on the licensed premises in original containers for consumption off the
licensed premises in any size not exceeding two liters (2 L) and in strict
compliance with the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
   F.   On-Premises Beer Retailer License: Authorizes the licensee to sell beer
on the licensed premises in the original containers for consumption on the
licensed premises; or in open containers in any size not exceeding two liters
(2 L) and in strict compliance with the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
For the purposes of this chapter an on premises beer retailer license shall
apply to all recreational amenity business establishments as defined by Utah
Code Annotated section 32B-6-702.
All on premises beer retailers shall be subject to the following:
         1.   Maintain at least seventy percent (70%) of the person's,
("person" as defined by the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act), total gross
revenues from business directly related to a recreational amenity on or
directly adjoining the licensed premises of the beer retailer, except that a
person may include gross revenue from business directly related to a
recreational amenity that is owned or operated by a political subdivision if
the person has a contract meeting the requirements of the Utah Alcoholic
Beverage Control Act with the political subdivision; or
         2.   Have a recreational amenity on or directly adjoining the licensed
premises of the beer retailer and maintain at least seventy percent (70%) of
the person's total gross revenues from the sale of food.
   G.   Tavern License 1 : Authorizes the licensee to sell beer on the licensed
premises occupied by a tavern on draft or in open containers in any size not
exceeding two liters (2 L) or in the original containers for consumption on the
licensed premises and in strict compliance with the Utah Alcoholic Beverage
Control Act.
         1.   For the purpose of this chapter a tavern means an on-premises
beer retailer who is:
            a.   Issued a license by the commission in accordance with Utah
Code Annotated chapter 5, Retail License Act, and chapter 6, part 7, on-
premises beer retailer license; and
            b.   Designated by the commission as a tavern in accordance with
Utah Code Annotated chapter 6, part 7, on-premises beer retailer license.
   H.   Temporary Beer Permit; As Fulfilled By Special Event Permit: Authorizes
the licensee to sell beer on the licensed premises on draft or in open
containers in any size not exceeding two liters (2 L) or in the original
containers for consumption on the licensed premises under the following
conditions:
         1.   For a period not to exceed thirty (30) days;
         2.   No temporary beer event permit may be issued to a person if the
aggregate of the days that the person is authorized to store, sell, offer for
sale, or furnish an alcoholic product under a temporary beer event permit will
exceed a total of ninety (90) days in any one calendar year.
         3.   Licensees are required to obtain a temporary special event beer
permit from the Utah Department of Beverage Control and Riverdale City prior to
the event.
LICENSEE: Includes the persons, firm, corporation or association to whom the
license is issued, and also means and includes the licensee's managers acting
for him/her with his/her consent or knowledge.
LIQUOR: Alcohol, or any alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented, malt or other
liquid, or combination of liquids, a part of which is spirituous, vinous or
fermented, other drinks or drinkable liquids that contain at least 0.5 percent
of alcohol by volume and is suitable to use for beverage purposes. Liquor
includes heavy beer, wine, and a flavored malt beverage. "Liquor" does not
include beer.
NUISANCE: Any room, house, building, structure, place or licensed premises,
where:
   A.   Alcoholic beverages are manufactured, sold, kept, bartered, stored,
given away or used contrary to the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act or this
title, or where persons resort for drinking alcoholic beverages contrary to the
Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act or this chapter; or
   B.   Intoxicated persons are permitted to loiter about, or use profanity,
indecent, immoral, loud or boisterous language or display immoral or lewd
conduct; or
   C.   Persons under the age of twenty one (21) are permitted to purchase or
drink alcoholic beverages, or are employed in violation of this chapter; or
   D.   Laws or ordinances are violated by licensee or his agents or patrons
with or without the consent or knowledge of licensee upon such premises; or
   E.   Any condition dangerous to human life or health is permitted to exist,
and all alcoholic beverages, packages, equipment and other property used in
maintaining the same.
PLACE OF BUSINESS: Shall be deemed to include cafes, restaurants, public dining
rooms, cafeterias, taverns, cabarets and any other place where the general
public is invited or admitted for business purposes, and shall also be deemed
to include clubs, corporations and associations operating under charter or
otherwise wherein only the members and their guests are invited. Occupied hotel
and motel rooms that are not open to the public shall not be deemed to be
"places of business", as herein defined.
RESTAURANT: Any place of business where a variety of foods are prepared, at
which meals are served; and that is engaged primarily in serving meals.
RETAILER: Any person engaged in the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages
to the consumer.
SELL OR TO SELL: When used in this chapter in any provision, shall be construed
to solicit, or to receive any order for, to keep or expose for sale, to deliver
for value or gratuitously, to peddle, to possess with intent to sell, to
traffic in for any consideration proposed or obtained directly or indirectly or
under any pretext or by any means whatsoever to procure or allow to be procured
for any other person, and "sale" when so used shall include every act of
selling, as herein defined.
WHOLESALER: Any person other than a brewer or retailer engaged in importation
for sale or in the sale of alcoholic beverages in wholesale or other
quantities. (Ord. 905, 1-15-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. See also definition of "tavern" at section
  10-2-2 of this Code.
3-2-2: LICENSES REQUIRED:
   A.   City License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in
any conduct described in the definition of "license", as provided in section
3-2-1 of this chapter, within the corporate limits of the City, without having
first procured the appropriate license therefor as described in said
definition.
   B.   State License: If said license is intended to permit alcohol
consumption or sale of alcohol, a State license is required before sales may
take place. Applicants shall contact the Utah Department of Alcoholic Beverage
Control for said license. (Ord. 905, 1-15-2019)
3-2-3: APPLICATION; PROCEDURE:
   A.   Form Of Application; Change Of Form:
      1.   All applicants shall submit a completed liquor or beer packet to the
City Recorder. No partial applications shall be accepted.
      2.   The liquor or beer packet shall be amended in accordance with
applicable State and Federal laws.
   B.   Investigation Of Applicant: The Police Department shall examine all
applications and investigate all applicants for licenses under this chapter.
Following such examination and investigation, the recommendations of the Police
Department shall be made in writing to the City Council.
   C.   Qualifications Of Applicants: In determining whether an applicant is
qualified to be considered for the issuance of a liquor or beer license, the
City Council shall weigh the following information on each individual required
to fill out a schedule A: age (for all applicants except those seeking an off-
premises beer retailer license, the application shall be disapproved if an
individual is under the age of 21 years. For applicants who are seeking an off-
premises beer retailer license, the application shall be disapproved if an
individual is under the age of 18 years); citizenship; and moral character,
including whether or not the applicant has been convicted, pleaded guilty or no
contest or forfeited bail on any felony or misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude, or on the violation of any law or ordinance relating to alcoholic
beverages, driving under the influence of intoxicating liquors, drugs, or
keeping a gambling or disorderly house in the six (6) years prior to the date
of the application.
   D.   Considerations By City Council: In determining whether to grant a
liquor or beer license to an applicant it has found to be qualified in
accordance with subsection C of this section, the City Council shall give
consideration to the following:
      1.   The locality and neighborhood within which the proposed licensed
premises will be located and the prospective impact of the same upon such
locality and neighborhood.
      2.   The proximity of the proposed licensed premises to existing licensed
premises.
      3.   The extent of present or anticipated tourist traffic within the area
of the proposed licensed premises.
      4.   The proximity of the proposed licensed premises to any school,
church, library, public playground or park.
      5.   The extent to which the application makes a full, complete and
candid disclosure of all information required thereby.
      6.   The integrity, character and reputation of the applicant, its
partners, directors, trustees, officers, lessors, managers and operators.
      7.   The business acumen and experience of the applicant, its partners,
directors, trustees, officers, lessors, managers and operators.
      8.   The prospective impact of the licensed premises upon vehicular
traffic, congestion and parking.
      9.   The number of liquor and beer licenses in existence in the City.
      10.   Whether all employees of an applicant who sells, serves or
furnishes liquor to the public for consumption on the premises have completed
an approved alcohol education and training seminar.
      11.   In the case of an off-premises beer retailer license, unless
otherwise prohibited in Utah Code, a retail licensee may employ a minor who is
at least sixteen (16) years of age to enter the sale at a cash register or
other sales recording device.
      12.   A full-service restaurant licensee, limited-service restaurant
licensee, or beer-only restaurant licensee may employ a minor who is at least
eighteen (18) years of age to bus tables, including containers that contain an
alcoholic product.
      13.   Whether the granting of the requested license is in the greatest
public interest and in the interest of the general health and welfare of the
City's residents.
      14.   Such other facts or circumstances which may be considered material.
(Ord. 905, 1-15-2019)
3-2-4: FEE FOR LICENSE:
The license fees for the various licenses provided for in this chapter shall be
set forth as a part of the City business license fee schedule referred to in
section
1-12-3 of this Code. Fees for alcoholic beverage licenses shall be the same
regardless of the issuance date or the length of time for which the license
shall be valid. No refund shall be made in the event the license is suspended,
revoked or voluntarily surrendered. (Ord. 905, 1-15-2019)
3-2-5: GRANTING OR DENYING LICENSE:
Upon receipt of a completed application, all required attachments thereto, the
required license fee, and the investigative report of the Police Department,
and providing the applicant is deemed qualified under the criteria set forth in
subsection 3-2-3C of this chapter, the City Council may conduct such further
investigations and hold such hearings as it may deem appropriate for the
purpose of determining whether to issue the requested license, taking into
consideration those matters set forth in subsection 3-2-3D of this chapter, and
may either grant or deny the same, as in the exercise of its discretion it
determines best. In the event the City Council denies the issuance of the
license, it shall set forth in writing delivered to the applicant, the reasons
for the denial. (Ord. 905, 1-15-2019)
3-2-6: EXPIRATION OF LICENSE:
All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire at twelve o'clock
(12:00) midnight on December 31 of the year for which issued. (Ord. 905, 1-15-
2019)
3-2-7: ALCOHOL TRAINING AND EDUCATION SEMINAR:
   A.   All liquor licensees shall provide to the City Recorder, by
certificate, granted by the Utah Department of Alcoholic Beverage and Control,
that each employee of the licensee engaged in the serving, selling or
furnishing of alcoholic beverages on the premises, has completed the alcohol
training and education seminar, as required by Utah Code Annotated sections
32B-5-404 et al and 62A-15-401 et al. This requirement is applicable to the
following:
      1.   A retail manager as defined in Utah Code Annotated section 32B-5-
402;
      2.   Retail staff as defined in Utah Code Annotated section 32B-5-402;
and
      3.   An individual who, as defined by division rule:
         a.   Directly supervises the sale of beer to a customer for
consumption off the premises of an off-premises beer retailer; or
         b.   Sells beer to a customer for consumption off the premises of an
off-premises beer retailer.
   B.   All employees required to complete the alcohol training and education
seminar, as outlined in subsection A of this section, who does not have a valid
record showing the individual has completed said training shall:
      1.   Complete the alcohol training and education seminar within thirty
(30) days of the following:
         a.   If the individual is an employee, the day the individual begins
employment;
         b.   If the individual is an independent contractor, the day the
individual is first hired; or
         c.   If the individual holds an ownership interest in the licensee,
the day that the individual first engages in an activity that would result in
that individual being required to complete an alcohol training and education
seminar.
Violation of this subsection will result in revocation of the license granted
under subsection A of this section, unless compliance with this subsection is
completed within two (2) months of the time that licensee first became aware
that such violation occurred. (Ord. 905, 1-15-2019)
3-2-8: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Display Of License: Any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall
at all times be conspicuously displayed in the premises for which it is issued.
   B.   Compliance With State Laws: All licensees shall comply with all
applicable State laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, the Utah
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act and the regulations of the Utah Department of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
   C.   Transfer Of License: No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall
be transferred to a licensee nor to a licensed premises different from the
licensee or licensed premises referred to in the original license and original
supporting application therefor. (Ord. 905, 1-15-2019)
3-2-9: LOCAL CONSENT:
The granting of any alcohol license pursuant to this chapter shall first obtain
the local consent of the City as required by Utah Code Annotated section 11-10
et al. Upon acquiring local consent from the City, the licensee shall complete
all application requirements set forth by the Utah Department of Alcoholic
Beverage Control. (Ord. 905, 1-15-2019)
3-2-10: RULES, REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Restrictions On Brewers, Dealers And Wholesalers: No brewer, dealer or
wholesaler shall either directly or indirectly supply, give or pay for any
furniture, furnishings or fixtures of a retailer, nor shall such brewers,
dealers or wholesalers advance, furnish money or pay for any license of a
retailer, or be financially interested either directly or indirectly in the
conduct or operation of the business of any retailer.
   B.   Illumination Of Licensed Premises: The licensed premises shall be kept
brightly illuminated at all times while occupied or open for business. In any
prosecution for violation of this subsection, if it is shown that there was
less than five (5) foot-candles of light anywhere on said premises at any time
while it was occupied or open for business, except in closets used exclusively
for storage, it shall be presumed that said premises was not sufficiently
illuminated.
   C.   Lawful Hours:
      1.   Restaurant: Liquor and/or beer may be sold or offered for sale at a
restaurant during the following:
         a.   A restaurant licensee may sell, offer for sale, or furnish liquor
at the licensed premises during the following time periods only:
            (1)   On a weekday, during the period that begins at eleven thirty
o'clock (11:30) A.M. and ends at eleven fifty nine o'clock (11:59) P.M.; or
            (2)   On a weekend or a State or Federal legal holiday or for a
private event, during the period that begins at ten thirty o'clock (10:30) A.M.
and ends at eleven fifty nine o'clock (11:59) P.M.
         b.   A restaurant licensee may sell, offer for sale, or furnish beer
at the licensed premises during the following time periods only:
            (1)   On a weekday, during the period that begins at eleven thirty
o'clock (11:30) A.M. and ends at twelve fifty nine o'clock (12:59) A.M.; or
            (2)   On a weekend or a State or Federal legal holiday or for a
private event, during the period that begins at ten thirty o'clock (10:30) A.M.
and ends at twelve fifty nine o'clock (12:59) A.M.
      2.   Club: Liquor may not be sold or offered for sale at any club during
the following days or hours:
         a.   On Sunday and any State or Federal legal holiday after twelve
o'clock (12:00) midnight and before twelve o'clock (12:00) noon. On all other
days the liquor storage and sales area in the club shall be closed from one
o'clock (1:00) A.M. until ten o'clock (10:00) A.M.
         b.   Liquor may be consumed for thirty (30) minutes after the
cessation of sales.
      3.   On Premises:
         a.   Beer may not be sold or offered for sale at any on premises beer
retailer licensee after one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and before ten o'clock (10:00)
A.M.
         b.   Beer may be consumed for thirty (30) minutes after the cessation
of sales.
      4.   Off Premises: Beer may not be sold or offered for sale at any off
premises beer retailer licensee after one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and before six
o'clock (6:00) A.M.
      5.   Single Event Permit And Temporary Beer Permit: Alcoholic beverages
may be sold, served and consumed at temporary events under either a single
event permit or a temporary special event beer permit between the hours of ten
o'clock (10:00) A.M. and one o'clock (1:00) A.M. (Ord. 905, 1-15-2019)
3-2-11: PROHIBITED ACTS AND ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Sale To Intoxicated Persons: No licensee shall sell an alcoholic
beverage to any person intoxicated, or under the influence of an intoxicating
beverage.
   B.   Sale To Minors Unlawful: It shall be unlawful to sell an alcoholic
beverage to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years.
   C.   Advertising: All advertising of alcoholic beverages shall be in
accordance with the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, as specified
in Utah Code Annotated 32B-1-206(4), or any other applicable State or Federal
Code, and in compliance with the basic guidelines outlined by the Alcoholic
Beverage Control Commission in rule R81-1-17.
   D.   Minors Frequenting Premises: A minor may not be on the premises of a
tavern. Riverdale City may exclude minors from the premises or portions of
premises which have the atmosphere or appearance of a tavern as defined by the
Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
   E.   Employment Of Minors:
      1.   The following rules apply to minors employed by retail liquor
licensees:
         a.   A retail licensee may not employ a minor to sell, offer for sale,
furnish, or dispense an alcoholic product.
         b.   Unless otherwise prohibited in the provisions related to the
specific type of retail license, a retail licensee may employ a minor who is at
least sixteen (16) years of age to enter the sale at a cash register or other
sales recording device, under the supervision of a person at least twenty one
(21) years of age or older who is on the premises.
         c.   A full-service restaurant licensee, limited-service restaurant
licensee, or beer-only restaurant licensee may employ a minor who is at least
eighteen (18) years of age to bus tables, including containers that contain an
alcoholic product.
   F.   Persons Under Twenty One Years Purchasing, Consuming Or Possessing
Alcoholic Beverages: No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall
purchase, consume or possess any alcoholic beverage.
   G.   Minors At Fraternal Benefit Associations, Societies; Exception: It
shall be unlawful to permit or allow any person, or for any person under twenty
one (21) years of age to be on, enter into, frequent or to loiter about any
premises for which a club liquor license or an on-premises beer license has
been issued, except on such premises licensed as a private fraternal club,
lawfully organized and existing under the laws of the State and the United
States government as a fraternal benefit association or society, unless said
person under twenty one (21) years of age is accompanied by and in the custody
of one of his/her parents, grandparents or guardian. It shall be unlawful for
any person under twenty one (21) years of age to be on said licensed premises
at any time between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:
00) A.M., even if said person is accompanied by and in the custody of his/her
parent, grandparent or guardian.
   H.   Frequenting Unlicensed Premises: It is unlawful for any person to
visit, to loiter about, to frequent or to resort to any house, building, room
or premises where any alcoholic beverages are kept, stored, sold, bartered,
offered or exposed for sale in violation of the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control
Act or of any ordinance of the City.
   I.   Consuming Beer On The Premises Of An Off-Premises Licensee: It is
unlawful for any licensee under an off-premises beer license to allow any
person to consume beer upon the licensed premises. It is unlawful for any
person to consume beer upon such premises.
   J.   Possession Of Illegally Obtained Alcoholic Beverages: It is unlawful
for any licensee to purchase or acquire, or to have or possess, or to suffer to
be kept upon the licensed premises, any alcoholic beverage except that lawfully
acquired under the provisions of the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
   K.   Nuisances: It is unlawful for any person to commit, keep or maintain a
nuisance upon any licensed premises. It is unlawful for any person to suffer a
nuisance to be maintained upon licensed premises owned, occupied, operated or
controlled by him, or which may be in his charge.
   L.   Locked Doors: It is unlawful for any door or other means of ingress to
or egress from any licensed premises to be locked or barred, or barricaded in
any way so as to interfere with the free entrance to the licensed premises by
any peace officer at any time while the premises is occupied or open to the
public, but all doors or other means of entrance thereto during the time the
premises is occupied or open to the public shall be left unlocked or unfastened
so that any peace officer may enter the same without any hindrance or delay;
provided, however, that there may be maintained upon the premises a locked
storeroom for the keeping of goods and supplies used in the business. Such
storeroom shall at all times be subject to search and inspection by any peace
officer as hereinafter provided. It is unlawful for any licensee to deny any
peace officer immediate access to such storeroom for such search or inspection
upon demand made for such access. It is unlawful for any licensee to suffer any
person, except a bona fide employee of the licensee or a peace officer, to
enter or remain in such storeroom; and further provided, that a general liquor
licensee may provide a card operated lock on the licensed premises; provided,
that an appropriate card key therefor is first delivered to the Police Chief or
his/her designee for use by his officers in the line of duty.
   M.   Lookouts: It is unlawful for any person commonly known as a "lookout"
to be stationed or maintained to give warning of the approach of any peace
officer to such premises. It is unlawful to maintain or operate any electrical
or other device which is used or capable of being used to give warning of any
peace officer.
   N.   Failure To Maintain Control By Licensee: It is unlawful for any
licensee hereunder to fail to maintain full control of the conduct of the
business upon the licensed premises, or to fail to inform himself of the manner
in which said business is conducted and of the activities of his agents,
servants and employees in and about the licensed premises. The licensee shall
be responsible, under this chapter, for all of the activities of his agents,
servants and employees in and about the licensed premises, and by accepting a
license hereunder, the licensee unconditionally guarantees to the City that
neither he nor his agents, servants or employees will violate the terms of this
chapter upon the licensed premises, and for breach of such guarantee the
license may be revoked. (Ord. 905, 1-15-2019)
3-2-12: SEARCH OF LICENSED PREMISES:
Every licensee, by accepting a license issued under the provisions of this
chapter, thereby irrevocably consents that any peace officer may at any time
during the effective period of the license freely enter upon and inspect and
search the licensed premises for any alcoholic beverage, or for any other goods
or chattels illegally possessed or kept thereon, or for evidence of any alleged
crime under investigation by such peace officer and further consents to the
seizure of any such alcoholic beverage or any goods, chattels or evidence, or
the property of the licensee, which may be found therein upon such search.
(Ord. 905, 1-15-2019)
3-2-13: STREAMLINED PROCEDURE:
   A.   Purpose: The streamlined procedure set forth in this section may be
used only by those applicants who held a valid liquor or beer license on
December 31 of the previous year.
   B.   Procedure: These applicants who are qualified to use this streamlined
procedure in accordance with subsection A of this section, may apply for a new
license by submitting the following:
      1.   License fee.
      2.   Maintain an active license with the Utah Department of Alcoholic
Beverage Control.
      3.   A new copy of the articles of incorporation or partnership agreement
only if changes have been made thereto.
      4.   A new detailed diagram of the licensed premises only if changes have
been made thereto.
      5.   A new affidavit signed by the official required to sign the
affidavit for the initial license swearing to the truthfulness of the documents
submitted. (Ord. 905, 1-15-2019)
3-2-14: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Authority: Licenses may be suspended or revoked by the City Council for
the violation on the licensed premises of any provision of this chapter or of
any other applicable ordinance or law relating to alcoholic beverages, or if
the person to whom the license was issued no longer possesses the
qualifications required by this chapter and the Statutes of the State.
   B.   Hearing: All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended
by the City Council without a prior hearing. Immediately following any
suspension order issued without a prior hearing, notice shall be given such
licensee, advising him of his right to a prompt hearing, and listing the cause
or causes for such suspension. If cause for the suspension is established at
the hearing, the suspension order may be continued for up to one year in
duration, or may be revoked. However, no license shall be revoked or suspended
beyond the initial hearing without first establishing cause therefor, nor shall
any license be revoked without first giving the licensee an opportunity for a
hearing on the cause specified for revocation. It shall be unlawful for any
licensee to sell or permit any person to possess or consume any alcoholic
beverage on the licensed premises during the period of suspension or after the
revocation of the license. (Ord. 905, 1-15-2019)
3-2-15: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
Class B misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. Each day of any continuing violation shall be deemed a
separate offense. (Ord. 905, 1-15-2019)
CHAPTER 3
SALES AND USE TAX
SECTION:
3-3-1: Title
3-3-2: Purpose
3-3-3: Effective Date
3-3-4: Sales And Use Tax
3-3-5: Penalty
3-3-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as THE SALES AND USE TAX ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF
RIVERDALE. (1985 Code § 17-1-1)
3-3-2: PURPOSE:
   A.   The 48th Session of the Utah Legislature has authorized the counties
and municipalities of the state to enact sales and use tax ordinances imposing
a one percent (1%) tax.
   B.   It is the purpose of this chapter conform the sales and use tax of the
city to the requirements of the Sales and Use Tax Act, Utah Code Annotated
title 59, chapter 12, as currently amended. (1985 Code § 17-1-2)
3-3-3: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter became effective as of one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01)
A.M., January 1, 1990. (1985 Code § 17-1-3)
3-3-4: SALES AND USE TAX:
   A.   Imposed:
      1.   From and after the effective date hereof, there is levied and there
shall be collected and paid a tax upon every retail sale of tangible personal
property, services and meals made within the city at the rate of one percent
(1%).
      2.   An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other
consumption in this city of tangible personal property from any retailer on or
after the operative date hereof, at the rate of one percent (1%) of the sales
price of the property.
      3.   For the purpose of this chapter, all retail sales shall be presumed
to have been consummated at the place of business delivered by the retailer or
his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to
an out-of-state destination. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of
business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall
be as determined under the rules and regulations prescribed by and adopted by
the State Tax Commission. "Public utilities", as defined by Utah Code Annotated
title 54, shall not be obligated to determine the place or places within any
county or municipality where public utility services are rendered, but the
place of sale or the sales tax revenue arising from such service allocable to
the city shall be as determined by the State Tax Commission pursuant to an
appropriate formula and other rules and regulations to be prescribed and
adopted by it.
   B.   State Statute Provisions Adopted:
      1.   Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of the Sales and Use Tax Act, all of the
provisions of Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, as amended, and in
force and affect on the effective date hereof, insofar as they relate to sales
taxes, excepting sections 59-12-101 and 59-12-119 thereof, are hereby adopted
and made a part of the chapter as though fully set forth herein.
      2.   Wherever, and to the extent that in Utah Code Annotated title 59,
chapter 12, the state of Utah is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the
name of this city shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this subsection
shall be deemed to require substitution of the name of the city for the word
"state" when that word is used as part of the title of the State Tax
Commission, or of the constitution of the state, nor shall the name of the city
be substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of that
substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city or any
agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Tax Commission in
performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this
chapter.
   C.   License Exemption: If an annual license has been issued to a retailer
under Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-106, an additional license shall not be
required by reason of this section.
   D.   Exclusions: There shall be excluded from the purchase price paid or
charged by which the tax is measured:
      1.   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a
retailer or consumer;
      2.   The gross receipts from the sale of or the cost of storage, use or
other consumption of tangible personal property upon which a sales or use tax
has become due by reason of the sale transaction to any other municipality and
any county in the state, under the sales or use tax ordinance enacted by that
county or municipality in accordance with the Sales and Use Tax Act. (1985 Code
§ 17-1-4)
3-3-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a Class B misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject
to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1985 Code § 17-1-5; amd. 2001 Code)
ARTICLE A.  RESERVED
(Ord. 809, 7-3-2012, eff. 7-3-2012)
ARTICLE B.  LOCAL OPTION SALES AND USE TAX
SECTION:
3-3B-1: Purpose And Title
3-3B-2: Definitions
3-3B-3: Tax Imposed
3-3B-4: Collection Of Tax; Contract With The State Tax Commission
3-3B-5: Miscellaneous Provisions
3-3B-6: Penalties And Interest
3-3B-1: PURPOSE AND TITLE:
It is the intent of Riverdale City to adopt a local option sales and use tax
pursuant to and in accordance with Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-210. This
article shall be known as the RIVERDALE CITY LOCAL OPTION SALES AND USE TAX
ACT. (Ord. 809, 7-3-2012, eff. 7-3-2012)
3-3B-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply to terms
used herein as used in this article:
ANNEXATION: An annexation to the city under title 10, chapter 2, part - 42 - 4,
annexation of the Utah Code Annotated.
ANNEXING AREA: An area that is annexed into the city.
CITY: Riverdale City. (Ord. 809, 7-3-2012, eff. 7-3-2012)
3-3B-3: TAX IMPOSED:
   A.   There is hereby levied an additional local option sales and use tax
beginning on January 1, 2009, and ending on June 30, 2030.
   B.   The amount of the local option sales and use tax shall be 0.20 percent
on all transactions:
      1.   Described in Utah Code Annotated subsection 59-12-103(1); and
      2.   Occurring within the city.
   C.   Subject to the limitations of Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-210 et
seq., Riverdale City may decrease the tax at any time by adopting an ordinance
to the effect.
   D.   The city shall expend the revenues collected from the tax for the same
purposes for which the city expends the city's or town's general fund revenues.
   E.   For purposes of this section, the location of a transaction shall be
determined in accordance with section 59-12-210.
   F.   The city shall not impose a tax under this section on any transaction
if otherwise prohibited under the Utah Code Annotated. (Ord. 809, 7-3-2012,
eff. 7-3-2012)
3-3B-4: COLLECTION OF TAX; CONTRACT WITH THE STATE TAX COMMISSION:
The tax shall be levied at the same time and collected in the same manner as
provided in Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-201 et seq., otherwise known as
the local sales and use tax act. (Ord. 809, 7-3-2012, eff. 7-3-2012)
3-3B-5: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
Within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this article, Riverdale City
shall contract with the state tax commission for that agency to perform all
functions incident to the administration and collection of the tax. The mayor,
on behalf of the city council is hereby authorized to enter into such
agreements with the state tax commission as may be necessary for the continued
administration and operation of the local option sales and use room tax
ordinance enacted by this article. Riverdale City shall:
   A.   Authorize the state tax commission to collect the tax on the first day
of the effective calendar quarter; and
   B.   Notify the state tax commission at least thirty (30) days before the
day on which the commission is required to collect the tax. (Ord. 809, 7-3-
2012, eff. 7-3-2012)
3-3B-6: PENALTIES AND INTEREST:
Penalties and interest equal to those authorized by Utah Code Annotated
sections 59-1-401 and 59-1-402 shall be imposed on any person who:
   A.   Is required to pay the tax under this article; and
   B.   Does not remit the tax to the collecting agent within the time
prescribed by law. (Ord. 809, 7-3-2012, eff. 7-3-2012)
CHAPTER 4
AUCTION HOUSES AND AUCTIONEERS
SECTION:
3-4-1: Definitions
3-4-2: License Required
3-4-3: Bond Required
3-4-4: Fee For License
3-4-5: Rules, Regulations And Requirements
3-4-6: Revocation Of License
3-4-7: Penalty
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
AUCTION HOUSE: A place where personal property is sold at auction by an
auctioneer.
AUCTIONEER: A person who conducts a public competitive sale of property by
outcry to the highest bona fide bidder. (1985 Code §
11-2-1; amd. 2001 Code)
3-4-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   Auction House: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation
to engage in the business of, or to keep, conduct or operate an auction house
within the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining a license to do
so.
   B.   Auctioneer: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the
business of an auctioneer, or to conduct an auction, within the corporate
limits of the city without first procuring a license to do so. (1985 Code §
11-2-2)
3-4-3: BOND REQUIRED:
   A.   Auction House: Any applicant for a license to conduct an auction house
shall execute a corporate surety bond in the sum of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) in favor of the city and of any person injured or damaged by false
or fraudulent representations dealing with such auction house, conditioned for
the faithful observances of all laws and ordinances of the city, the honest
conduct of the business engaged in, and for the payment of damages to all
persons injured or damaged by fraud or false or fraudulent representations in
dealing with said auction house; said bond to be approved by the city council
and filed in the office of the city recorder. Such applicant shall also pay
into the city treasury the license fees hereinafter provided for.
   B.   Auctioneer; Exception: Any applicant for an auctioneer's license shall
file a like bond in like amount as is herein required for an auction house, and
shall pay the license fees herein required; provided, however, that the city
council may, in its sole discretion, issue a license to an auctioneer without
the requirement of a bond in cases where said auctioneer operates solely and
exclusively from a licensed auction house, within the limits of the city. (1985
Code §
11-2-3)
3-4-4: FEE FOR LICENSE:
The license fee for an auction house shall be as established in title 1,
chapter 12 of this code. (1985 Code § 11-2-4; amd. 2001 Code)
3-4-5: RULES, REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Term Of License: A license issued under this chapter shall expire
December 31 of each year. (1985 Code § 11-2-4)
   B.   Transferability: No license issued under this chapter shall be
transferable. (1985 Code § 11-2-6)
   C.   Manner Of Conducting Sale: It shall be unlawful for any auctioneer to
conduct a sale in such a manner as to cause people to gather in crowds on the
streets or sidewalks so as to obstruct the same; or to use immoral or indecent
language in crying their sales; or to make or cause to be made, any noisy
announcements such as the ringing of bells, blowing of whistles or otherwise,
through the streets in advertising their sales, and no bellman or crier, or
drum, or fife, or other musical instrument or noise-making means of attracting
attention of passersby, except the customary auctioneer's flags, shall be
employed or suffered to be used at or near any auction room, or near any
auction whatsoever. (1985 Code § 11-2-7)
   D.   Waiver Of Bond, Fee: The mayor may, in his discretion, issue a license
to conduct an auction by a church, charitable or benevolent institution without
the necessity of bond or the payment of a license fee. (1985 Code § 11-2-8;
amd. 2001 Code)
3-4-6: REVOCATION OF LICENSE 1 :
   A.   Authority: The city council shall, upon receiving a certified copy of
the record of conviction of any auctioneer, or operator of any auction house,
of violation of any law, or an ordinance relating to the operation or conduct
of the business of such auctioneer or auction house, revoke the license of such
auction house or auctioneer.
   B.   Operation After Revocation Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any
auction house or auctioneer to operate after revocation of the license of such
auction house or auctioneer as herein provided. (1985 Code § 11-2-5)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section 3-1-12 of this title for procedure.
3-4-7: PENALTY:
Any person or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor, and upon conviction, such person
shall be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1985 Code § 11-2-9)
CHAPTER 5
SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES AND EMPLOYEES 1
SECTION:
3-5-1: Title
3-5-2: Purpose And Application
3-5-3: Definitions
3-5-4: Business Licenses
3-5-5: Legitimate Artistic Modeling
3-5-6: Categories; Number Of Licenses
3-5-7: Application For License
3-5-8: Fees
3-5-9: Bond Required
3-5-10: Issuance Of License
3-5-11: Location Restrictions
3-5-12: Design Of Premises
3-5-13: License; Specific Regulations
3-5-14: General Regulations
3-5-15: Prohibited Activities By Performers, Customers
3-5-16: Outcall Services
3-5-17: Semi-Nude Dancing Bars
3-5-18: Performers; Costume, Stage Requirements
3-5-19: Nudity; Defenses To Prosecution
3-5-20: Violations
3-5-21: Appeal Procedure
3-5-22: Penalty
3-5-23: Existing Businesses; Compliance Time Limit
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 10, chapter 13, article A of this code for zoning
  regulations.
3-5-1: TITLE:
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and may be referred to as
THE SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS AND EMPLOYEE LICENSING ORDINANCE. (1985 Code §
11-8-1)
3-5-2: PURPOSE AND APPLICATION:
   A.   Reasonable And Uniform Regulations: The purpose and object of this
chapter is to establish reasonable and uniform regulations governing the time,
place and manner of operation of sexually-oriented businesses and their
employees in the city. This chapter, by its terms, is designed to prevent
crime, protect the city's retail trade, maintain property values, and generally
protect and preserve the quality of the city's neighborhoods, commercial
districts, and the quality of urban life. The provisions of this chapter have
neither the purpose nor the effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on
the content of any communicative materials or speech protected by the First
Amendment. This chapter shall be construed to protect the governmental
interests recognized by this chapter in a manner consistent with constitutional
provisions provided by the United States and Utah Constitutions. (1985 Code §
11-8-2)
   B.   Certain Business Activities: This chapter imposes regulatory standards
and license requirements on certain business activities, which are
characterized as sexually- oriented businesses, and certain employees of those
businesses characterized as sexually-oriented business employees. Except when
the context or specific provisions require, this chapter does not supersede or
nullify any other related ordinances. (1985 Code § 11-8-3)
3-5-3: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
ADULT BOOKSTORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE: A commercial establishment:
   A.   Which excludes minors from more than fifteen percent (15%) of the
retail floor or shelf space of the premises; or
   B.   Which, as one of its principal purposes, offers for sale or rental, for
any form of consideration, any one or more of the following: books, magazines,
periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures,
video cassettes or video reproductions, slides or other visual representations,
the central theme of which depicts or describes specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas; or instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are
designated for use in connection with specified sexual activities, except for
legitimate medically recognized contraceptives.
ADULT BUSINESS: An adult motion picture theater, adult bookstore or adult video
store.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A commercial establishment which regularly shows,
for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides
or similar photographic reproductions which are primarily characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
ADULT THEATER: A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of
seminudity.
BUSINESS LICENSE AUTHORITY: The city's community development director or
designee.
CUSTOMER: Any person who contracts with or employs any escort services or
escort, or the patron of any business licensed pursuant to this chapter.
EMPLOY: Hiring an individual to work for pecuniary or any other form of
compensation, whether such person is hired on the payroll of the employer, as
an independent contractor, as an agent or in any other form of employment
relationship.
ESCORT: Any person who, for pecuniary compensation, dates, socializes, visits,
consorts with or accompanies or offers to date, consort, socialize, visit or
accompany another or others to or about social affairs, entertainment or places
of amusement, or within any place of public or private resort or any business
or commercial establishment or any private quarters, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie, or to privately perform a striptease for another
person. Escort shall not be construed to include persons who provide business
or personal services such as licensed private nurses, aides for the elderly or
handicapped, social secretaries or similar service personnel whose relationship
with their patron is characterized by a bona fide contractual relationship
having a duration of more than twelve (12) hours and who provide a service not
principally characterized as dating or socializing. Escort shall also not be
construed to include persons providing services such as singing telegrams,
birthday greetings or similar activities characterized by appearances in a
public place, contracted for by a party other than the person for whom the
service is being performed and of a duration not longer than one hour.
ESCORT SERVICE: An individual or entity who, for pecuniary compensation,
furnishes or offers to furnish escorts, or provides or offers to introduce
patrons to escorts.
ESCORT SERVICE RUNNER: Any third person, not an escort, who, for pecuniary
compensation, acts in the capacity of an agent or broker for an escort service,
escort or customer by contacting or meeting with escort services, escorts or
customers at any location within the city, whether or not such third person is
employed by such escort service, escort, customer or by another business, or is
an independent contractor or self-employed.
NUDITY OR STATE OF NUDITY: The appearance of a human bare buttock, cleft of
buttocks, anus, pubic region, male genitals, female genitals or full female
breast.
OUTCALL SERVICES: Services of a type performed by a sexually oriented business
employee outside of the premises of the licensed sexually oriented business,
including, but not limited to, escorts, models, dancers and other similar
employees.
PECUNIARY COMPENSATION: Any commission, fee, salary, tip, gratuity, hire,
profit, reward or any other form of consideration.
PERSON: Any person, unincorporated association, corporation, partnership or
other legal entity.
SEMINUDE: A state of dress in which opaque clothing covers no more than the
genitals, pubic region, anus, cleft of the buttocks, the areola and nipple of
the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps
or devices.
SEMINUDE DANCING AGENCY: Any person, agency, firm, corporation, partnership or
any other entity or individual which furnishes, books or otherwise engages or
offers to furnish, book or otherwise engage the service of a professional
dancer licensed pursuant to this chapter for performance or appearance at a
business licensed for seminude entertainment, seminude dancing bars or adult
theaters.
SEMINUDE DANCING BARS: Any business which sells or allows the consumption of
any alcoholic beverage on its premises that permits dancing, modeling or other
performance or appearance however characterized, in a state of seminudity.
SEMINUDE ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS: A business, including adult theater, where
employees perform or appear in the presence of customers of the business in a
state of seminudity. A business shall also be presumed to be a seminude
entertainment business if the business holds itself out as such a business.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: "Seminude entertainment businesses", "sexually
oriented outcall services", "adult businesses", "seminude dancing bars" and
"seminude dancing agencies", as defined in this section.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEES: Those employees who work on the premises
of the sexually oriented business in activities related to the sexually
oriented portion of the business. This includes all managing employees,
dancers, escorts, models and other similar employees whether or not hired as
employees, agents or as independent contractors. Employees shall not include
individuals whose work is unrelated to the sexually oriented portion of the
business, such as janitors, bookkeepers, cooks, serving persons, bartenders and
similar employees, except when they may be managers or supervisors of the
business. All persons making outcall meetings under this chapter, including
escorts, models, guards, escort runners, drivers, chauffeurs and other similar
employees, shall be considered sexually oriented business employees.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: The human male or female pubic area or anus with
less than full opaque covering, or the human female breast including the
areola, papilla or nipple with less than full opaque covering.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: A. Acts of masturbation, human sexual intercourse,
sexual copulation between a person and a beast, fellatio, cunnilingus,
bestiality, pederasty, buggery, or any anal copulation between a human male and
another human male, human female or beast;
   B.   Manipulation, caressing or fondling by any person of the genitals of a
human, the pubic area of a human, the uncovered female nipple and areola; or
   C.   Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad in undergarments, a
mask or bizarre costume, or in the condition of being fettered, bound or
otherwise physically restrained on the part of the one so clothed. (1985 Code §
11-8-4; amd. 2001 Code; Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
3-5-4: BUSINESS LICENSES:
   A.   Sexually-Oriented Business: It is unlawful for any person to operate a
sexually-oriented business, as specified herein, without first obtaining a
sexually-oriented business license. The license shall specify the type of
business for which it is obtained. (1985 Code § 11-8-7)
   B.   Sexually-Oriented Business Employee: It is unlawful for any sexually-
oriented business to employ or for any individual to be employed by a sexually-
oriented business in the capacity of a sexually-oriented business employee,
unless that employee first obtains a sexually-oriented business employee
license. (1985 Code § 11-8-11)
   C.   Semi-Nude Dancing Agencies:
      1.   It is unlawful for any individual or entity to furnish, book or
otherwise engage the services of a professional dancer, model or performer to
appear in a state of semi-nudity for pecuniary compensation in or for any semi-
nude entertainment business, adult theater or semi-nude dancing bar licensed
pursuant to this chapter, unless such agency is licensed pursuant to this
chapter.
      2.   It is unlawful for any individual or entity to furnish, book or
otherwise engage or permit any person to perform as a professional dancer,
model or performer in a state of semi- nudity, either gratuitously or for
compensation, in or for any business licensed pursuant to this chapter, unless
such person is licensed pursuant to this chapter. (1985 Code § 11-8-29)
   D.   Exemptions: The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any sex
therapist or similar individual licensed by the state to provide bona fide
sexual therapy or counseling, licensed medical practitioner, licensed nurse,
psychiatrist, psychologist, nor shall it apply to any educator licensed by the
state for activities in the classroom. (1985 Code § 11-8-8)
3-5-5: LEGITIMATE ARTISTIC MODELING:
   A.   Intent: The city does not intend to unreasonably or improperly prohibit
legitimate modeling which may occur in a state of nudity for purposes protected
by the First Amendment or similar state protections. The city does intend to
prohibit prostitution and related offenses occurring under the guise of nude
modeling. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 3-5-14D11 of this
chapter, a licensed outcall employee may appear in a state of nudity before a
customer; provided, that a written contract for such appearance was entered
into between the customer and the employee and was signed by all parties to the
contract at least twenty four (24) hours before the nude appearance. All of the
other applicable provisions of this chapter shall still apply to such nude
appearance.
   B.   Contract; Unlawful Activities: In the event of a contract for nude
modeling or appearance is signed more than forty eight (48) hours in advance of
the modeling or appearance, the individual to appear nude shall not be required
to obtain a license pursuant to this chapter. During such unlicensed nude
appearance, it is unlawful to:
      1.   Appear nude or semi-nude in the presence of persons under the age of
eighteen (18);
      2.   Allow, offer or agree to any touching of the contracting party or
other person by the individual appearing nude;
      3.   Allow, offer or agree to commit prostitution, solicitation of
prostitution, solicitation of a minor or committing activities harmful to a
minor;
      4.   Allow, offer, commit or agree to any sex act as validly defined by
city ordinance or state statute;
      5.   Allow, offer or agree or permit the contracting party or other
person to masturbate in the presence of the individual contracted to appear
nude;
      6.   Allow, offer or agree for the individual appearing nude to be within
five feet (5') of any other person while performing or while nude or semi-nude.
(1985 Code § 11-8-9)
3-5-6: CATEGORIES; NUMBER OF LICENSES:
   A.   Scope: It is unlawful for any business premises to operate or be
licensed for more than one category of sexually-oriented business, except that
a business may have a license for both outcall services and semi-nude dancing
agency on the same premises.
   B.   Categories: The categories of sexually oriented businesses are:
      1.   Outcall services;
      2.   Adult businesses;
      3.   Seminude entertainment businesses;
      4.   Seminude dancing bars; and
      5.   Seminude dancing agencies. (1985 Code § 11-8-10)
3-5-7: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Before any applicant may be licensed to operate a sexually oriented business or
as a sexually oriented business employee pursuant to this chapter, the
applicant shall submit, on a form to be supplied by the business license
authority, the following:
   A.   Correct Legal Name: The correct legal name of each applicant,
corporation, partnership, limited partnership or entity doing business under an
assumed name. (1985 Code § 11-8-12)
   B.   Corporations; Partnerships: If the applicant is a corporation,
partnership or limited partnership or individual or entity doing business under
an assumed name, the information required below for individual applicants shall
be submitted for each partner and each principal of the applicant and for each
officer, director and any shareholder (corporate or personal) holding more than
ten percent (10%) of the stock of any applicant. Any holding company or any
entity holding more than ten percent (10%) of an applicant's stock shall be
considered an applicant for purposes of disclosure under this chapter. (1985
Code § 11-8-12; amd. 2001 Code)
The shareholder disclosure requirements above shall only be applicable for
outcall service licenses.
   C.   Check Signer: All corporations, partnerships or noncorporate entities
included on the application shall also identify each individual authorized by
the corporation, partnership or noncorporate entity to sign the checks for such
corporation, partnership or noncorporate entity.
   D.   Personal Information: For all applicants or individuals, the
application must also state:
      1.   Any other names or aliases used by the individual;
      2.   The age, date and place of birth;
      3.   Height, weight and color of hair and eyes;
      4.   Present business address and telephone number;
      5.   Proposed business address and telephone number;
      6.   Present residence address and telephone number;
      7.   State driver's license or identification number; and
      8.   Social security number.
   E.   Proof Of Age: Acceptable written proof that the individual is at least
eighteen (18) years of age or, in the case of employees to be employed in a
business where a different age is required, proof of the required age. (1985
Code § 11-8-12)
   F.   Photographs: Attached to the form as provided above, two (2) color
photographs of the applicant clearly showing the individual's face and the
individual's fingerprints on a form provided by the police department. For
persons not residing in the city, the photographs may be on a form from the law
enforcement jurisdiction where the person resides. Any fees for the photographs
and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant. (Ord. 815, 9-25-2012)
   G.   Health Certificate: For any individual applicant required to obtain a
sexually oriented business employee license as an escort or as a seminude
entertainer, a certificate from the Weber County health department, stating
that the individual has, within thirty (30) days immediately preceding the date
of application, been examined and found to be free of any contagious or
communicable diseases.
   H.   Previous Business Information: A statement describing the business,
occupation or employment history of the applicant for three (3) years
immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application.
   I.   License And Permit History: A statement detailing the license or permit
history of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date
of the filing of the application, including whether such applicant previously
operating or seeking to operate, in this or any other county, city, state or
country, has ever had a license, permit or authorization to do business denied,
revoked or suspended, or had any professional or vocational license or permit
denied, revoked or suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation or
suspension, state the date, the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction,
and describe in full the reasons for the denial, revocation or suspension. A
copy of any order of denial, revocation or suspension shall be attached to the
application.
   J.   Criminal Convictions: List all criminal convictions or pleas of nolo
contendere, except those which have been expunged, and the disposition of all
arrests of the applicant, individual or other entity subject to disclosure
under this chapter, for five (5) years prior to the date of the application.
This disclosure shall include identification of all ordinance violations,
except minor traffic offenses (any traffic offense designated as a felony,
class A or class B misdemeanor shall not be construed as a minor traffic
offense), stating the date, place, nature of each conviction or plea of nolo
contendere and sentence of each conviction or other disposition; identifying
the convicting jurisdiction and sentencing court and providing court
identifying case numbers or docket numbers. Application for a sexually oriented
business or employee license shall constitute a waiver of disclosure of any
criminal conviction or plea of nolo contendere for the purposes of any
proceeding involving the business or employee license.
   K.   Property Owner: In the event the applicant is not the owner of record
of the real property upon which the business or proposed business is located,
the application must be accompanied by a notarized statement from the legal or
equitable owner of the possessory interest in the property specifically
acknowledging the type of business for which the applicant seeks a license for
the property. In addition to the notarized statement, the applicant shall
furnish the name, address and phone number of the owner of record of the
property, as well as a copy of the lease or rental agreement pertaining to the
premises in which the service is or will be located.
   L.   Description Of Services: A description of the services to be provided
by the business, with sufficient detail to allow reviewing authorities to
determine what business will be transacted on the premises, together with a
schedule of usual fees to be charged by the licensee, and any rules,
regulations or employment guidelines under or by which the business intends to
operate. This description shall also include:
      1.   The hours that the business or service will be open to the public,
and the methods of promoting the health and safety of the employees and
customers and preventing them from engaging in illegal activity;
      2.   The methods of supervision preventing the employees from engaging in
acts of prostitution or other related criminal activities;
      3.   The methods of supervising employees and customers from charging or
receiving fees for services or acts prohibited by this chapter or other
statutes or ordinances;
      4.   The methods of screening employees and customers in order to promote
the health and safety of employees and customers and prevent the transmission
of disease, and prevent the commission of acts of prostitution or other
criminal activity. (1985 Code § 11-8-12)
3-5-8: FEES:
   A.   Established: The fees for sexually oriented businesses shall be as
established in section
1-12-2 of this code. (1985 Code § 11-8-13; amd. 2001 Code)
   B.   Fees Additional: These fees shall be in addition to the other licenses
and fees required to do business in the city. (1985 Code § 11-8-13)
3-5-9: BOND REQUIRED:
Each applicant for a sexually oriented business license shall post with the
community development director a cash or corporate surety bond, payable to the
city, in the amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Any fines assessed
against the business, officers or managers for violations of city ordinances
shall be taken from this bond if not paid in cash within ten (10) days after
notice of the fine, unless an appeal is filed, as provided by this chapter. In
the event the funds are drawn against the cash or surety bond to pay such
fines, the bond shall be replenished to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) within
fifteen (15) days of the date of notice of any draw against it. In the event
the bond is not replenished within the fifteen (15) days, the license granted
by this chapter shall automatically be suspended until such time as the bond is
replenished. (1985 Code § 11-8-14; amd. 2001 Code; Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
3-5-10: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
   A.   Within Thirty Days; Exceptions: The community development director
shall approve the issuance of a license to the applicant within thirty (30)
days after receipt of the application, unless the director finds one or more of
the following: (Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
      1.   The applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age or any higher age
if the license sought requires a higher age.
      2.   The applicant is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees,
fines or penalties assessed against the applicant or imposed on the applicant
in relation to a sexually oriented business.
      3.   The applicant has falsely answered a material question or request
for information as authorized by this chapter.
      4.   The applicant has been convicted of a violation of a provision of
this chapter within two (2) years immediately preceding the application. The
fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the denial.
(1985 Code § 11-8-16; amd. 2001 Code)
      5.   The premises to be used for the business has been disapproved by the
county health department, the fire department, the city building officials or
the city zoning officials as not being in compliance with applicable laws and
ordinances of the city. If any of the foregoing reviewing agencies cannot
complete their review within the thirty (30) day approval or denial period, the
agency or department may obtain from the community development director an
extension of time for their review of no more than fifteen (15) days. The total
time for the city to approve or deny a license shall not exceed forty five (45)
days from receipt of an application. Businesses located outside the corporate
boundaries of the city, but requiring a license under this chapter, may be
denied a license pursuant to this chapter if the business does not have a valid
business license to conduct business at the business location from the
appropriate jurisdiction for that location. (Ord. 815, 9-25-2012; amd. Ord.
854, 5-6-2014)
         a.   Upon receipt of an application, all departments required to
review the application shall determine within seven (7) days whether or not the
application is incomplete with all items needed for processing. Incomplete
applications shall be returned to the applicant with a specification of the
items which are incomplete.
         b.   The time for processing applications specified in this section
shall begin to run from the receipt of a complete application.
         c.   In the event that a license has not been disapproved within
thirty (30) days, or the forty five (45) days allowed after an extension, the
city shall issue the license.
         d.   Any license issued pursuant to subsection A5c of this section may
be revoked by the city pursuant to the revocation procedures of subsection 3-5-
20B of this chapter, if the completed review determines that the license should
have been denied.
      6.   The license fees required by this chapter or by other ordinances
have not been paid.
      7.   All applicable sales and use taxes have not been paid.
      8.   An applicant for the proposed business is in violation of or not in
compliance with this chapter.
      9.   An applicant has been convicted of or pled nolo contendere to a
crime involving: prostitution; exploitation of prostitution; aggravated
promotion of prostitution; aggravated exploitation of prostitution;
solicitation of sex acts; sex acts for hire; compelling prostitution; aiding
prostitution; sale, distribution or display of material harmful to minors;
sexual performance by minors; possession of child pornography; lewdness; public
indecency; any crime involving sexual abuse or exploitation of a minor; sexual
assault or aggravated sexual assault; rape; rape of a child; object rape;
object rape of a child; sodomy; forcible sexual abuse; incest; harboring a
runaway child; criminal contempt; conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of
the foregoing offenses or offenses involving similar elements from any
jurisdiction, regardless of the exact title of the offense, for which:
         a.   Less than two (2) years have elapsed from the date of conviction,
if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense, or less than five (5) years, if
the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanors within the five (5) years,
or less than five (5) years has elapsed from the date of the conviction if the
offense was a felony.
         b.   The fact that a conviction is being appealed does not prevent
someone from being denied a business license for that conviction. (1985 Code §
1-8-16)
   B.   Term Of License: Sexually-oriented business and employee licenses
issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid from the date of issuance
through January 1 of the next year. The license fees required under section
3-5-8 of this chapter shall not be prorated for any portion of a year, but
shall be paid in full for whatever portion of the year the license is applied
for. (1985 Code § 11-8-17)
3-5-11: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Semi-Nude Entertainment Businesses: It is unlawful for any business
licensed for semi-nude entertainment to be located within three hundred thirty
feet (330') of a different business which is licensed for the sale or
consumption of alcohol. (1985 Code § 11-8-26)
   B.   Zoning: It is unlawful for any sexually-oriented business to do
business at any location within the city not zoned for such business. Sexually-
oriented businesses licensed as adult businesses, semi-nude entertainment
businesses or semi-nude dancing bars pursuant to this chapter shall only be
allowed in areas zoned for their use pursuant to title 10, article 13A of this
code. (1985 Code § 11-8-6)
3-5-12: DESIGN OF PREMISES:
   A.   Adult Businesses:
      1.   Diagram: In addition to the general requirements of disclosure for a
sexually-oriented business, any applicant for a license as an adult business
shall also submit a diagram, drawn to scale, of the premises of the license.
The design and construction, prior to granting a license or opening for
business, shall conform to the following:
         a.   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of
the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding
restrooms.
         b.   Restrooms may not contain any video reproduction equipment or any
of the business merchandise. Signs shall be posted requiring only one person be
allowed in the restroom per stall, and only one person in any stall at a time,
and requiring that patrons shall not be allowed access to managers' station
areas.
         c.   For businesses which exclude minors from the entire premises, all
windows, doors and other apertures to the premises shall be darkened or
otherwise constructed to prevent anyone outside the premises from seeing the
inside of the premises. Businesses which exclude minors from less than all of
the premises shall be designed and constructed so that minors may not see into
the area from which they are excluded.
         d.   The diagram required shall not necessarily be a professional
engineer or architect's blueprint; however, the diagram must show marked
internal dimensions, all overhead lighting fixtures and ratings for
illumination capacity.
      2.   Manager's Station; Unobstructed View: It shall be the duty of the
licensee and the licensee's employees to ensure that the views from the
manager's station in subsection A1 of this section remain unobstructed by any
doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or any other materials at all times
that any patron is present in the premises, and to ensure that no patron is
permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an
area in which patrons will not be permitted.
      3.   Lighting Fixtures: The premises shall at all times be equipped and
illuminated with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to
illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination
of not less than one foot-candle, measured at floor level. It shall be the duty
of the licensee and the licensee's employees present on the premises to ensure
that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any
patron is present on the premises. (1985 Code § 11-8-24)
   B.   Semi-Nude Entertainment Business:
      1.   It is unlawful for business premises licensed for semi-nude
entertainment to:
         a.   Permit a bed, sofa, mattress or similar item in any room on the
premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the
public or in any office to which patrons are not admitted, and except that in
an adult theater such items may be on the stage as part of a performance.
         b.   Allow any door on any room used for the business, except for the
door to an office to which customers shall not be admitted, outside doors and
restroom doors, to be lockable from the inside.
         c.   Provide any room in which the employee and the customer are alone
together without separation by a solid physical barrier at least three feet
(3') high and six inches (6") wide. The customer shall remain on one side of
the barrier and the employee shall remain on the other side of the barrier.
      2.   Adult theaters shall also require that the performance area shall be
separated from the customers by a minimum of three feet (3'), which separation
shall be delineated by a physical barrier at least three feet (3') high. (1985
Code § 11-8-25)
3-5-13: LICENSE; SPECIFIC REGULATIONS:
   A.   Notice Of Change Of Information: Any change in the information required
to be submitted under this chapter for either a sexually oriented business
license or sexually oriented business employee license shall be given, in
writing, to the community development director and the police department within
fourteen (14) days after such change. (Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
   B.   Transfer Limitations: Sexually oriented business licenses granted under
this chapter shall not be transferable. It is unlawful for a license held by an
individual to be transferred. It is unlawful for a license held by a
corporation, partnership or other noncorporate entity to transfer any part in
excess of ten percent (10%) thereof, without filing a new application and
obtaining prior city approval. If any transfer of the controlling interest in a
business licensee occurs, the license is immediately null and void and the
business shall not operate until a separate new license has been properly
issued by the city as provided in this chapter. (1985 Code § 11-8-19)
   C.   Display Of License: It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business
location within the boundaries of the city to fail to display the license
granted pursuant to this chapter in a prominent location within the business
premises. It is unlawful for any individual licensed pursuant to this chapter
to fail to carry, at all times while engaged in licensed activities within the
corporate boundaries of the city, their employee license on their person. If
the individual is nude or seminude, such license shall be visibly displayed
within the same room as the employee is performing. When requested by the
police, city licensing or other enforcement personnel or health official, it is
unlawful to fail to show the appropriate licenses while engaged in licensed
activities within the corporate boundaries of the city. (1985 Code § 11-8-20)
   D.   Advertisements; Statement: It is unlawful for any advertisement by the
sexually oriented business or employee to fail to state that the business or
employee is licensed by the city and shall include the city license number.
(1985 Code § 11-8-21)
3-5-14: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Obscenity: Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter, nothing
in this chapter shall be deemed to permit or allow the showing or display of
any matter which is contrary to the provisions of this code or other applicable
federal or state statutes prohibiting obscenity or nudity. (1985 Code § 11-8-5)
   B.   Premises Location: It is unlawful to conduct business under a license
issued pursuant to this chapter at any location other than the licensed
premises. Any location to which telephone calls are automatically forwarded by
such business shall require a separate license.
   C.   Business Name: It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business to do
business in the city under any name other than the business name specified in
the application. (1985 Code § 11-8-15)
   D.   Unlawful Activities: It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business
or sexually oriented business employee to:
      1.   Allow persons under the age of eighteen (18) years, or the age of
twenty one (21) years, if required by applicable liquor ordinance or statutes,
to be on the licensed premises, except that in adult businesses which exclude
minors from less than all of the business premises, minors shall not be
permitted in excluded areas;
      2.   Allow, offer or agree to conduct any outcall business with persons
under the age of eighteen (18) years;
      3.   Except for seminude dancing bars, allow, offer or agree to allow
alcohol being stored, used or consumed on or in the licensed premises;
      4.   Allow the outside door to the premises to be locked while any
customer is in the premises;
      5.   Allow, offer or agree to gambling on the licensed premises;
      6.   Allow, offer or agree to any sexually-oriented business employee
touching any customer, except that outcall employees and customers may touch,
except that any touching of specified anatomical areas, whether clothed or
unclothed, is prohibited;
      7.   Allow, offer or agree to illegal possession, use, sale or
distribution of controlled substances on the licensed premises;
      8.   Allow sexually-oriented business employees to possess, use, sell or
distribute controlled substances while engaged in the activities of the
business;
      9.   Allow, offer or agree to commit prostitution, solicitation of
prostitution or solicitation of a minor to occur on the licensed premises or,
in the event of an outcall employee or business, the outcall employee
committing, offering or agreeing to commit prostitution, attempting to commit
prostitution, soliciting prostitution, soliciting a minor or committing
activities harmful to a minor;
      10.   Allow, offer, commit or agree to any sex act as validly defined by
city ordinances or state statutes in the presence of any customer;
      11.   Allow, offer or agree to any outcall employee appearing before any
customer or patron in a state of nudity;
      12.   Allow, offer or agree to allow a customer to masturbate in the
presence of the sexually-oriented business employee or on the premises of a
sexually-oriented business. (1985 Code § 11-8-22)
3-5-15: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES BY PERFORMERS, CUSTOMERS:
   A.   Performers: It is unlawful for any professional dancer, model or
performer, while performing in any business licensed pursuant to this chapter,
to:
      1.   Touch in any manner any other person; or
      2.   Throw any object or clothing off the stage area; or
      3.   Accept any money, drink or any other object directly from any
person; or
      4.   Allow another person to touch such performer or to place any money
or object on the performer or within the costume or person of the performer; or
      5.   Place anything within the costume or adjust or move the costume
while performing so as to render the performer in a state of nudity. (1985 Code
§ 11-8-30)
   B.   Customers: It is unlawful for any person or any customer of any
business to touch in any manner any performer; to place any money or object on
or within the costume or person of any performer; or to give or offer to give
to any such performer any drinks, money or object while such performer is
performing, except that money may be placed on the stage, which shall not be
picked up by the performer except by hand. (1985 Code § 11-8-33)
3-5-16: OUTCALL SERVICES:
It is unlawful for any business or employee providing outcall services
contracted for within the city, to fail to comply with the following
requirements:
   A.   Written Contract: All businesses licensed to provide outcall services
pursuant to this chapter shall provide to each customer a written contract in
receipt of pecuniary compensation for services. The contract shall clearly
state the type of services to be performed, the length of time such services
shall be performed, the total amount such services shall cost the customer and
any special terms or conditions relating to the services to be performed. The
contract need not include the name of the customer. The business licensee shall
keep and maintain a copy of each written contract entered into pursuant to this
section for a period of not less than one year from the date of provision of
services thereunder. The contract shall be numbered and entered into a register
listing the contract number, date, names of all employees involved in the
contract and pecuniary compensation paid.
   B.   Maintain Office Or Telephone: All outcall businesses licensed pursuant
to this chapter shall maintain an open office or telephone at which the
licensee or licensee's designated agency may be personally contacted during all
hours outcall employees are working. The address and phone number of the
license location shall appear and be included in all customer contracts and
published advertisements. For outcall businesses which premises are licensed
within the corporate limits of the city, private rooms or booths where the
patrons may meet with the outcall employee shall not be provided at the open
office or any other location by the service, nor shall patrons meet outcall
employees at the business premises.
   C.   Advertise; Manner: Outcall services shall not advertise in such a
manner that would lead a reasonably prudent person to conclude that specified
sexual activities would be performed by the outcall employee. (1985 Code § 11-
8-23)
3-5-17: SEMI-NUDE DANCING BARS:
   A.   Operation Prerequisites: It is unlawful for any business licensed for
the sale or consumption of alcohol pursuant to city ordinances or state law to
allow any person on the premises to dance, model or perform in a state of semi-
nudity without first obtaining a license pursuant to this chapter. In
establishments where alcohol is sold or consumed, semi-nude dancing shall only
be allowed in private clubs licensed by the state and on-premises beer retailer
establishments licensed by the state. (1985 Code § 11-8-27)
   B.   Performer Restrictions: It is unlawful for any person to perform or
appear in a state of semi-nudity as a professional dancer, model, performer or
otherwise on the premises of a business licensed as a semi-nude dancing bar,
either gratuitously or for compensation, unless that person is licensed as a
sexually-oriented business employee. (1985 Code § 11-8-28)
3-5-18: PERFORMERS; COSTUME, STAGE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Costume Requirements: It is unlawful for performers in semi-nude
dancing bars to fail to comply with the following costume requirements:
      1.   Performers shall at all times be costumed during performances in a
manner not to violate any city ordinance concerning disorderly conduct or
lewdness, and such performers shall not perform or conduct themselves in such a
manner as to violate the provisions of any city ordinance. No performer shall
appear in any business licensed as a semi-nude dancing bar, during a
performance or appearance with less than opaque clothing which meets the
definition of semi-nude, and in the case of a female performer, covers the
areola and nipple of such performer in a shape and color other than the natural
shape and color of the nipple and areola.
      2.   While on the portion of a business licensed as a semi-nude dancing
bar used by customers, performers shall be dressed in opaque clothing covering
the performer's cleft of buttocks and pubic area and, in the case of a female,
the nipple and areola of the breast. (1985 Code § 11-8-31)
   B.   Stage Requirements: It is unlawful for any performer in a business
licensed as a semi-nude dancing bar to appear in costume other than on a stage
which shall be at least three feet (3') from the portion of the premises on
which customers are allowed, and which shall be separated from the customers by
a solid barrier or railing, the top of which shall be at least two feet (2')
from the floor. (1985 Code § 11-8-32)
3-5-19: NUDITY; DEFENSES TO PROSECUTION:
It is a defense to prosecution for violation under this chapter that a person
appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
   A.   Proprietary School: By a proprietary school licensed by the state or a
college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
   B.   Private College Or University: By a private college or university which
maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable
to a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation. (1985 Code § 11-8-34)
3-5-20: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Injunction: An entity or individual who operates or causes to be
operated a sexually-oriented business without a valid license or who employs or
is employed as an employee of a sexually-oriented business, or who operates
such a business or functions as such an employee in violation of the provisions
of this chapter, is subject to a suit for injunction in addition to the civil
and criminal violations provided herein, and any other remedy available at law
or in equity. (1985 Code § 11-8-36)
   B.   Suspension Or Revocation 1 :
      1.   The city may issue a notice suspending or revoking a sexually
oriented business or employee license granted under this chapter if a licensee,
or an employee of the licensee, has:
         a.   Violated or is not in compliance with this chapter;
         b.   Refused to allow any inspection of the premises of the sexually
oriented business specifically authorized by this chapter or by any other
statute or ordinance;
         c.   Failed to replenish the cost bond as provided in this chapter
(such suspension shall extend until the bond has been replenished);
         d.   A licensee or employee gave materially false or misleading
information in obtaining the license;
         e.   A licensee or employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented
business or worked under the employee license during the period when the
business license or employee license was suspended;
         f.   A licensee has committed an offense which would be grounds for
denial of a license for which the time period required has not elapsed;
         g.   On two (2) or more occasions within a twelve (12) month period, a
person committed in or on, or solicited for on the licensed premises, or an
outcall employee solicited or committed on or off the premises, an offense
which would be grounds for denial of a license for which a conviction has been
obtained, and the person or persons were employees, whether or not licensed, of
the sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were committed;
         h.   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for ad valorem
taxes, or sales taxes, related to the sexually oriented business.
      2.   Suspension or revocation shall take effect within ten (10) days of
the issuance of notice, unless an appeal is filed with the city as provided by
this chapter. The revocation or suspension is stayed pending the outcome of the
appeal with the city.
      3.   The fact that a criminal conviction is being appealed shall have no
effect on the revocation of a license. (1985 Code § 11-8-37)
   C.   Effect Of Revocation: When a license issued pursuant to this chapter is
revoked, the revocation shall continue for one year from its effective date and
the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business or employee
license for one year from the date of such revocation. (1985 Code § 11-8-38)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  3-1-12 of this title for procedure.
3-5-21: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   Filing: If the license is denied or approved with qualifications, or if
a notice of suspension, revocation or citation of a civil fine is imposed, the
applicant or licensee may file an appeal with the city council. (1985 Code §
11-8-39; amd. 2001 Code)
   B.   Time Limitation; Hearing Scheduled: The filing of an appeal must take
place within ten (10) days after the date of the service of the notice of any
denial, qualified approval, suspension, revocation or civil fine. Upon
receiving the notice of such appeal, the community development director shall
schedule a hearing before the city council within twenty (20) calendar days
after the date of the appeal, unless such time shall be extended for good
cause. (Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
   C.   Public Hearing: The city council shall hold a public hearing on the
record and take such facts and evidence as necessary to determine whether the
denial, qualified approval, suspension, revocation or civil fine was proper
under the law.
   D.   Burden Of Proof: The burden of proof shall be on the city.
   E.   Recommended Decision: After the hearing, the city council shall have
seven (7) working days, unless extended for good cause, in which to render
findings of fact and conclusions of law and make a recommendation to the city
administrator.
   F.   Objections: Either party may object to the recommendation of the city
council by filing the party's objection and reason in writing to the city
administrator within seven (7) days following the recommendation. In the event
the city council recommends upholding a suspension or revocation, the license
shall be immediately suspended and shall remain suspended until any subsequent
appeal is decided. If no objections are received within the seven (7) days, the
city administrator may immediately adopt the recommendation of the city
council.
   G.   Consideration: If objections are received, the city administrator shall
have ten (10) working days to consider such objections before issuing the city
administrator's final decision. The city administrator may, in the city
administrator's discretion, take additional evidence or require written
memorandum on issues of fact or law. The standard by which the city
administrator shall review the decision of the city council is whether
substantial evidence exists in the record to support the city council's
recommendation.
   H.   Judicial Review: An applicant aggrieved by the city administrator's
decision shall have judicial review of such decision pursuant to rule 65(b),
Utah rules of civil procedure, or any other applicable ordinance, statute or
rule providing for such review. (1985 Code § 11-8-39; amd. 2001 Code)
3-5-22: PENALTY:
In addition to revocation or suspension of a license, as provided in this
chapter, each violation of this chapter shall, upon citation by the community
development director, require the licensee to pay a civil penalty in the amount
of five hundred dollars ($500.00). Such fines shall be deducted from the cost
bond posted pursuant to this chapter, unless paid within ten (10) days of
notice of the fine or the final determination after an appeal. In addition to
the civil fines provided in this chapter, the violation of any provision of
this chapter shall be a class B misdemeanor, punishable as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day of a violation shall be considered a separate
offense. (Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
3-5-23: EXISTING BUSINESSES; COMPLIANCE TIME LIMITS:
   A.   Applicability: The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to
all persons and businesses described herein, whether the herein described
activities were established before or after the effective date hereof, and
regardless of whether such persons and businesses are currently licensed to do
business in the city.
      1.   All such persons and businesses requiring outcall service licenses
shall have forty five (45) days from the effective date hereof, or until their
current license expires, whichever is first in time, to comply with the
provision of this chapter.
      2.   All seminude dancing bars and employees thereof requiring licenses
and seminude dancing agency licenses shall have seventy five (75) days from the
effective date hereof, or until their license must be renewed, whichever is
first, to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
      3.   All seminude entertainment businesses shall have one hundred five
(105) days from the effective date hereof, or until their current license must
be renewed, whichever is first, to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
      4.   All adult businesses shall have one hundred thirty five (135) days
from the effective date hereof, or until their current license must be renewed,
whichever is first in time, to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Fees; Credit: For the year 1998, all businesses required by this
chapter to be licensed as sexually oriented businesses shall be credited
against the fees required by this chapter with the regulatory license fees paid
for the current 1998 license. (1985 Code § 11-8-35)
CHAPTER 6
SWAP MEETS
SECTION:
3-6-1: Definitions
3-6-2: License Required; Exemptions
3-6-3: Application, Investigation
3-6-4: Rules, Regulations And Requirements
3-6-5: Revocation And Suspension
3-6-6: Penalty
3-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
FLEA MARKET: Shall be considered a swap meet.
SWAP MEET LICENSEE: Any person, firm or corporation that rents, lends or leases
premises to temporary sellers for use as a marketplace to barter and exchange
goods. (1985 Code § 11-5-1; amd. 2001 Code)
3-6-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or charity to hold a
swap meet or flea market without having first obtained a license therefor, as
is herein provided, but the license for a charity may be waived by the mayor
upon application. Garage sales by individual homeowners on their premises are
exempt from this requirement. (1985 Code § 11-5-2)
3-6-3: APPLICATION, INVESTIGATION:
An application for a swap meet license shall be made to the city recorder and
shall state thereon the name of the applicant, the place of business and the
number of employees intended to be engaged. The police chief or any other
office designated by the police chief shall investigate each applicant for such
license and shall report back on whether or not such applicant is a person who
has been convicted of a felony or theft related offense. If no such convictions
appear on the person's record, the city may issue a license to conduct a swap
meet, providing the licensee agrees to comply with the other provisions of this
chapter. If any such conviction does appear, no license shall be issued without
the consent of the city council. (Ord. 815, 9-25-2012)
3-6-4: RULES, REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Restricted Items: No sales of firearms, pyrotechnics, ammunition,
explosives, alcoholic beverages, food (except fresh produce), drinks,
pornography or medicines, shall be made by daily sellers on the swap meet
licensee's premises. (1985 Code § 11-5-4)
   B.   Report Required: It shall be the duty of every swap meet licensee to
report to the police department any article he or she has reason to believe was
stolen or lost, and found by the person attempting to sell it. (Ord. 815, 9-25-
2012)
3-6-5: REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION 1 :
In addition to the other penalties provided by law, any swap meet licensee
violating the provisions of this chapter may have his or her license revoked or
suspended. (1985 Code § 11-5-6)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section 3-1-12 of this title for procedure.
3-6-6: PENALTY:
In addition to the other penalties provided by law, any person violating the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor and upon
conviction, such person shall be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1985 Code § 11-5-7)
CHAPTER 7
PAWNBROKERS
SECTION:
3-7-1: Defined
3-7-2: License Required
3-7-3: Application; Investigation
3-7-4: Rules, Regulations And Requirements
3-7-5: Revocation Of License
3-7-6: Penalty
3-7-1: DEFINED:
Any person who lends money on deposit or pledge of personal property; or deals
in the purchase or possession of personal property on condition of selling the
same back again to the vendor or pledger at a stipulated price; or who
purchases or takes any personal property, with an agreement or understanding to
resell at any time for a stipulated or any price to the vendor; or who takes
such personal property on condition that it may be redeemed; or who lends or
advances money on personal property, and takes or receives such personal
property in their possession, is hereby declared to be a "pawnbroker". (1985
Code § 11-7-1)
3-7-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to carry on the business of pawnbroker without
first having obtained the license required by this chapter and having paid the
license fee therefor as prescribed in title 1, chapter 12 of this code. Any
person engaging in or carrying on the business of pawnbroker without first
having obtained the license required in this chapter shall be guilty of a
separate offense for each and every day that such business shall be carried on
without such license, and shall be punished in accordance with the provisions
of section
3-7-6 of this chapter. (1985 Code § 11-7-2; amd. 2001 Code)
3-7-3: APPLICATION; INVESTIGATION:
   A.   Required; Character References: All applications for a license to carry
on the business of a pawnbroker shall be submitted to the city council and
shall be accompanied by three (3) character references of the applicant to be
used by the police department to conduct an investigation into the background
of the applicant.
   B.   Recommendation: After the police department has completed its
investigation into the background of the applicant, the police chief or his/her
designee shall make a written recommendation to the city council as to whether
or not the license should be granted. (Ord. 815, 9-25-2012)
   C.   Decision Of City Council; Appeal: The city council shall then either
grant or deny the license. In the event of a denial, the applicant may appeal
the denial to the district court. (1985 Code § 11-7-3; amd. 2001 Code)
3-7-4: RULES, REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Licensee Liable For Employee Acts: The holder of a pawnbroker's license
is liable for any and all acts of his employees and for any violation by them
of any of the provisions of this chapter. (1985 Code § 11-7-5)
   B.   Ordinances To Be Posted: It is unlawful for any person to conduct or
transact a pawnbroking business unless he shall keep posted in a conspicuous
place in his place of business a copy of all ordinances relating to
pawnbrokers. (1985 Code § 11-7-6)
   C.   Hours Of Business: It is unlawful for any pawnbroker to receive any
goods by way of pawn or pledge between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
one day and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. the next day. (1985 Code § 11-7-7)
   D.   Recordkeeping Duty; Right Of Inspection:
      1.   Every pawnbroker shall keep a substantial and well bound book in
which shall be written in ink, in the English language, at the time of each
loan or receipt of personal property, an accurate account and description of
the goods, articles or things pawned or received, which shall include the
following items:
         a.   The number and make of all articles, where such articles have a
number or are manufactured by any particular manufacturer;
         b.   The amount loaned or advanced thereon;
         c.   The time, both date and hour, of pawning or receiving such goods,
articles or thing; and
         d.   The true name and residence of the person pawning or delivering
the goods, article or thing.
No entry made in said book shall be erased, obliterated or defaced, and the
said book, as well as every article or thing pawned, pledged or deposited,
shall be open to the inspection of any police officer at all reasonable times.
(1985 Code § 11-7-8; amd. 2001 Code)
      2.   In addition, every pawnbroker shall accurately and completely fill
out a card entitled "pawned and purchased property" provided by the police
department. Said card shall require that each customer provide the pawnbroker
with an identification card with his or her photo on it, that the pawnbroker
record the type of photo identification card presented (e.g., driver's license)
by the customer, along with the identification card number. (1985 Code § 11-7-
8; amd. 2001 Code; Ord. 815, 9-25-2012)
      3.   Every pawnbroker shall obtain a fingerprint from each customer and
record it in the space provided on the card required by subsection D2 of this
section. (1985 Code § 11-7-8; amd. 2001 Code)
      4.   Every pawnbroker shall provide the cards required by subsection D2
of this section to the police department periodically as the police department
directs. (Ord. 815, 9-25-2012)
   E.   Receipt Required; Contents; Right Of Inspection: It is unlawful for any
pawnbroker to receive or accept any article of personal property as a pawn or
pledge, or upon which money is lent or advanced, without issuing and delivering
to the person or persons delivering such article a receipt for the same, which
shall bear the date, both day and hour, when such goods are received and a
description of the article so pawned or deposited with the pawnbroker, as set
out in subsection D of this section, and the pawnbroker shall keep on file in
his office a duplicate of said receipt, which shall be open to the inspection
of any police officer at all reasonable times. Said receipts shall be numbered
and a record kept thereof. (1985 Code § 11-7-9; amd. 2001 Code)
   F.   Pledged Articles; Redemption: When a pledge is redeemed, the pawnbroker
shall place and keep on file the returned pawn ticket or receipt for such
pledge, which ticket or receipt shall at all times be open to the inspection of
any police officer. In the event of the loss of the pawn ticket or receipt by
the pledger of any pledge, the pawnbroker, before allowing a redemption of the
pledge, shall require the pledger to summon a police officer in whose presence
the pledge shall be redeemed and restored to the pledger. (1985 Code § 11-7-10)
   G.   Forfeited Articles; Redemption; Time Limit: It is unlawful, in all
cases in which articles pledged have been forfeited, for a sale or other
disposition thereof to be made by the pledgee within the period of three (3)
months after such forfeiture. (1985 Code § 11-7-11; amd. 2001 Code)
   H.   Receiving Goods From Designated Persons Prohibited: It is unlawful for
any pawnbroker to receive any goods, articles or things in pawn or pledge from
a person who is intoxicated, who the pawnbroker knows or should know has been
convicted of theft, or who the pawnbroker knows or should know is mentally
incompetent, or from a person under the age of eighteen (18). (1985 Code § 11-
7-12)
   I.   Employment Of Persons Under Sixteen Prohibited: It is unlawful for any
pawnbroker to employ any clerk or person under the age of sixteen (16) years to
receive any pledge or make any loan. (1985 Code § 11-7-13)
3-7-5: REVOCATION OF LICENSE 1 :
It shall be the duty of the police chief or his/her designee to report to the
city council any failure by a pawnbroker to comply with the provisions of this
chapter. The city council may revoke any pawnbroker's license for good cause
after notice and a hearing, upon conviction of any violation of the provisions
of this chapter from which an appeal has not been taken. (Ord. 815, 9-25-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section 3-1-12 of this title for procedure.
3-7-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
class B misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be punished as set forth in
section
1-4-1 of this code; provided, however, that the penalty in section
3-7-2 of this chapter shall be administered where applicable. (1985 Code § 11-
7-14)
CHAPTER 8
VENDING CART REGULATIONS
SECTION:
3-8-1: Purpose
3-8-2: General
3-8-3: Cart Standards
3-8-4: Locations
3-8-5: Use Regulations
3-8-6: Application Requirements
3-8-7: Approvals
3-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purposes of this chapter are:
   A.   To regulate retail sales from portable carts; and
   B.   To provide for the orderly establishment of vending cart locations; and
   C.   To regulate the site areas, size, mobility, safety, appearance and
design of portable carts so as not to unreasonably discriminate among providers
of functionally equivalent services; and
   D.   To establish safety standards that will help mitigate potential impacts
related to operators and clientele. (Ord. 604, 2-19-2002)
3-8-2: GENERAL:
A "vending cart operator" is a person sixteen (16) years of age or older who
sells or offers to sell food, nonalcoholic beverages, balloons, cut flowers,
caps, T-shirts, souvenirs, handmade crafts, and items approved by the city
council in hardscaped areas meeting all of the requirements of this section.
All vending carts require a Riverdale City business license approved by the
Riverdale City council prior to any sales. (Ord. 604, 2-19-2002)
3-8-3: CART STANDARDS:
A "vending cart" is a mobile device or pushcart of sufficient lightweight
construction that can be moved from place to place by one person without any
auxiliary power and shall comply with the following:
   A.   Size: A vending cart shall not exceed a width of four feet (4') and a
length of nine feet (9'); this does not include the hitch.
   B.   Height: The height of a vending cart, excluding canopies or umbrellas,
shall not exceed five feet (5').
   C.   Attachments: Canopies and/or umbrellas shall have a minimum vertical
clearance to the sidewalk of seven feet (7'), shall not exceed a height of
eight and one-half feet (8.5'), and shall not exceed forty (40) square feet in
area.
   D.   Design: A vending cart shall be of a design such that the vendor cannot
stand or sit in any portion of the cart to conduct business. Vending carts
shall not be motorized as to move on its own power. (Ord. 604, 2-19-2002)
3-8-4: LOCATIONS:
Vending carts are allowed only in commercial, manufacturing and office park
areas as approved by the city council. Vending carts are not permitted in other
areas except by special approval of the city council. Vending carts are
permitted only on sites that have an approved site development plan on file
with Riverdale City. The Riverdale City planning commission and city council
shall specify vending cart set up areas on all site areas, which property
owners request the use of vending carts. (Ord. 604, 2-19-2002)
3-8-5: USE REGULATIONS:
   A.   All vending carts must be a factory built unit from a company that
specializes in the manufacturing of portable carts, and shall be maintained in
good condition and repair. "Home-made" carts shall not be allowed; and
   B.   Only a single product type may be sold; and
   C.   A separate business license application is required for each location;
and
   D.   A permit is valid for one cart per location; and
   E.   Vendors are required to maintain a commercial general liability
insurance policy with minimum limits of liability of five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence for bodily injury, personal injury and
property damage naming Riverdale City as an additional insured; and
   F.   Portable vending carts must be placed on a hard surface, such as:
concrete, asphalt or pavers designated for such; and
   G.   Vending carts are not permitted on public property without written
permission from the city council, and must meet the following requirements: be
a minimum of ten feet (10') from a building entrance; ten feet (10') from a
fire hydrant; thirty feet (30') from a public street right of way; thirty feet
(30') from adjacent property; not in front of any building opening (door,
window, intake or exhaust vent); not in any parking space; shall not reduce
ramps or sidewalks to a clear width of less than five feet (5'); and shall not
interfere with or obstruct the free flow of pedestrian traffic or access to
businesses; and
   H.   Signage shall be attached to the vending cart; all portable and
permanent signs, which are not attached, are prohibited; and
   I.   Vending cart hours of operation are from ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. to
ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. Vending carts shall not remain outside on site except
during these hours; and
   J.   Vendors shall provide trash receptacles adjacent to the vending cart.
Trash, refuse and debris shall be removed from the location each day, and the
pad kept clean; and
   K.   Vendors shall not leave a vending cart unattended; and
   L.   Vendors shall not solicit or conduct business with any person in a
motor vehicle; and
   M.   Vendors shall not use any noise or sound producing device that attracts
attention to its operation. (Ord. 604, 2-19-2002)
3-8-6: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
Prior to the consideration of any vending cart approval, all persons, firms or
corporations or agents of said persons, firms or corporations desiring to
operate a vending cart in the city, shall:
   A.   Submission: Submit a completed application requesting to operate a
vending cart in the city to the planning commission. All requirements,
attachments and fees set forth on the application shall be satisfied and
submitted with the application before the application shall be deemed
completed. No application for a vending cart shall be considered by planning
commission until it is completed. The following information shall be provided:
      1.   Description of all products to be sold; and
      2.   All applicable health permits shall be submitted with the
application; and
      3.   A photograph showing the width, length and height of the vending
cart; and
      4.   All attached signage; and
      5.   A site plan showing the exact location of the vending cart; and
      6.   A letter of approval from the property owner; and
      7.   The name of the company that manufactures the vending cart; and
      8.   A copy of the entity's state of Utah sales tax license; and
      9.   Proof of general liability insurance.
   B.   Fee: The applicant shall have paid to the city a vending cart
application fee prior to consideration of the request. Said application fee
shall be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 604, 2-19-2002)
3-8-7: APPROVALS:
All applications for operating a vending cart shall be reviewed and
recommendation made by the planning commission. Final approval of the
application shall be approved by the Riverdale City council. (Ord. 604, 2-19-
2002)
CHAPTER 9
TRANSIENT ROOM TAX
SECTION:
3-9-1: Purpose
3-9-2: Definitions
3-9-3: Tax Levied
3-9-4: Collection Of Tax
3-9-5: Penalties And Interest
3-9-1: PURPOSE:
It is the intent of Riverdale City to adopt a transient room tax pursuant to
and in accordance with Utah Code Annotated sections 59-12-352 through 59-12-
355. (Ord. 689, 8-21-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply to terms
used herein:
PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION: A place providing temporary sleeping accommodations to
the public and includes:
   A.   A motel;
   B.   A hotel;
   C.   A motor court;
   D.   An inn;
   E.   A bed and breakfast establishment;
   F.   A condominium; and
   G.   A resort home.
RENTS: Include:
   A.   Rents (any compensation received in exchange for providing the public
accommodation); and
   B.   Timeshare condo fees or dues.
TRANSIENT: A person who occupies a public accommodation for thirty (30)
consecutive days or less. (Ord. 689, 8-21-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-9-3: TAX LEVIED:
There is hereby levied a transient room tax equal to one percent (1%) of the
rents charged to transients occupying public accommodations within Riverdale
City. This tax shall be known as the transient room tax.
   A.   Subject to the limitations of Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-352(1),
Riverdale City may increase or decrease the tax at any time by adopting an
ordinance to the effect.
   B.   Revenues generated by the tax shall be used for general fund purposes.
(Ord. 689, 8-21-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-9-4: COLLECTION OF TAX:
   A.   The tax shall be levied at the same time and collected in the same
manner as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-201, et seq., otherwise
known as the local sales and use tax act.
   B.   Within thirty (30) days of the effective date hereof, Riverdale City
shall contract with the state tax commission for that agency to perform all
functions incident to the administration and collection of the tax. The mayor,
on behalf of the city council is hereby authorized to enter into such
agreements with the state tax commission as may be necessary for the continued
administration and operation of the transient room tax ordinance enacted by
this chapter. Riverdale City shall:
      1.   Authorize the state tax commission to collect the tax on the first
day of the effective calendar quarter; and
      2.   Notify the state tax commission at least thirty (30) days before the
day on which the commission is required to collect the tax. (Ord. 689, 8-21-
2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-9-5: PENALTIES AND INTEREST:
Penalties and interest equal to those authorized by Utah Code Annotated
sections 59-1-401 and 59-1-402 shall be imposed on any person who:
   A.   Is required to pay the tax under this chapter; and
   B.   Does not remit the tax to the collecting agent within the time
prescribed by law. (Ord. 689, 8-21-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
CHAPTER 10
SPECIAL EVENTS
SECTION:
3-10-1: Purpose
3-10-2: Definition
3-10-3: Special Event Permit Required
3-10-4: Permit Application
3-10-5: Rules Or Regulations
3-10-6: Considerations For Issuance; Denial
3-10-7: Restrictions And Conditions
3-10-8: Prohibited Conduct
3-10-9: Penalty For Violation
3-10-1: PURPOSE:
To establish procedures and requirements for conducting special events in the
city in order to properly provide for traffic and crowd control, for street,
park, and property maintenance, for the protection of the public health, safety
and welfare; and to provide penalties for violation of this chapter. (Ord. 855,
5-6-2014)
3-10-2: DEFINITION:
For the purpose of this policy, a "special event" is defined as an activity or
series of activities, specific to an identifiable time and place, held on
public property. A special event includes, but is not limited to:
   A.   Any activity involving entertainment and/or amplified sound, food,
beverage, merchandise sales or any activity promoted as a festival, trade show
open to the public, craft show, public dance, special event, concert or
performance, or
   B.   Any activity that substantially increases or disrupts the normal flow
of traffic on any street or highway, or
   C.   Any activity which involves the use of public facilities, or
   D.   Any activity which involves the use of any city services that would not
be necessary in the absence of such an event. (Ord. 855, 5-6-2014)
3-10-3: SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT REQUIRED:
Unless otherwise prohibited or allowed pursuant to any other legal agreement
with Riverdale City, a special event permit is required for profit and
nonprofit events held upon any city street, park or other public area of the
city, which do not seek a permanent site or business location or are of such a
nature as to be acceptable to the general public with regard to morals, safety
features, and the conduct of the special event participants or where the
activity is not otherwise permitted in the zoning or business license
ordinance.
Peaceful demonstrations (including lawful picketing) conducted on public
sidewalks so as not to impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic are not
considered special events.
An application must be made to the city recorder along with the necessary fees.
No permit will be issued for any special event at any location where such use
is not permitted by the zoning ordinance without first obtaining approval by
the city council.
A special event permit is not required for parties or gatherings at a private
residence or subdivision commons area, garage/yard sales or estate sales. (Ord.
855, 5-6-2014)
3-10-4: PERMIT APPLICATION:
Application to conduct a special event shall be made to the city recorder, in
writing, by the person or persons in charge or responsible therefor. All
applications for special event permits shall be made at least thirty (30) days
prior to the date on which the special event is sought to be held, unless the
city staff waives the time requirement for good cause shown. Such application
shall set forth the following information:
   A.   The name, address and telephone number of the person requesting the
permit.
   B.   The name and address of the organization or group involved.
   C.   The name, address and telephone number of the person who will act as
director or person in charge of the special event and be responsible for the
conduct thereof.
   D.   The purpose of the event and the number of persons expected to attend.
   E.   The date the event is to be conducted and the hours it will commence
and terminate.
   F.   The specific assembly and dispersal locations, and specific route
plans, if any.
   G.   Such other information as the city reasonably deems necessary to
properly prepare for and/or evaluate the potential impact on the public health,
safety and welfare. (Ord. 855, 5-6-2014)
3-10-5: RULES OR REGULATIONS:
The city administrator is hereby authorized to promulgate rules and/or
regulations, not in conflict with this chapter, to supplement and specify in
more detail requirements relating to special events, provided that such rules
or regulations are approved by the city council. Failure to observe any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant to this section shall be a violation of this
chapter and a class B misdemeanor resulting in a fine and/or imprisonment and
the organizers being suspended from hosting a special event in Riverdale City
for a year, or longer if determined appropriate by council consensus. Any rules
and/or regulations adopted under this provision shall be available at the city
recorder's office. (Ord. 855, 5-6-2014)
3-10-6: CONSIDERATIONS FOR ISSUANCE; DENIAL:
In determining whether to approve a special event permit the city administrator
may consider any factors reasonably deemed relevant for the proposed event
including, but not limited to, the following:
   A.   Whether the special event appears to be held for any unlawful purpose.
   B.   Whether it appears the special event may be conducted in a manner so as
to cause a breach of the peace.
   C.   Whether the special event will unnecessarily interfere with the public
use of the streets, sidewalks, parks and/or other public areas.
   D.   Whether the special event appears to be primarily for commercial
purposes with no general benefit to the city or the public.
   E.   Whether the special event may have some special right or priority under
the law.
   F.   Whether the special event would, in any way, be detrimental to the
public health, safety and welfare.
Denials of requests for a special event permit shall be made in writing,
setting forth the reasons for such denial. (Ord. 855, 5-6-2014)
3-10-7: RESTRICTIONS AND CONDITIONS:
The permit evidencing approval under this chapter may include reasonable time,
place and manner restrictions as a condition to granting any permit if such
restrictions are reasonable and necessary for the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 855, 5-6-2014)
3-10-8: PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
   A.   No person shall knowingly participate in a special event for which no
permit has been obtained.
   B.   No person shall continue to organize, or participate in the further
planning or organizing, of a special event that is conducted without a permit
after a permit has been denied.
   C.   No person in a position of influence or control over a special event
shall allow the conduct of a special event without a permit.
   D.   No person shall violate any condition of a special event permit.
   E.   No person shall violate any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to
Riverdale City or Utah state code. (Ord. 855, 5-6-2014)
3-10-9: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a class B
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to penalties in
accordance with the Utah state code which may include fines or imprisonment or
both. Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day
or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter is committed. (Ord. 855, 5-6-2014)
CHAPTER 11
FOOD TRUCK REGULATIONS
SECTION:
3-11-1: Adoption Of State Statute
3-11-2: Definitions
3-11-3: Mandatory Minimum Requirements For Granting Any Food Truck Permit
3-11-4: First Time Food Truck Application Procedure
3-11-5: Reciprocity Food Truck Permit Application Procedure
3-11-6: General Use Regulations
3-11-7: Penalty
3-11-1: ADOPTION OF STATE STATUTE:
   A.   Riverdale City incorporates herein the provisions set forth in Utah
Code 11-56-101 et seq., Food Truck Licensing and Regulation Act.
   B.   All provisions of this local chapter not precluded by the Utah Food
Truck Licensing and Regulation Act, shall supersede said Act, provided said
local regulations do not conflict with the provisions of said Act. (Ord. 901,
8-7-2018)
3-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
BUSINESS LICENSE ORIGIN: The original municipality, or political subdivision,
within the State of Utah, for which the business collects and pays Sales Tax.
EVENT PERMIT: A permit that a political subdivision issues to the organizer of
a public food truck event located on public property.
FIRST TIME FOOD TRUCK APPLICATION: An application for a mobile food truck
business that does not already possess a business license with another
municipality or political subdivision within the State of Utah.
FOOD TRUCK: A fully encased food service establishment:
   A.   On a motor vehicle or on a trailer that a motor vehicle pulls to
transport; and
   B.   From which a food truck vendor, standing within the frame of the
vehicle, prepares, cooks, sells, or serves food or beverages for immediate
human consumption.
   C.   Food truck does not include vending carts or mobile ice cream vendors.
FOOD TRUCK EVENT: An event where an individual has ordered or commissioned the
operation of a food truck at a private or public gathering.
FOOD TRUCK OPERATOR: A person who manages, controls, or who has the duty to
manage or control, the operation of a food truck.
FOOD TRUCK OWNER: A person who owns and/or holds the actual title to the food
truck vehicle.
FOOD TRUCK RALLY: A private or public parcel of land where two (2) or more
mobile food businesses congregate to:
   A.   Prepare, cook, sell, or serve food or beverages for human consumption.
   B.   Food truck rally shall not include special events.
RECIPROCITY FOOD TRUCK PERMIT APPLICATION: An application for a mobile food
truck business within the Riverdale City boundary limits, that already has an
active license with another municipality, or political subdivision, located
within the State of Utah.
TEMPORARY MASS GATHERING: A. An actual or reasonably anticipated assembly of
five hundred (500) or more people that continues, or reasonably can be expected
to continue, for two (2) or more hours per day; or
   B.   An event that requires a more extensive review to protect public health
and safety because the event's nature or conditions have the potential of
generating environmental or health risks. (Ord. 901, 8-7-2018)
3-11-3: MANDATORY MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR GRANTING ANY FOOD TRUCK PERMIT:
   A.   A business license to operate a food truck in a political subdivision
within the State;
   B.   A current Health Department food truck permit from a local Health
Department within the State; and
   C.   A current approval of a political subdivision within the State that
shows that the food truck passed a fire safety inspection that the other
political subdivision conducted in accordance with Utah Code Annotated
subsection 11-56-104(4)(a).
   D.   Current compliance with all local, State and Federal laws and
requirements. (Ord. 901, 8-7-2018)
3-11-4: FIRST TIME FOOD TRUCK APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
All first-time licensee mobile food truck applications shall be made in writing
to the Riverdale City Recorder and shall be subject to the provisions of
chapter 1, "General License Provisions", of this title; in conjunction with
title 1, chapter 12, "Consolidated Fee Schedule", of this Code. (Ord. 901, 8-7-
2018)
3-11-5: RECIPROCITY FOOD TRUCK PERMIT APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
   A.   All mobile food truck businesses that engage in business within the
Riverdale City limits, who have an existing business license with another
municipality, or political subdivision, within the State of Utah, shall be
required to submit the following:
      1.   Reciprocity Mobile Food Truck Permit Application.
      2.   Pay reciprocity application fee.
      3.   Copy of the active business of origin license.
      4.   Copy of the active local Health Department permit.
      5.   Copy of the active fire inspection. (Ord. 901, 8-7-2018)
3-11-6: GENERAL USE REGULATIONS:
All food truck businesses shall adhere to the following regulations:
   A.   All food truck businesses shall conduct business on private property,
unless in the following cases:
      1.   In conjunction with a City sponsored event; or
      2.   In conjunction with a City approved special event as outlined in
chapter 10, "Special Events", of this title.
   B.   All food truck businesses shall be limited in their business activity:
      1.   The food truck shall be occupied by the owner, food truck operator
or employee, at all times.
   C.   All mobile food truck businesses shall adhere to following location and
parking requirements:
      1.   Parking: All mobile food trucks shall park on a hard surface of
either asphalt or cement, unless otherwise allowed by ordinance.
      2.   Traffic Hazard: No mobile food truck, or customer of a mobile food
truck, may block or obstruct a driveway or an entrance of an existing building,
or be parked in such a manner that results in a traffic hazard.
      3.   Circulation: No mobile food truck shall interfere with the internal
parking lot circulation that creates a hazard or dangerous situation.
      4.   Public Right-Of-Way: No mobile food truck shall use the public
right-of-way, unless otherwise allowed by ordinance.
      5.   Auxiliary Power: Any auxiliary power required for the operation of
the mobile food truck shall be self-contained.
      6.   Portable Structures: No use of any tents, tables or other portable
structures are allowed if it restricts the flow of pedestrians or vehicular
traffic.
      7.   Lighting: Any lights used to illuminate the premises shall be
installed in such manner that the source of light shall be suitably screened to
avoid annoying illumination of lands outside said premises. No lighting may be
used in any way which will penetrate onto any adjoining property used for
residential purposes, or in any manner constituting a nuisance.
      8.   Sound: No person shall operate or aid in the operation of private
radios, stereophonic or sound amplification devices at a greater operating
level than eighty six (86) decibels measured at a distance of twenty five feet
(25') from such radios or devices or exceed a noise level of sixty two (62)
decibels except by permit in designated areas or as defined and enforced under
the City's nuisance ordinance or permit policy.
      9.   Others: All other local, State or Federal law, rule or regulation.
   D.   All mobile food truck businesses shall adhere to the following business
license standards:
      1.   Reciprocity permits shall be renewed annually; with the date of
expiration being the same date as the business license origin.
      2.   Reciprocity permits are non-transferable and shall be issued to the
mobile food truck owner(s) as identified on the reciprocity food truck permit.
      3.   No signage shall be allowed except those painted or affixed directly
on the mobile food truck.
      4.   All mobile food trucks shall maintain a valid Utah vehicle
registration.
      5.   All mobile food trucks shall be responsible for the trash within the
proximity of their parked food truck.
   E.   Any food truck rally that evolves into a temporary mass gathering, as
determined by Riverdale City, shall be regulated in conjunction with chapter
10, "Special Events", of this title. (Ord. 901, 8-7-2018)
3-11-7: PENALTY:
Any food truck business that fails to comply with any City, County, State and/
or Federal laws shall be subject to the immediate revocation of the business
license and/or permit as outlined in section
3-1-12 et seq., of this title. (Ord. 901, 8-7-2018)
TITLE 4
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
4-1-1: Established; Organization
4-1-2: Fire Chief; Supervision Over Fire Department
4-1-3: Duties And Responsibilities
4-1-4: Interference With Fire Officials Unlawful
4-1-5: Agreements With Other Agencies
4-1-1: ESTABLISHED; ORGANIZATION:
   A.   There is created and established a fire department consisting of such
officers and firefighters as may from time to time be provided for by the mayor
and city council. The officers and firefighters shall be appointed in an
appropriate manner, as provided by law, city ordinance and city personnel
policy.
   B.   The fire department shall have an organization approved by the city
council, which approval may be given by resolution duly adopted by the city
council. (Ord. 810, 7-17-2012)
4-1-2: FIRE CHIEF; SUPERVISION OVER FIRE DEPARTMENT:
The fire chief shall have control of the fire department, emergency medical
service, all fire apparatus, and all emergency medical apparatus belonging to
the city. (Ord. 810, 7-17-2012)
4-1-3: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   Command At Fires: In case of fire, the chief, the deputy or the officer
of the highest rank at the fire shall take command of the fire department and
direct the management thereof for the suppression of the fire, in the best
manner possible.
   B.   Records Maintained: The fire chief shall keep or cause to be kept a
record of all training received by firefighters; and a record of all fires and
such other records as may be required by law or by city policy; and, prior to
the city's annual budget preparation meetings each year, file with the city
administrator a full report of such records and fires, which report shall be
under oath.
   C.   Fire Prevention: It shall be the function and duty of the fire
department and every officer and firefighter thereof to extinguish accidental
or destructive fires and to prevent the occurrence or spread of such fires.
(Ord. 810, 7-17-2012)
4-1-4: INTERFERENCE WITH FIRE OFFICIALS UNLAWFUL:
Any person who shall wilfully hinder any officer or firefighter in the
discharge of their duty at a fire or drill or in any manner injure, deface or
destroy any engine, hose or other fire apparatus belonging to the city or who
shall interfere with the water or its source of supply, shall be deemed guilty
of a class B misdemeanor, and upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 810, 7-17-2012)
4-1-5: AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER AGENCIES:
The city may contract with other governmental units for cooperative fire
protection service in accordance with the provisions of Utah Code Annotated
title 11, chapter 13, as amended. (Ord. 810, 7-17-2012)
CHAPTER 2
FIRE CODE
SECTION:
4-2-1: Fire Code Adopted
4-2-1: FIRE CODE ADOPTED:
A certain document, two (2) copies of which are on file in the office of the
community development director, being marked and designated as the
international fire code, 2015 edition, including appendix chapters, as
published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the
code of Riverdale City for regulating and governing the safeguarding of life
and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling
and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions
hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings or premises in
Riverdale City and providing for the issuance of permits for hazardous uses or
operations; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and
terms of such international fire code, published by the International Code
Council, on file in the office of the community development director, are
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this
chapter; provided, however, that any person who violates this code shall be
guilty of a class B misdemeanor and upon conviction such person shall be
punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 880, 7-28-2016)
CHAPTER 3
FIREWORKS
SECTION:
4-3-1: Retail Sales; Permit Requirements; Regulations
4-3-2: Use Of Fireworks
4-3-3: Laws And Rules Adopted
4-3-1: RETAIL SALES; PERMIT REQUIREMENTS; REGULATIONS:
   A.   Special Permit Required: No persons shall sell or offer for retail sale
any fireworks within this city without first obtaining a special permit
therefor in accordance with the provisions of this section.
   B.   State Statutes Adopted: Utah Code Annotated sections 11-3-1 et seq.,
and 53-7-201 et seq., are hereby adopted by reference.
   C.   Application: Any person seeking a special permit for the retail sale of
fireworks within this city shall file a written application on a form to be
adopted by the city administrator. Said application shall be accompanied by a
copy of the applicant's state sales tax license and a permit fee in the amount
provided for in section
1-12-2 of this code. All applications for special permits shall be referred to
the building official, who shall issue the special permit if all provisions of
this chapter are fully complied with.
   D.   Display Of Permit: The special permit for fireworks issued by the city
shall be available at the store or stand for presentation upon request to duly
authorized public safety officials.
   E.   Revocation Or Suspension Of Permit: This city may revoke or suspend the
permit and confiscate merchandise when this section is violated.
   F.   Supervision Required: All fireworks retail sales locations shall be
under the direct supervision of a reasonable person who is sixteen (16) years
of age or older. A salesperson shall remain at the sales location at all times
unless suitable locking devices are provided to prevent the unauthorized access
to the merchandise by others or the merchandise is removed.
   G.   Purchaser's Age: Fireworks shall not be sold to any person under the
age of sixteen (16) years, unless accompanied by an adult.
   H.   Construction Of Stands: Buildings and temporary outdoor stands for the
retail sales of fireworks shall be constructed in compliance with the
ordinances of this city.
   I.   Combustible Materials: All retail sales locations shall be kept clear
of dry grass or other combustible material for a distance of at least twenty
five feet (25') in all directions.
   J.   Storage Prohibited In Residential Areas: Storage of fireworks for sale
shall not be located in residential areas.
   K.   No Smoking: Smoking shall not be permitted within fifty feet (50') of
any fireworks, either on display for retail sale or being stored. "Smoking
prohibited within 50 feet" (or similar wording) signs shall be conspicuously
posted at all sales and storage locations.
   L.   Sign Indicating Dates Of Authorized Discharge: A sign, clearly visible
to the general public, shall be posted at all fireworks sales locations
indicating the legal dates for discharge of fireworks.
   M.   Fire Extinguisher Required: All retail sales locations shall be
equipped with a fire extinguisher that has an approved portable rating of at
least 2A:10BC.
   N.   Hazard Not Allowed: No amount of retail storage or retail sales of
class C fireworks shall, by its presence, create a distinct hazard to the life
or safety of the customer, employee or property.
   O.   Storage In Permanent Structures: In all retail sales locations in
permanent structures, the area where fireworks are displayed or stored shall be
at least fifty feet (50') from any flammable liquid or gas, or other highly
combustible material. Fireworks shall not be stored (including stock for sale)
near exit doorways, stairways or in locations that would impede egress.
   P.   Sale In Packaged Units: Fireworks shall be stored, handled, displayed
and sold only as packaged units inside buildings.
   Q.   Two Exit Doors Required: Each temporary outdoor stand shall have a
minimum of two (2) approved exit doors which swing out at opposite ends of the
stand. Door locking devices, if any, shall be easily released from the inside
without special knowledge, key or effort.
   R.   Unobstructed Aisle Required: Each temporary outdoor stand shall have a
minimum three foot (3') wide unobstructed aisle, running the length of the
stand, inside and behind the counter.
   S.   Customer Not To Handle: The "pass-through openings" for sales of
fireworks in temporary outdoor stands shall be arranged to permit the customer
to view the merchandise for sale but prevent the touching or handling of
nonprepackaged fireworks by the customer.
   T.   Location Of Temporary Stands: Temporary outdoor stands for the sale of
fireworks shall be located in properly zoned areas, at least twenty five feet
(25') from other fireworks stands, LPG flammable liquid or gas storage and
dispensing units.
   U.   Overnight Storage: If the temporary outdoor stand is used for the
overnight storage of fireworks, it shall be equipped with suitable locking
devices to prevent unauthorized entry.
   V.   No Open Flame: Temporary outdoor stands shall not be illuminated or
heated by any device requiring an open flame or exposed heating elements. All
heaters and lighting devices shall be approved by the authority having
jurisdiction.
   W.   Penalty: Any person who violates any subsection of this section shall
be guilty of a class B misdemeanor, and upon conviction, such person shall be
punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 810, 7-17-2012)
4-3-2: USE OF FIREWORKS:
   A.   Definitions: The city hereby adopts by reference the definitions set
forth in Utah Code Annotated section 53-7-202 as if fully set forth herein.
(Ord. 810, 7-17-2012)
   B.   Use Restrictions:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to use, explode or discharge any
fireworks within the city other than those defined in state statute except as
provided in the most recently adopted international fire code, and Utah Code
Annotated sections 11-3-1, 53-7-222, and 53-7-226. Any homeowner, property
owner or renter over eighteen (18) years of age who knows that a person under
eighteen (18) years of age is using, exploding or discharging any fireworks
other than those defined in state statute on property under the adult's
ownership, control or supervision and permits that activity to continue, shall
be guilty of violating this section.
      2.   The use of fireworks in certain areas designated and noticed by the
city council and published by the fire chief as unsafe is also prohibited.
(Ord. 840, 6-18-2013)
   C.   Time For Use Of Fireworks: The fireworks defined in state statute may
be used, exploded or discharged only during the three (3) days prior to, on the
day of, and three (3) days following July 4, July 24, January 1 and the Chinese
New Year. Hours of use shall not extend past eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. except
on July 4, July 24, January 1, and the Chinese New Year when the hours of use
shall be extended to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight.
   D.   Penalty: A violation of this section is a class B misdemeanor,
punishable as is provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 810, 7-17-2012)
4-3-3: LAWS AND RULES ADOPTED:
The city adopts the county and municipal fireworks act, Utah Code Annotated
section 11-3-1 et seq., the definitions contained in the Utah fire prevention
and fireworks act, Utah Code Annotated section 53-7-202, the Utah fireworks
act, Utah Code Annotated section 53-7-220 et seq., and the department of public
safety, state fire marshal rules pursuant to the Utah fireworks act, chapter 33
of the international fire code regulating fireworks and R710-2 et seq., all as
amended periodically, as though set forth in their entirety. If any provision
of this chapter conflicts with those state laws and rules, the state laws and
rules shall control. (Ord. 810, 7-17-2012)
CHAPTER 4
GARBAGE, REFUSE AND RECYCLING 1
SECTION:
4-4-1: Definitions
4-4-2: Contract Authorized
4-4-3: Collection, Hauling Or Disposal; License Required
4-4-4: Disposal Of Refuse And Recycling
4-4-5: Commercial And Industrial Properties
4-4-6: Fees And Charges; Discontinuance Of Services
4-4-7: Prohibited Acts And Activities
4-4-8: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 10-13C-16A5 of this code for specific hours of refuse
  removal in the office park zone.
4-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
DWELLING: A building or portion thereof used exclusively for residential
occupancy, including single-family, two-family, and multi-family dwellings, but
not including hotels, motels, condominiums, lodging houses, apartments, group
homes or tourist homes.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms in a dwelling, occupied by one family for
living, sleeping and eating purposes.
RECYCLABLE: Waste material that may be collected, separated, cleansed, treated
or reconstituted and returned to the economic stream in the form of raw
materials or products, and which is approved for collection as a recyclable.
The director of the public works department shall determine which materials are
suitable for collection as recyclables based upon the city's ability to recycle
such materials in a reasonable and economical manner.
REFUSE: Includes and means all animal and vegetable refuse from kitchens of
residences, hotels, cafes, restaurants and places where food is prepared for
human consumption, including all animal and vegetable refuse from such
kitchens; and also all condemned or decayed or unsound vegetables, meat, fish,
fruit and all waste and offal therefrom from markets, stores and factories. The
term "refuse" shall also include normal household trash, cardboard boxes,
grass, leaves, yard trimmings, tree limbs and shrub trimmings; provided,
however, that it shall not include waste from slaughterhouses, hot stove ashes
or coals, dirt, sod, rocks, concrete, flammable materials such as oil, gas or
paint, large bulky items such as appliances, furniture, metal objects,
construction, remodeling or demolition debris, car parts, mattresses, rolls of
carpet, animal carcasses or hazardous wastes.
STOVE ASHES: Includes the residue of material burned in stoves and in furnaces
in private residences, but shall not include the residue from furnaces in
apartment houses, hotels, business houses, heating or manufacturing plants. An
"apartment house" is defined as a building comprising three (3) or more units
designated for separate housekeeping tenements with heat furnished in common.
(Ord. 796, 10-4-2011)
4-4-2: CONTRACT AUTHORIZED:
The city council shall have the power at any time it may deem advisable to
contract with any person, firm or corporation for the hauling and disposal of
refuse, rubbish, recyclable and similar wastes from residential property. (Ord.
796, 10-4-2011)
4-4-3: COLLECTION, HAULING OR DISPOSAL; LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in the
business of collection, hauling or disposal of refuse, recyclable materials,
swill, rubbish or similar wastes within the corporate limits of the city
without first having obtained a license so to do from the city council. (Ord.
796, 10-4-2011)
4-4-4: DISPOSAL OF REFUSE AND RECYCLING:
   A.   Container Provided: The city shall provide every owner or lessee of a
dwelling or dwelling unit within the corporate limits of the city, that is not
provided by city requirement with other waste hauling services, one 90-gallon
automated refuse collection container and one 90-gallon recyclable material
collection container at no cost other than the rate that is paid for refuse
collection, recycling collection and disposal. For those residents generating
more refuse than will fit in one 90-gallon automated refuse collection
container each week, the city will provide a second ninety (90) gallon
automated refuse container for an additional charge to be set by the city
council by resolution, which charge shall be added to the resident's monthly
bill. For those residents generating more recycling waste than will fit in one
90-gallon automated recycling collection container biweekly, the city will
provide a second ninety (90) gallon automated recycling container for an
additional charge to be set by the city council by resolution, which charge
shall be added to the resident's monthly bill. Additional containers shall be
provided for a minimum of six (6) months.
   B.   Placement In Cans: All refuse must be placed in the ninety (90) gallon
automated refuse collection container. All recyclables must be placed in the
ninety (90) gallon automated recycle collection container. Containers shall at
all times be kept securely closed and be kept in such place and in such manner
as to prevent offense.
   C.   Recycling Container: Only recyclables approved for collection by the
director of the public works department shall be placed in a recycling
container. Large boxes, cartons, or pieces of corrugated cardboard shall be cut
into pieces no larger than two feet by two feet (2' x 2'). Recyclables shall
not be placed in separate bags or containers within a recycling container, but
placed loose within the container to allow for visual inspection of the
materials.
   D.   Set Out For Collection: Automated refuse and recycle collection
containers containing refuse to be hauled away by the person, firm or
corporation contracting with the city for refuse and recycle removal, shall be
placed at the curbside in the location and position designated by the operator
no later than six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the day of collection. Containers
shall be set out for collection on the street at least four feet (4') from
other automated containers and obstructions such as trees, mailboxes or parked
vehicles. Containers must be placed in the gutter or, where there is no gutter,
within two feet (2') of blacktop with the container handle facing the
residence. All empty receptacles must be removed from the street as soon as
practical after being emptied, and in every case must be removed from the
street on the day they are emptied. (Ord. 807, 6-5-2012)
4-4-5: COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL PROPERTIES:
The occupants or owners of all commercial and industrial property, including
trailer parks, condominiums and apartment houses with five (5) or more units,
shall arrange and pay for their own refuse collection and disposal in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The occupants or owners of
apartment houses with two (2), three (3) or four (4) units have the option of
using the city's refuse and recycling collection services or arranging and
paying for their own refuse collection service. (Ord. 796, 10-4-2011)
4-4-6: FEES AND CHARGES; DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICES 1 :
   A.   Authority To Charge: The city council may, in its discretion and when
it shall determine that the public interest shall be best served thereby,
arrange for the collection by the city treasurer, of any charges for
collections of refuse and recyclables by a contractor of the city under the
provisions of section
4-4-2 of this chapter, and shall arrange for such collection service and bill
for the charge of such service on the regular statement for water service on
said premises; provided, that the two (2) charges must be at all times
separately listed, and that the proceeds therefrom must at all times be kept
separate and apart and not commingled in a single fund or account by the city
treasurer.
   B.   Prompt Payment Required: In the event that any charges made under the
provisions of subsection A of this section are not promptly paid when due, the
city may proceed to collect the same as a debt due the city, and may sue
therefor in any court of competent jurisdiction.
   C.   Temporary Discontinuance Of Services: Refuse and recycling collection
services may be discontinued during periods that the premises are vacant and
water has been shut off, under the following conditions: the public works
department picks up all containers assigned to the premises and no automated
containers are found or used on the premises during such periods. (Ord. 814, 8-
21-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section 1-12-6 of this code for specific fees.
4-4-7: PROHIBITED ACTS AND ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Placement Outside Of Collection Days: It shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation to place or deposit in or on any of the public
streets, alleys or parks in the city any refuse except on regular refuse
collection days and in automated refuse collection containers.
   B.   Prohibited Materials: When unapproved or prohibited materials are
placed in a container, the public works director may remove or have removed the
container or containers and terminate services, in whole or in part. If only
recycling services are terminated, the customer will continue to receive
regular garbage and refuse services, with no reduction in monthly charges, but
will not be allowed to obtain another recycling container for the following
twelve (12) month period.
   C.   Refusal To Remove Refuse: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to permit refuse, swill, rubbish or similar wastes to accumulate or
remain on or about the premises, under the control of such person, for such
period of time as to become objectionable or unsanitary; and every person, firm
or corporation is hereby required to remove, or provide for the removal of,
such refuse, swill, rubbish and similar wastes before the same become
objectionable or unsanitary.
   D.   Refuse Falling On Streets: It shall be unlawful for any person hauling
refuse, rubbish, swill, manure or matter of any kind to permit or allow any
such matter to fall upon and remain in any street, alley or park within the
corporate limits of the city, or to deposit any such matter at any place except
a dumping ground or incinerator as authorized by the city council. It shall be
unlawful for any person, firm or corporation hauling or collecting refuse to
conduct such operation in such a manner as to cause any unnecessary noise or
disturbance.
   E.   Painting Or Defacing Containers: Automated containers shall not be
painted, marked or otherwise defaced; provided, that a customer may repaint a
container using the original container color in order to cover over the colors
of paint, unauthorized markings or graffiti. If a customer fails to restore a
container to its original color and appearance, after being notified by the
public works department, the department may provide a replacement container and
the replacement costs shall be paid for by the customer.
   F.   Vacant Premises: When premises are vacant, the property owner or
customer is responsible for placing all automated containers in a secure
location to protect against theft or vandalism. If the failure to place any
containers in a secure location results in container loss, theft or vandalism,
the property owner or customer shall be responsible for the replacement cost of
the container.
   G.   Container Replacement Fee: Whenever a customer is required to pay for
the cost of replacing any automated container under the provisions of this
chapter, the fee for container replacement shall be the current replacement
cost of the container.
   H.   Accumulation: All persons, firms or corporations having accumulation of
"refuse" and similar wastes, as defined in this chapter, are hereby charged
with the responsibility of making proper arrangements for the removal of the
same, not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter; and any person,
firm or corporation failing so to do, and permitting the accumulation of the
same, shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor, and in addition, the city
council may, in its discretion, arrange for the removal of such accumulated
refuse and/or rubbish from such premises, and may charge the costs of such
removal to the owner or occupant of the premises on which such accumulation was
permitted, such charge to be deemed a debt due the city, and the city may
proceed to collect such expenses by legal action in any court of competent
jurisdiction if such is not paid promptly on demand. (Ord. 796, 10-4-2011)
4-4-8: PENALTY:
Any person or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be
punished as is provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 796, 10-4-2011)
CHAPTER 5
NUISANCES
SECTION:
4-5-1: Purpose
4-5-2: Definitions
4-5-3: Nuisance Defined
4-5-4: Exceptions
4-5-5: Responsibility For Nuisances
4-5-6: Nuisance Abatement – Administration
4-5-7: Finding Of Nuisance
4-5-8: Voluntary Correction
4-5-9: Administrative Citation
4-5-10: Other Remedies
4-5-11: Appeals
4-5-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a means for the city and complainants
to identify nuisances within the city and to provide a means for correcting or
abating the nuisances. The city must have the ability to abate nuisances in
order to protect the health and safety of the public, to foster neighborhood
stability, to preserve the appearance, character and beauty of neighborhoods,
to encourage community pride, to preserve the value of property, and to protect
the general welfare of the city and its citizens, businesses and visitors. This
chapter provides for progressive enforcement measures to abate nuisances; the
most aggressive forms of enforcement are generally reserved for the most
recalcitrant violators of this chapter. (Ord. 795, 10-4-2011)
4-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
ABATE: To repair, replace, remove, correct or otherwise remedy a condition
which constitutes a nuisance by such means, in such a manner and to such an
extent as the city determines is necessary in the interest of the general
health, safety and welfare of the community.
CODE ENFORCEMENT INSPECTOR: A code enforcement inspector(s) designated by the
city to enforce this chapter. This can include: employee(s) of the community
development department, or employee(s) or officer(s) of the Riverdale City
police, fire or public works departments.
COMPLETION DATE: The date by which the responsible person must abate a
nuisance. The completion date is originally set by the city in the voluntary
correction agreement or in the administrative citation. The completion date may
be modified by the justice court.
EMERGENCY: A situation which, in the determination of the city, requires
immediate action to prevent or eliminate an immediate threat to the health or
safety of a person or property.
JUSTICE COURT: The Riverdale City justice court.
OWNER: Any person who, alone or with others, has title or interest in any
building, property or premises, with or without accompanying actual possession
thereof. For the purpose of giving notice, the term "owner" also includes any
person in physical possession.
PREMISES: A plot of ground, whether occupied or not.
PROPERTY: A building or structure, or the premises on which the building or
structure is located, developed or undeveloped land.
PUBLIC PLACE: An area generally visible to public view and includes: alleys,
bridges, driveways, parking lots, parks, plazas, sidewalks, streets, and
buildings open to the general public, including those that serve food or drink
or provide entertainment, and the doorways and entrances to buildings or
dwellings and the grounds enclosing them.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: The person(s) responsible for correcting or abating a
nuisance or ordinance violation pursuant to this chapter. The responsible
person includes the owner and any person who causes or permits a nuisance to
occur or remain upon property in the city, and includes, but is not limited to,
the owner(s), lessor(s), lessee(s), or other person(s) entitled to control, use
and/or occupy property where a nuisance occurs. In cases where there are more
than one responsible persons, the city may proceed against one, some or all of
them.
UNDRIVABLE OR NONTOWABLE CONDITION: A vehicle or RV which has missing tires or
tire, missing engine, missing transmission, is dismantled or in such a manner
as to which the vehicle is rendered unable to pass state safety inspection
requirements, unable to move upon its own operable means, or the vehicle has
become the habitat for rats, birds, mice, vermin, or insects. (Ord. 780, 3-15-
2011)
4-5-3: NUISANCE DEFINED:
This section defines "nuisance" by providing five (5) general definitions of
what constitutes a nuisance or ordinance violation (subsection A of this
section), and then providing specific examples of situations, conduct or
activities that constitute nuisances or ordinance violations (subsection B of
this section). The purpose of the general definitions is to allow the city to
classify an offending situation, conduct or activity as a nuisance, even though
the situation, conduct or activity may not be listed as a nuisance in the
specific examples. The first three (3) general definitions are taken directly
from Utah state law. The purpose of listing the specific examples is to
identify some of the specific situations, conduct and activities that the city
intends to abate as nuisances.
   A.   General Definitions Of Nuisance: Any activity that meets any one or
more of the five (5) definitions set forth below shall constitute a nuisance if
it occurs within the city of Riverdale:
      1.   Injurious To Health: Anything which is injurious to health,
indecent, offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of
property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or
property.
      2.   Dangerous To Human Life: Any item, thing, manner, or condition
whatsoever that is dangerous or harmful to human life or health or renders
soil, air, water, or food impure or unwholesome.
      3.   Act Or Omission: Unlawfully doing any act or omitting to perform any
duty, which act or omission:
         a.   Annoys, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, or
safety of three (3) or more persons;
         b.   Offends public decency;
         c.   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, or tends to obstruct, or
renders dangerous for passage, any lake, stream, canal, or basin, or any public
park, square, street, or highway; or
         d.   In any way renders three (3) or more persons insecure in life or
the use of property.
An act which affects three (3) or more persons in any of the ways specified in
this subsection is still a nuisance regardless of the extent to which the
annoyance or damage inflicted on individuals is unequal.
      4.   Nuisance: A condition which:
         a.   Wrongfully annoys, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose,
health or safety of others; or
         b.   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct, or
render dangerous for passage, any public park, square, street or highway, or
any other public place; or
         c.   In any way renders other persons insecure in life, or in the use
of property, and which affects the rights of an entire community or
neighborhood, although the extent of the damage may be unequal.
      5.   Specific Nuisances Listed In Subsection B Of This Section: Anything
specifically listed as a nuisance in subsection B of this section.
   B.   Nuisances Enumerated: Every situation, conduct or activity listed below
constitutes a nuisance and may be abated pursuant to this chapter. The listed
examples are not exhaustive; a situation, conduct or activity not listed below,
but coming within one of the general definitions of nuisance listed above,
shall also constitute a nuisance.
      1.   Drug Houses: Every building or premises where the unlawful sale,
manufacture, service, storage, distribution, dispensing, or acquisition of any
controlled substance, precursor, or analog specified in title 58, chapter 37 of
the Utah code (Utah controlled substances act) occurs.
      2.   Gambling: Every building or premises where gambling occurs as
prohibited in title 76, chapter 10, part 11 of the Utah code (gambling and
"fringe gambling") which creates the conditions of a nuisance as defined in
subsection A1 of this section.
      3.   Gang Houses: Every building, house, apartment or premises wherein
criminal activity is committed in concert with two (2) or more persons as
provided in section 76-3-203.1 of the Utah code.
      4.   Prostitution: Every building, house, apartment or premises where
prostitution or the promotion of prostitution is regularly carried on by one or
more persons as provided in title 76, chapter 10, part 13 (prostitution) of the
Utah code.
      5.   Weapons: Every building, house, apartment or premises where a
violation of title 76, chapter 10, part 5 (weapons) of the Utah code occurs on
the premises.
      6.   Unsafe Condition: A condition that unreasonably or unlawfully
affects the health, safety or well being of one or more persons.
      7.   Fire Hazard: A fire hazard.
      8.   Noxious Emanations: Emanation of noxious, offensive, foul or
unreasonable odors, fumes, gas, smoke, soot or cinders.
      9.   Noxious Weeds: Noxious weeds located on vacant lots or other
property, along public sidewalks or the outer edge of any public street, or
weeds in any other location which constitute a fire or safety hazard, or
violate any other city, state or federal ordinance, statute, or law. Noxious
weeds: Weeds that are listed as noxious by the Utah state extension service.
Said list of weeds is incorporated herein by reference and said weeds shall be
removed from all real property subject to the provisions of this chapter.
      10.   Refuse: Keeping or storing of any refuse or waste matter which
interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of nearby property. Refuse matter:
animal fecal matter, vegetative waste, weed, and/or grass clippings shall not
be allowed to accumulate on property, unless they are kept in an enclosed
compost bin that does not create a nuisance pursuant to section
4-5-1 of this chapter by being a health or safety hazard.
      11.   Stagnant Water: Polluted or stagnant water which constitutes an
unhealthy or unsafe condition.
      12.   Improper Accumulations: Accumulation of soil, litter, debris, plant
trimmings, or trash, visible from the street or an adjoining property.
      13.   Accumulation Of Junk: Accumulation of used or damaged lumber; junk;
salvage materials; abandoned, discarded or unused furniture; stoves, sinks,
toilets, cabinets, or other fixtures or equipment stored so as to be visible
from a public street, alley, or adjoining property. However, nothing herein
shall preclude the placement of stacked firewood for personal noncommercial use
on the premises.
      14.   Attractive Nuisances: Any attractive nuisance dangerous to children
and other persons including, but not limited to, abandoned, broken, or
neglected household appliances, equipment and machinery, abandoned foundations
or excavations, or improperly maintained or secured pools.
      15.   Vegetation: Dead, decayed, diseased, or hazardous trees, weeds,
hedges, and overgrown or uncultivated vegetation which is in a hazardous or
unsafe condition, is an obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or
which is likely to harbor rats, vermin or other pests.
      16.   Dust: Any premises which causes excessive dust due to lack of
landscaping, maintenance or other cause.
      17.   Improper Storage: The keeping, storing, depositing or accumulating
on the premises or in the public right of way any trailers, equipment,
machinery, dirt, sand, gravel, concrete, or other similar materials, or
maintenance of such material on public rights of way for an unreasonable period
of time or longer than seventy two (72) hours. Material stored as part of an
active construction project shall not be considered a nuisance so long as such
equipment or machinery does not otherwise create a nuisance herein.
      18.   Garbage Can: The leaving of any garbage can or refuse container in
the street, other than on collection day, for more than twenty four (24) hours
after the collection day.
      19.   Construction Equipment: Construction equipment or machinery of any
type or description parked or stored on property when it is readily visible
from a public street, alley or adjoining property, except while excavation,
construction or demolition operations covered by an active building permit are
in progress on the subject property or an adjoining property, or where the
property is zoned for the storage of construction equipment and/or machinery so
long as such equipment or machinery does not otherwise create a nuisance
herein.
      20.   Improper Sign: Improper maintenance or nonmaintenance of a sign or
signs which advertise a business or businesses that no longer exists on the
property, or is in violation of any other Riverdale City ordinance.
      21.   Abandoned Vehicles: A car, truck, bus, motor home, fifth wheel
vehicle, trailer, camper, boat, jet ski, motorcycle, ATV, snowmobile, and/or a
combination thereof or any other vehicle that is not currently registered or is
in an undrivable condition or unusable as a vehicle and is visible from a
public street or an adjoining property. If any of the above mentioned types of
vehicles are visible from a public street or an adjoining property the vehicle
or vehicles if allowed to remain on property must be stored/enclosed in an
approved accessory building or garage. Tarps, covers, tents or temporary
shelters are not approved enclosures to be used for the purpose of complying
with this section.
      22.   Improper Parking Or Storage:
         a.   Parking or storage of inoperative, unregistered, abandoned,
wrecked or dismantled vehicles, boats, trailers or vehicle parts, including
recreational vehicles, on a premises or in the public right of way. Storage or
parking that is specifically allowed by the city's zoning ordinance shall not
be considered a nuisance.
         b.   Parking or storage of registered vehicles, trailers or boats in
violation of city ordinance.
      23.   Hazardous Conditions: Any wall, sign, fence, gate, hedge, or
structure maintained in such condition of deterioration or disrepair as to
constitute a hazard to persons or property.
      24.   Graffiti: Graffiti which remains on the exterior of any building,
fence, sign, or other structure and is visible from a public street.
      25.   Improper Maintenance: Maintenance of buildings and/or structures in
such condition as to be deemed defective or in a condition of deterioration or
disrepair including, but not limited to:
         a.   Any building or structure which is unfit for human habitation, or
which is an unreasonable hazard to the health of people residing in the
vicinity thereof, or which presents an unreasonable fire or health hazard in
the vicinity where it is located; or
         b.   Any building or structure set up, erected, constructed, altered,
enlarged, converted, moved or maintained contrary to the provisions of city
ordinances, or any use of land, buildings or premises in violation of city
ordinances; or
         c.   Buildings, signs or structures which are abandoned, partially
destroyed, or left in an unreasonable state of partial construction for a
period of six (6) months or longer. An "unreasonable state of partial
construction" is defined as any unfinished building, sign or structure where
the appearance or condition of the building, sign or structure does not meet
the requirements for finished buildings, signs or structures as required by
applicable city ordinances or building codes. The building, sign or structure
shall not be considered to be a nuisance if it is under active construction; or
         d.   Buildings having dry rot, mold, warping, termite infestation,
decay, excessive cracking, peeling, or chalking, as to render the building
unsightly and/or in a state of disrepair; or
         e.   Buildings with missing doors and/or windows containing broken
glass and/or no glass at all where the window is of a type which normally
contains glass; or
         f.   Building exteriors, walls, fences, gates, driveways, sidewalks,
walkways, signs or ornamentation, or alleys maintained in such condition as to
render them unsightly and/or in a state of disrepair; or
         g.   Buildings or conditions that violate any building, electrical,
plumbing, fire, housing, or other code adopted by the city.
      26.   City Code Nuisances: Any violation of a Riverdale City code section
that expressly declares a specific situation, conduct or activity to be a
nuisance.
      27.   Drugs And Alcohol: Every property or premises not licensed under
applicable federal or state law or city ordinance where any intoxicating drugs,
liquors or alcohol are kept for unlawful use, sale or distribution.
      28.   Inappropriate Conduct: Every property or premises where there
exists an environment which causes, encourages or allows individuals or groups
of individuals to commit one or more of the following acts on the property,
premises or adjacent public place, including, but not limited to:
         a.   Illegally consuming intoxicating liquor or alcohol or illegal
drugs;
         b.   Publicly urinating or defecating;
         c.   By physical action, intentionally causing or attempting to cause
another person to reasonably fear imminent bodily injury or the commission of a
criminal act upon their person or upon property in their immediate possession;
         d.   Engaging in acts of violence, including fighting;
         e.   Discharging a firearm or an explosive in violation of city
ordinance or state law;
         f.   Creating unreasonable or excessive noise, traffic, smells or
light which disturbs others or deprives someone of their peaceful enjoyment of
their property;
         g.   Intentionally obstructing pedestrian or vehicular traffic; or
         h.   Soliciting acts of prostitution.
      29.   Dangerous Conditions: Any fence, wall, shed, deck, house, garage,
building, structure or any part of any of the aforesaid; or any tree, pole,
smokestack; or any excavation, hole, pit, basement, cellar, sidewalk, subspace,
dock, or loading dock; or any lot, land, yard, premises or location which in
its entirety, or in any part thereof, by reason of the condition in which the
same is found or permitted to be or remain, shall or may endanger the health,
safety, life, limb or property, or cause any hurt, harm, inconvenience,
discomfort, damage or injury to any one or more individuals in the city, in any
one or more of the following particulars:
         a.   By reason of being a menace, threat and/or hazard to the general
health and safety of the community.
         b.   By reason of being a fire hazard.
         c.   By reason of being unsafe for occupancy, or use on, in, upon,
about or around the aforesaid property.
         d.   By reason of lack of sufficient or adequate maintenance of the
property, and/or being vacant, any of which depreciates the enjoyment and use
of the property in the immediate vicinity to such an extent that it is harmful
to the community in which such property is situated or such condition exists.
      30.   Zoning Violations: Any violation of the city's zoning ordinances in
which the owner or occupier has not obtained a nonconforming use approval, as
obtained through title 10, chapter 20 of this code.
      31.   Parking On Landscaping: Parking in an area required to be
landscaped by city ordinance. This does not include temporary parking of less
than four (4) hours.
      32.   Required Landscaping: Failure to install or maintain landscaping
required by city ordinance.
      33.   Unmanaged Growth: Unmanaged growth includes, but is not limited to,
the following:
         a.   Weeds or grasses, other than ornamental grasses, that are in
excess of six inches (6") in height relative to the surrounding hardscape and
that are in areas required to be landscaped by city ordinance;
         b.   Trees, shrubs, or other vegetation, that interferes with the
ingress or egress to a city street or right of way including sidewalks,
visually, or through other manner from a private drive, street or other
entryway; or
         c.   Trees, shrubs, or other vegetation, that interferes with the
delivery, service or operation of any public utility.
         d.   The provisions of this section shall govern and be applied to all
owners and occupants of real property which is:
            (1)   Located within the Riverdale City corporate limits, in any
and all residential zones; or
            (2)   Located within the Riverdale City corporate limits with a
zoning designation of A-1, provided said A-1 zoned real property has been
developed for a residential use.
         e.   The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any
real property located in the Riverdale City corporate limits, zoning
designation notwithstanding, which is:
            (1)   Protected by local, state, or federal law, statute, or
regulation; or
            (2)   All properties with a certified hillside slope of twenty
percent (20%) or greater.
      34.   Animals, Pets Or Fowl: Any animal, pet or fowl kept for any reason,
or the containment means or living structure for the same that creates
objectionable, offensive or annoying odor, noise, deterioration of property or
that is unsightly, hazardous or unhealthy. (Ord. 780, 3-15-2011)
4-5-4: EXCEPTIONS:
No act which is done or maintained under the express authority of an
authoritative statute, ordinance or court ruling shall be declared a nuisance.
(Ord. 795, 10-4-2011)
4-5-5: RESPONSIBILITY FOR NUISANCES:
Any person or entity, whether as owner, manager, agent, renter, occupant, or
the person(s) or entity who controls or who is in charge of any property, lot
or premises, who creates, aids in creating, or contributes to a nuisance, or
who supports, continues, or retains a nuisance, is responsible for the nuisance
and is therefore a responsible person pursuant to this chapter. Every
successive owner, tenant or responsible person of a property or premises who
fails to abate a continuing nuisance upon or in the use of such property or
premises caused by a former owner, tenant or responsible person is responsible
therefor in the same manner as the one who first created it. (Ord. 795, 10-4-
2011)
4-5-6: NUISANCE ABATEMENT – ADMINISTRATION:
This chapter may be administered and enforced by the city, code enforcement or
the public safety department. In case of nuisances involving dangerous
buildings enforcement may be administered by the community development or fire
department or any other properly authorized agent of the city. (Ord. 780, 3-15-
2011)
4-5-7: FINDING OF NUISANCE:
If the city finds that a nuisance exists, the city shall attempt to have the
responsible person abate the nuisance. (Ord. 780, 3-15-2011)
4-5-8: VOLUNTARY CORRECTION:
This section may apply whenever the city determines that a nuisance exists.
Although the city's first step in correcting or abating the nuisance may be to
obtain voluntary compliance, the city may pursue any remedy or combination of
remedies available pursuant to this chapter, state law or common law in order
to abate the nuisance. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to prohibit
the city from engaging in its standard prosecution practices. Therefore, the
city may prosecute violators of city ordinances or state laws without first
having to comply with the provisions of this chapter, even though the activity
or conduct prosecuted may also constitute a nuisance under this chapter.
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to prevent the city from enforcing
applicable city ordinances, or building codes, without first treating the
offending conduct, situation or activity as a nuisance pursuant to this
chapter.
   A.   Contact: One of the options available before taking other steps to
abate the nuisance, the city may make a reasonable attempt to secure voluntary
correction or abatement of the nuisance by:
      1.   Contacting the responsible person, where possible;
      2.   Explaining the nuisance;
      3.   Requesting the responsible person to abate the nuisance; and
      4.   Agreeing to terms with the responsible person to abate the nuisance,
in writing signed by both parties.
      5.   Issue a "fix-it" citation as prescribed in subsection 1-4-4F of this
code.
   B.   No Agreement: If the city and the responsible person cannot agree to
terms for correcting or abating the nuisance, the city may still abate the
nuisance using one or more of the procedures set forth in this chapter, state
law, or common law.
   C.   Voluntary Correction Agreement: If the city and the responsible person
agree to terms for abating the nuisance, they shall enter into and sign a
voluntary correction agreement. The voluntary correction agreement is a
contract between the city and the responsible person in which the responsible
person agrees to abate the nuisance within a specified time and according to
specified conditions. The voluntary correction agreement shall include the
following terms:
      1.   The name and address of the responsible person;
      2.   The street address of the nuisance, or a description sufficient to
identify the building, structure, premises, or land upon or within which the
nuisance is occurring;
      3.   A description of the nuisance;
      4.   The necessary corrective action to be taken, and a date or time by
which correction must be completed;
      5.   An agreement by the responsible person that the city may inspect the
premises as necessary to determine compliance with the voluntary correction
agreement;
      6.   An agreement by the responsible person that the city may abate the
nuisance and recover its costs and expenses to abate the nuisance, as well as a
monetary fine pursuant to this chapter from the responsible person, if terms of
the voluntary correction agreement are not met;
      7.   An agreement by the responsible person acknowledging that he/she
waives the right to appeal the city's finding that a nuisance exists and waives
the right to appeal the specific corrective action required in the voluntary
correction agreement; and
      8.   An agreement by the responsible person that failure to comply with
the voluntary correction agreement may be grounds for criminal prosecution.
      9.   If a voluntary correction agreement has been entered into between
the city and this responsible party, within the previous twenty four (24)
months, the city may, but is not required to, enter into another voluntary
correction agreement but may exercise any options available to the city to
abate the nuisance such as issue an administrative citation as described in
section
4-5-9 of this chapter or a fix-it citation as prescribed in subsection 1-4-4F
of this code.
      10.   It shall be the obligation of the responsible person to notify the
city to sign off on the voluntary correction agreement when the work is
completed prior to the date of expiration or the voluntary correction agreement
expires. Failure to do so will become an administrative citation in the
Riverdale justice court.
The city may grant an extension of the time limit for correcting or abating the
nuisance if the responsible person has shown due diligence and/or substantial
progress in correcting or abating the nuisance but unforeseen circumstances
render abatement under the original conditions unattainable. If the responsible
person complies with the terms of the voluntary correction agreement, the city
shall take no further action against the responsible person related to the
nuisance described in the voluntary correction agreement unless the nuisance
recurs. (Ord. 780, 3-15-2011)
4-5-9: ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION:
   A.   Issuance Of An Administrative Citation: When the city determines that a
nuisance exists, and is unable to secure voluntary correction pursuant to
section
4-5-8 of this chapter, the city may issue an administrative citation to the
responsible person. The city may issue an administrative citation without
having attempted to secure voluntary correction as provided in section
4-5-8 of this chapter under the following circumstances:
      1.   When an emergency exists; or
      2.   When the city is unable to locate or determine the identity of the
responsible person, other than the property owner; or
      3.   When the city has previously entered into an agreement with the
responsible party(ies) within the previous twenty four (24) months.
   B.   Content Of Administrative Citation: The administrative citation shall
include the following:
      1.   The name and address of the responsible person; and
      2.   The street address of the nuisance or a description sufficient for
identifying the building, structure, premises, or land upon or within which the
nuisance is occurring; and
      3.   A description of the nuisance; and
      4.   The required corrective action; and
      5.   The completion date and a notice that the city may abate the
nuisance and charge the responsible person for all abatement costs if the
responsible person does not correct the nuisance before the completion date;
and
      6.   The time for appealing the administrative citation to the justice
court and the procedure for filing an appeal.
      7.   A statement indicating that no monetary fine will be assessed if the
city approves the completed, required corrective action prior to the completion
date; and
      8.   A statement that the city may abate the nuisance and assess costs
and expenses of abatement and a monetary fine against the responsible person if
the correction is not completed by the responsible person and approved by the
city before the completion date.
   C.   Service Of Administrative Citation: The city shall serve the
administrative citation upon the responsible person, either personally or by
mailing, certified, return receipt requested, a copy of the administrative
citation to the responsible person at his/her last known address. If the
responsible person cannot after due diligence be personally served within Weber
County and if an address for mailed service cannot after due diligence be
ascertained, notice shall be served by posting a copy of the administrative
citation conspicuously on the affected property or structure. Proof of service
shall be made by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the
person effecting the service, declaring the time and date of service, the
manner by which the service was made, and if by posting, the facts showing that
due diligence was used in attempting to serve the person personally or by mail.
   D.   No Extension: No extension of the time specified in the administrative
citation for correction of the nuisance may be granted, except by order of the
justice court. (Ord. 780, 3-15-2011)
4-5-10: OTHER REMEDIES:
The city may take one or more of the following actions against any responsible
person who fails to comply with the terms of a voluntary consent agreement, an
administrative citation, or an order of the justice court:
   A.   Abatement By The City:
      1.   The city may abate a nuisance when:
         a.   The terms of a voluntary correction agreement have not been met;
or
         b.   The requirements of an administrative citation have not been
complied with, or, if the administrative citation is appealed to a justice
court and the terms of the administrative citation are amended by the justice
court, the terms of the justice court's order have not been complied with; or
         c.   The condition is subject to summary abatement as provided for in
subsection A2 of this section.
      2.   Whenever a nuisance is occurring which constitutes an immediate and
emergent threat to the public health, safety or welfare or to the environment,
the city may summarily and without prior notice abate the condition. Notice of
such abatement, including the reason for it, shall be given to the responsible
person as soon as reasonably possible after the abatement.
      3.   Using any lawful means, the city may enter upon the subject property
and may remove or correct the condition which is subject to abatement. The city
may seek such judicial process as it deems necessary to effect the removal or
correction of such condition.
      4.   The costs, including incidental expenses, of correcting or abating
the violation shall be billed to the responsible person and/or the owner,
lessor, tenant or other person entitled to control, use and/or occupy the
property and shall become due and payable to the city within ten (10) days of
actual receipt of the bill (within 15 days of the mailing date if the bill is
mailed). The term "incidental expenses" includes, but is not limited to:
         a.   Personnel costs, both direct and indirect, including attorney
fees and costs;
         b.   Costs incurred in documenting the violation;
         c.   Hauling, storage and disposal expenses;
         d.   Actual expenses and costs for the city in preparing notices,
specifications and contracts, and in accomplishing and/or contracting and
inspecting the work; and
         e.   The costs of any required printing and mailing.
   B.   Monetary Fine: The responsible person shall pay the city a monetary
fine for each day the nuisance continues after the completion date. The
nuisance shall be considered to continue until the city approves the
responsible person's actions to correct or abate the nuisance. The amount of
the monetary fine shall be as follows:
      1.   One hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for each day during the first
week that the nuisance remains uncorrected or unabated after the completion
date;
      2.   Two hundred dollars ($200.00) per day for each day thereafter until
the nuisance is corrected or abated according to the terms set forth in the
administrative citation.
The monetary fine shall be cumulative and may not be waived by the city.
Payment of a monetary fine pursuant to this section does not relieve the
responsible person from the duty to abate the nuisance as required by the
voluntary consent agreement or the administrative citation. The monetary fine
constitutes a personal obligation of the responsible person. Any monetary fine
assessed must be paid to the city within ten (10) calendar days from the date
of mailing of the justice court's decision and order or a notice from the city
that the fine is due. The city attorney or his/her designee is authorized to
take appropriate action to collect the monetary fine, plus reasonable attorney
fees and costs incurred in collecting said monetary fine.
   C.   Civil Actions: Either the city or any private person directly affected
by a nuisance may bring a civil action to abate or enjoin the nuisance, or for
damages for causing or maintaining the nuisance (including the cost, if any, of
cleaning the subject property). The civil action may be brought pursuant to
this chapter or pursuant to state law.
   D.   Criminal Actions: Criminal actions may be initiated by criminal
citation from the city or by information filed with the court.
      1.   Any person who maintains or assists in maintaining a nuisance is
guilty of a class C misdemeanor. A prior conviction within the previous five
(5) years will be considered an enhanced violation and any person convicted of
a second or more violations of this chapter within five (5) years shall be
guilty of a class B misdemeanor.
         a.   If the alleged nuisance is also a violation of a provision of
this code (other than this nuisance chapter) or state law, the responsible
person may be charged under the specific provision of this code or state law,
even if the city did not first attempt to obtain voluntary correction as
provided in section
4-5-8 of this chapter.
      2.   Any person who knowingly obstructs, impedes, or interferes with the
city or its agents, or with the responsible person, in the performance of
duties imposed by this chapter, or a decision and order issued by the justice
court, or a voluntary correction agreement, is guilty of a class B misdemeanor.
   E.   Abatement By Eviction: Whenever there is reason to believe that a
nuisance under subsections 4-5-3B1 through B6 of this chapter is kept,
maintained, or exists in the city, the city attorney or any citizen(s) residing
in the city, or any person or entity doing business in the city, in his or
their own names, may maintain an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to
abate the nuisance and obtain an order for the automatic eviction of the tenant
of the property harboring the nuisance. The eviction shall take place as
specified in Utah law.
   F.   Lien For Costs: If a person fails to pay any fines or costs related to
nuisance abatement when due, the city may:
      1.   Record a lien on the property or premises for the full amount of the
unpaid fines and costs; and
      2.   Add such fines or costs to the utility water bill account.
   G.   Nonexclusive Remedies: The city may take any or all of the above
mentioned remedies (administrative, civil or criminal) to abate a nuisance and/
or to punish any person or entity that creates, causes or allows a nuisance to
exist. The abatement of a nuisance does not prejudice the right of the city or
any person to recover damages or penalties for its past existence. (Ord. 795,
10-4-2011)
4-5-11: APPEALS:
   A.   Grounds: Any person receiving an administrative citation may appeal the
administrative citation to the Riverdale justice court. Only the following
issues may be appealed to the justice court:
      1.   The person charged as the responsible person is not the "responsible
person" as defined by this chapter.
      2.   The condition described as a nuisance is not a "nuisance" as defined
by this chapter.
      3.   The method required to abate the nuisance is inappropriate.
      4.   The time period given to abate the nuisance is unreasonable.
      5.   The monetary fine is unreasonable.
      6.   The responsible person claims that the requirement(s) violates his/
her constitutional rights.
   B.   Filing: The person desiring to appeal must file a notice of appeal at
the city's office of community development, and the Riverdale justice court
within ten (10) days of receipt of the citation (within 15 days of the mailing
date if the citation is mailed).
   C.   Hearing: The hearing before the justice court shall be informal
according to rules and procedures established by the justice court. The
appellant may, but is not required to, bring an attorney or other
representative to assist him or her. The appellant and the city may each call
witnesses at the hearing. The justice court judge may, with or without the
parties present, visit the site of the alleged nuisance. If the justice court
judge allows the parties at the site visit, both parties must be given the
opportunity to be present. The hearing shall be scheduled by the justice court
within thirty (30) days of when the notice of appeal is filed with the city.
   D.   Burden Of Proof: The appellant shall have the burden of proof to
demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that he/she had legitimate
grounds for an appeal. The determination of the city as to the need for the
required corrective action shall be accorded substantial weight by the justice
court in determining the reasonableness of the corrective action.
   E.   Authority Of The Justice Court: The justice court shall have authority
to affirm or vacate the administrative citation, or to modify or waive specific
provisions of the administrative citation. If the appellant fails to attend the
hearing, the justice court shall affirm the administrative citation. The
justice court shall not vacate the administrative citation unless he/she finds
that no nuisance exists. The justice court shall modify the administrative
citation if he/she finds that a nuisance exists, but that one or more of the
requirements of the administrative citation is improper or inappropriate. A
requirement is improper if it is contrary to this chapter. A requirement is
inappropriate if the justice court finds that there is a better means of
resolving the problem or that the proposed solution is inappropriate given the
nature or severity of the problem. When determining whether to waive or modify
a requirement of the administrative citation, the justice court may also
consider:
      1.   Whether the appellant responded to the city's attempts to contact
the appellant and cooperated with efforts to correct the nuisance;
      2.   Whether the appellant has shown due diligence and/or substantial
progress in correcting the nuisance;
      3.   The financial ability of the appellant and the amount, if any, that
the appellant has benefited financially by maintaining the nuisance;
      4.   Any other relevant factors.
If the appellant appeals the city's refusal to approve appellant's corrective
action, the justice court shall visit the site and determine if the appellant
complied with the requirements of the administrative citation.
   F.   Order: The justice court shall issue a written order to the appellant
and the city notifying them of his/her decision. The order shall include the
justice court's findings of fact and ultimate decision. If the justice court
modifies or waives provisions of the administrative citation, the order shall
specify which portions are modified and how they are modified. The justice
court shall mail a copy of the order to the appellant and the city within five
(5) working days of the close of the hearing.
   G.   Appeal To District Court: Either the city (in the case of a ruling on
an administrative citation only) or the appellant may appeal the justice
court's order by filing a petition for review of the order. The petition must
be filed in the second district court within thirty (30) calendar days from the
date the justice court's order was mailed to the appellant. (Ord. 780, 3-15-
2011)
CHAPTER 6
COST RECOVERY FOR EMERGENCIES
SECTION:
4-6-1: Purpose
4-6-2: Definitions
4-6-3: Recovery Authorization And Procedure
4-6-4: No Admission Of Liability
4-6-5: Action To Recover Costs
4-6-6: Excessive False Fire Alarm Penalty
4-6-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter shall provide procedures for recovering cost incurred by the city
for city assistance rendered in responding to hazardous materials emergencies,
aggravated fire emergencies and aggravated medical emergencies pursuant to 53-
2-105, Utah Code Annotated. (Ord. 637, 9-21-2004)
4-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
designated:
AGGRAVATED FIRE EMERGENCY: A. A fire proximately caused by the owner or
occupier of the property or a structure, which presents a direct and immediate
threat to public safety and requires immediate action to mitigate the threat,
and the fire.
         1.   Is caused or contributed to by the failure to comply with an
order from state, county or local agency, department or official; or
         2.   Occurs as a direct result of a deliberate act in violation of
state law or the ordinances or regulations of the county or other local agency.
   B.   A fire that constitutes arson or reckless burning as defined by the
Utah code.
AGGRAVATED MEDICAL EMERGENCY: An alarm that results in a county and/or other
authorized local authority or an emergency medical unit being dispatched, and
the person transmitting, or causing the transmission of the alarm, knows at the
time of said transmission there are no reasonable grounds for believing that a
medical emergency exists.
EXPENSES: The actual labor cost of government and volunteer personnel,
including workers' compensation benefits, fringe benefits, administrative
overhead, costs of equipment, costs of equipment operation, costs of materials,
costs of disposal and the cost of any contract labor and materials.
FALSE FIRE ALARMS: An alarm that results due to a malfunction or lack of
maintenance, which requires an emergency response of fire personnel.
"Excessive" false fire alarm calls is defined as more than two (2) within a
thirty (30) day period.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS EMERGENCY: A sudden and unexpected release of any substance
that, because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or
infectious characteristics, presents a direct and immediate threat to public
safety or the environment, and requires immediate action to mitigate the
threat. (Ord. 637, 9-21-2004; amd. Ord. 887, 4-18-2017)
4-6-3: RECOVERY AUTHORIZATION AND PROCEDURE:
The city is hereby empowered to recover from any person, corporation,
partnership or other entity who causes the city or any assisting agency to
incur any expenses associated with responding to a hazardous material
emergency, aggravated fire emergency or an aggravated medical emergency. These
expenses may be collected in accordance with the following procedures:
   A.   The Riverdale fire chief shall determine responsibility for the
hazardous materials emergency and notify the responsible party in person or by
mail (first class, postage prepaid) of the city's determination of
responsibility and the costs to be recovered.
   B.   The notice shall specify that the party determined to be responsible
may appeal the Riverdale City fire chief's decision to the city administrator.
Any appeal shall be filed, in writing, with the city recorder's office not more
than thirty (30) days from the date of service notice. The date of service
notice shall be the date of the personal delivery or three (3) days after the
date of mailing.
   C.   In the event the party determined to be responsible appeals the fire
chief's notice, the city administrator shall hold a hearing to consider any
issues raised by the appeal. At the hearing the appealing party and the city
shall be entitled to present evidence in support of their respective positions.
The city administrator shall issue a final decision assessing responsibility
and expenses. (Ord. 637, 9-21-2004)
4-6-4: NO ADMISSION OF LIABILITY:
The payment of expenses determined owing under this chapter does not constitute
a criminal fine or an admission of liability or negligence in any legal action
for damages. (Ord. 637, 9-21-2004)
4-6-5: ACTION TO RECOVER COSTS:
In the event any person determined to be responsible for the repayment of
hazardous material emergency expenses, aggravated fire expenses or aggravated
emergency medical expenses fails to make payment to the city within thirty (30)
days after a final determination of any appeal to the city administrator, or
thirty (30) days from the deadline for the approval in the event no appeal is
filed, the city may initiate legal action to recover from the determined
responsible party the expenses determined to be owing, including the city's
reasonable attorney fees and the cost of such recovery. (Ord. 637, 9-21-2004)
4-6-6: EXCESSIVE FALSE FIRE ALARM PENALTY:
"Excessive" false fire alarm calls are prohibited. Excessive false fire alarm
calls will be assessed to the business/residence under the direction of the
fire chief, at a recovery rate of forty eight dollars ($48.00) per fifteen (15)
minute increment for each occurrence. (Ord. 887, 4-18-2017)
CHAPTER 7
CAMPING IN UNDESIGNATED AREAS
SECTION:
4-7-1: Purpose And Scope
4-7-2: Unlawful Camping
4-7-3: Definitions
4-7-4: Permit For Special Events Required
4-7-5: Camping Restrictions When Permitted For Special Events
4-7-6: Impoundment Of Camping Equipment
4-7-7: Penalty
4-7-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
The purpose of this chapter is to maintain public and private lands, streets,
sidewalks, alleys, ways, creeks, waterways, parks, playgrounds, recreation
areas, plazas, open spaces, lots, parcels and other public and private areas
within the city in a clean, sanitary and accessible condition and to protect
the health, safety and welfare of the community.
Nothing in this chapter is intended to interfere with otherwise lawful and
ordinary uses of public or private property.
It is not the intent or purpose of this chapter to prohibit overnight camping
on private residentially zoned property when located on the same lot as an
existing single-family residence. (Ord. 728, 1-20-2009)
4-7-2: UNLAWFUL CAMPING:
It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person or group of persons to
establish any site for the purpose of human habitation to provide overnight or
short term camping, to camp, establish or occupy camping facilities, or use
camping paraphernalia within Riverdale City limits or any of the following
areas:
   A.   Any public property, improved or unimproved, including, but not limited
to, public streets and sidewalks, parks, open space, and other property;
   B.   Public places restricted as day use;
   C.   Public restroom facilities;
   D.   Areas established as closed to public use;
   E.   Within one-fourth (1/4) mile of any roadway, highway, freeway, water
source, river, wetland, or waterway, pathway or walkway, bridge, tunnel or
viaduct, rail yard or train tracks;
   F.   Within one thousand feet (1,000') of:
      1.   A public or private school or grounds.
      2.   A building, park, stadium or other structure which at the time of
the act, being used for an activity sponsored by or through a school or
institution.
      3.   A preschool or childcare facility;
   G.   In an area deemed for other recreational use. (Ord. 728, 1-20-2009)
4-7-3: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the particular provisions or the context otherwise requires, the
definitions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning,
and application of words and phrases used in this chapter.
Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the use of umbrellas,
sunshades, or other usual equipment for temporary protection from the sun or
elements and not for human habitation or overnight use.
The term "camping" as used in this chapter shall not be defined to include any
camping activity authorized pursuant to a special event, activity or special
business event license issued by the city pursuant to the provisions herein or
otherwise in this code.
CAMP OR CAMPING: To do any of the following:
   A.   Sleep or establish oneself at any time between the hours of eleven
o'clock (11:00) P.M. and eight thirty o'clock (8:30) A.M. in any of the
following:
         1.   Outdoors, with or without bedding, sleeping bag, blanket,
mattress, tent, hammock, or other similar protection, equipment or device;
         2.   In, on, or under any structure or thing not intended for human
occupancy, whether with or without bedding, sleeping bag, blanket, mattress,
tent, hammock, or other similar protection, equipment or device.
   B.   Establish or maintain, outdoors or in, on, or under any structure,
object or thing not intended for human occupancy, at any time between the hours
of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and eight thirty o'clock (8:30) A.M., a
temporary or permanent place for sleeping by setting up any bedding, sleeping
bag, blanket, mattress, tent, hammock, or other sleeping equipment or device in
such a manner as to be usable for sleeping purposes.
   C.   Establish or maintain, outdoors or in, on, or under any structure or
thing not intended for human occupancy, at any time during the day or night, a
temporary or permanent place for cooking or sleeping by setting up any bedding,
sleeping bag, blanket, mattress, tent, hammock, or other sleeping equipment or
device or by setting up any cooking equipment, with the intent to remain in
that location overnight.
CAMPING FACILITIES OR CAMPING FACILITY: Include, but are not limited to, tents,
huts, lean tos, tarps, trailers, vehicles, vehicle camping outfits or other
forms of temporary shelter.
CAMPING PARAPHERNALIA: Includes, but is not limited to, bedrolls, blankets,
tarpaulins, cots, beds, mattresses, pads, sleeping bags, hammocks, lanterns,
stoves or noncity designated cooking facilities and similar equipment.
ESTABLISH: Setting up or moving equipment, supplies or materials onto public or
private property for the purpose of camping or operating or using camping
facilities.
MAINTAIN: Keeping or permitting self, equipment, supplies or materials to
remain on public or private property in order to camp or operate or use camping
facilities.
OPERATE OR OPERATING: Participating or assisting in establishing or maintaining
a camp or camping facility.
PARKS: Public and private parks.
PLAYGROUNDS: Play lots, playgrounds, and play fields for local youth and adult
recreation programs.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: All publicly owned property including, but not limited to,
public streets, sidewalks, alleys, ways, creeks, waterways, parks, playgrounds,
recreation areas, plazas, open spaces, lots, parcels and other forms of
improved or unimproved land or real property.
STORE: To set aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put for safekeeping,
or to place or leave in a location.
STREETS OR PUBLIC STREETS: Includes avenues, highways, lanes, alleys, ways,
crossings or intersections, courts and cul-de-sacs that have been dedicated and
accepted according to law, or which have been in common and undisputed use by
the public for a period of not less than five (5) years from the effective date
hereof. "Streets" and "public streets" do not include privately owned streets
unless the context clearly provides otherwise. (Ord. 728, 1-20-2009)
4-7-4: PERMIT FOR SPECIAL EVENTS REQUIRED:
The mayor or city manager, in his/her/their discretion, may issue a temporary
permit to permit camping in connection with a special event. A "special event"
is intended to include, but not be limited to, programs operated by the
departments of the city, youth or school events, marathons or other sporting
events and scouting activities that the city manager deems to be in the public
interest and shall not constitute a public nuisance nor be a threat to the
public health, safety or welfare. (Ord. 728, 1-20-2009)
4-7-5: CAMPING RESTRICTIONS WHEN PERMITTED FOR SPECIAL EVENTS:
   A.   Campsite must be kept in a sanitary condition.
      1.   Littering, human excrement, open containers of food and other
unsanitary conditions will not be tolerated.
   B.   No campfires or fires of any kind.
   C.   No damage to surrounding vegetation or destruction of public property.
   D.   No open containers of alcohol.
   E.   No possession of firearms. (Ord. 728, 1-20-2009)
4-7-6: IMPOUNDMENT OF CAMPING EQUIPMENT:
Any camping equipment left standing in violation of this section may be
impounded or removed by a peace officer or designated official. For purposes of
impoundment and/or removal, a peace officer or designated official may, after
making a reasonable effort to locate the owner, impound and remove any vehicle,
trailer, tent or associated camping equipment. The cost of fines, fees for
impoundment for each day that it is held in storage, and removal costs shall be
charged to the owner or any person who claims the impounded equipment, trailer
or vehicle. (Ord. 728, 1-20-2009)
4-7-7: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any section of this chapter shall be guilty of a class
B misdemeanor, and upon conviction, such person shall be subject to fine and/or
imprisonment or punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. In addition to the remedies set forth herein, the city
attorney may institute civil actions to abate a public nuisance under this
chapter. Nothing in this subsection precludes prosecution under any other
provision of law. (Ord. 728, 1-20-2009)
CHAPTER 8
NOISE ABATEMENT
SECTION:
4-8-1: Purpose And Scope
4-8-2: Definitions
4-8-3: Prohibited Acts
4-8-4: Exemptions
4-8-5: Responsibility Of Owners Of Premises
4-8-6: Violations And Penalties
4-8-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   The purpose and scope of this chapter is to prohibit noise and/or
sounds which disrupt the peace and harmony of Riverdale City and to protect the
physical, mental and social well being of the residents of Riverdale by
prohibiting such noise and/or sound.
   B.   This chapter aims to ensure that public health, safety and welfare
shall not be abridged by the making and creating of public nuisances from
disturbing, excessive or offensive noises in Riverdale City. The residents of
Riverdale recognize that the community is entitled to live in an environment in
which the level of noise is minimized for the community good.
   C.   This chapter applies to all persons, property, animals, equipment,
appliances, instruments and other sound emitting devices, as regulated herein.
   D.   The provisions of this chapter are not intended to interfere with,
abrogate or annul other rules, regulations or ordinances, including this code
or Utah code. If more stringent requirements concerning noise abatement are
contained in the other rules, regulations or ordinances, the more stringent
regulation shall apply. (Ord. 740, 8-4-2009)
4-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall
have the meanings indicated herein:
CITY: The city of Riverdale.
NOISE: Any sound emitted by a person, an appliance, equipment, an instrument,
other device or animal.
NOISE DISTURBANCE: Any noise, which endangers or injures the safety or health
of humans or animals; annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of ordinary
sensibilities; that endangers or injures any personal or real property; or that
disturbs the peace or creates a nuisance.
PERSON: Any individual, association, trust, partnership or corporation,
including any members, directors, officers, employees, partners or principals
thereof. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty,
"person" includes the members, trustees, partners, directors, officers,
managers and supervisors, or any of them, of partnerships, associations,
corporations or other forms of entity. (Ord. 740, 8-4-2009)
4-8-3: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   General Prohibition: It shall be unlawful for any person to make or
cause to be made a noise disturbance within the limits of Riverdale City,
except as otherwise permitted in this chapter.
   B.   Specific Prohibitions: The following are specifically prohibited,
except as otherwise permitted in or exempted from this chapter:
      1.   No person shall operate, play or permit the operation or playing of
any radio, television, drum, musical instrument, player, sound amplifier or
similar device which produces, reproduces or amplifies sound:
         a.   In such manner as to cause a noise disturbance.
         b.   In such manner, which is plainly audible at a distance of fifty
feet (50') from such source, when the source is operated from a residence, a
motor vehicle or hand carried on a public right of way or public space.
      2.   No person(s) shall yell, shout, hoot, sing, make other loud or
disruptive noises on the public streets between the hours of eleven o'clock
(11:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., or at any time or place so as to
annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity.
      3.   No person shall operate or permit the operation of any tools or
equipment used on construction operations, drilling or demolition or other work
or in the sweeping of parking lots in areas directly adjacent to residential
districts between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. of one day and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the following day on weekdays and Saturdays or at any
time on Sundays or legal holidays such that the sound therefrom causes an
unusually loud and/or annoying noise disturbance.
      4.   No person shall operate or permit the operation of any electrically
powered saw, drill, sander, grinder, lawn or garden tool, snowblower or similar
device used outdoors between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. of one day
and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the following day so as to cause a noise
disturbance.
      5.   No person shall load, open, close or otherwise handle boxes, crates,
containers, building materials, garbage cans or other objects between the hours
of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. of one day and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the
following day in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a
residential lot line. This subsection shall not apply to municipal or utility
services in or about the public right of way.
      6.   No person shall offer for sale, or sell, by shouting or outcry or by
any other amplified or unamplified sound, except between the hours of seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. of one day and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. of the same day.
      7.   No person shall sound any horn or signal device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus, or other vehicle for any purpose other than to avoid an
accident or collision or other lawful reason.
      8.   No person shall use a product which has had a muffler or sound
dissipative device or element of design or noise label removed or rendered
inoperative with knowledge or reason to know that such action has occurred.
      9.   No person shall repair, rebuild, test or otherwise work on any
motorcycle or other motor vehicle, motorboat or aircraft in such a manner as to
cause a noise disturbance across a lot line of the receiving land use.
      10.   No person shall create such other noise as might pose a danger to
the public health, safety or welfare of the city or otherwise constitute a
nuisance in fact.
      11.   No person, including, without limitation, a pedestrian, shall make,
continue or cause to be made or continued any noise, which creates or causes a
noise disturbance.
      12.   No person shall operate a motorcycle, truck, automobile or other
motor vehicle in such a manner as to cause it to create a noise disturbance.
      13.   No person shall keep any animal, bird or fowl which emanates
frequent or extended noise which shall disturb the quiet, comfort and repose of
any person in the vicinity. (Ord. 740, 8-4-2009)
4-8-4: EXEMPTIONS:
The following noises are exempted from the provisions above:
   A.   Band concerts, carnivals or other performances or similar activities
publicly or privately sponsored and presented in any public or private space
outdoors, provided that such activities do not occur between eleven o'clock
(11:00) P.M. on one day and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on the following day and
that said activities or performances have obtained a city permit and, if
occurring within a city park or trail, do not violate provisions of section
7-7-5 of this code.
   B.   Noises caused by the performance of emergency work or by the ordinary
and accepted use of emergency apparatus and equipment.
   C.   Noises resulting from the provision, repair and maintenance of
municipal/governmental facilities, services or public utilities.
   D.   Noises created by organized school related programs, activities,
athletic and entertainment events or other public programs, activities or
events.
   E.   Noises made by warning devices operating continuously for three (3)
minutes or less, except that, in the event of an actual emergency, the
limitation shall not apply. (Ord. 816, 8-21-2012)
4-8-5: RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS OF PREMISES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly permit the making, creation or
maintenance of unreasonably loud noises upon any premises owned or possessed by
him or under his control. (Ord. 740, 8-4-2009)
4-8-6: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor, and upon conviction, such
person shall be subject to fine and/or imprisonment or punished as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. In addition to the remedies set forth herein, the city
attorney may institute civil actions to abate a public nuisance under this
chapter. Nothing in this subsection precludes prosecution under any other
provision of law. (Ord. 740, 8-4-2009)
TITLE 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
5-1-1: Police Chief
5-1-2: Appointment Of Other Officers
5-1-1: POLICE CHIEF:
   A.   Appointment; Duties: With the advice and consent of the city council,
the mayor may appoint a police chief, who shall perform the duties required of
him by law and the ordinances of the city, and such other duties as the city
may by resolution require.
   B.   Powers: The police chief shall possess the same powers, be subject to
the same liabilities, and exercise the same privileges as are possessed by and
imposed by law upon constables, and may execute such legal orders as may be
required of him. He shall attend all meetings of the city council when
requested. He shall preserve the peace and good order of the city; quell all
riots; arrest and bring all disorderly persons before the justice court judge;
and see that all orders and judgments of said court are carried into effect;
and shall take such measures as shall secure the peace and good order of all
public meetings and of the city generally. (Ord. 811, 7-17-2012)
5-1-2: APPOINTMENT OF OTHER OFFICERS:
As authorized by the city council, the police chief may appoint such other
officers as may be necessary for the order and well being of the city; define
their duties, fix their term and compensation, remove them from office at will
and require them to take and subscribe an oath and give bond as they shall
provide by resolution or ordinance. (Ord. 811, 7-17-2012)
ARTICLE A.  DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY RECEIVED
SECTION:
5-1A-1: Safekeeping Pending Disposition; Records
5-1A-2: Property Not Needed As Evidence; Return
5-1A-3: Receipt From Owner Of Returned Property
5-1A-4: Unclaimed Property; Sale Or Other Disposition
5-1A-5: Seized Property; Duplicate Receipts
5-1A-1: SAFEKEEPING PENDING DISPOSITION; RECORDS:
When personal property comes into the possession of a police officer either in
execution of a search warrant, or pursuant to an arrest of a person with or
without warrant, or is received or taken by him as evidence in connection with
any public offense, he shall hold it in safe custody until it is received into
evidence or, if it is not used as evidence, until it can be disposed of as
provided in this article. While in the custody of such peace officer, a proper
record shall be maintained reflecting the ownership of the property, if known,
and the case or cases for which it was taken or received and is being held.
(Ord. 811, 7-17-2012)
5-1A-2: PROPERTY NOT NEEDED AS EVIDENCE; RETURN:
Property so obtained which is not needed as evidence shall be returned to the
owner if he may lawfully possess it. When the police officer or the police
department becomes aware that the property is not needed, the prosecuting
attorney shall be so advised, giving a description and details of ownership.
When the prosecuting attorney, by such notice or otherwise, becomes aware that
the property is not needed, the evidence custodian shall give written notice to
the owner. Upon proof of ownership and of lawfulness of possession satisfactory
to the prosecuting attorney, the prosecuting attorney shall give the owner
written authorization which shall entitle the owner to receive the property
from the person having custody of it. When property so obtained is received in
evidence, it shall be retained by the clerk of the court last receiving it or
shall be returned by him to the custody of the peace officer until all direct
appeals and retrials are final, at which time the property shall be returned in
accordance with this section. In the event that the prosecuting attorney
considers it necessary to retain control over the evidence, in anticipation of
possible collateral attacks upon the judgment or of use in some potential
prosecution, he may decline to authorize return. (Ord. 811, 7-17-2012)
5-1A-3: RECEIPT FROM OWNER OF RETURNED PROPERTY:
Whenever property is returned to the owner, a receipt shall be taken from him
listing in detail the property returned. The receipt shall be retained as a
permanent record in the files of the police department or the court where the
case is finally resolved. (Ord. 811, 7-17-2012)
5-1A-4: UNCLAIMED PROPERTY; SALE OR OTHER DISPOSITION:
   A.   All "unclaimed property", as defined by state statute, shall be
disposed of as directed by Utah Code Annotated sections 77-24-4 and 77-24a-5,
as amended.
   B.   In the event the city council shall, by resolution, designate public
interest use of unclaimed property and approve its donation to charity, then
such donation shall be made by the police chief or by the city administrator,
after consultation with the mayor. (Ord. 811, 7-17-2012)
5-1A-5: SEIZED PROPERTY; DUPLICATE RECEIPTS:
When money or other property is seized with or without a warrant, the police
officer seizing it shall at the time deliver a receipt to the person from whom
it is taken and file a duplicate in the office of the agency employing the
officer. If the custody of the property is transferred to another police agency
or the property is placed in evidence, a copy of the receipt shall accompany it
until disposition of the property is made in accordance with the provisions of
this article. (Ord. 811, 7-17-2012)
CHAPTER 2
OFFENSES
SECTION:
5-2-1: Criminal Code Adopted By Reference
5-2-2: Greenway Trail System Regulations
5-2-3: Firearms And Weapons
5-2-4: Hunting Illegal
5-2-1: CRIMINAL CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
Except insofar as the application thereof is clearly impractical or
inappropriate, in view of the context of purposes or penalty as provided, all
of the definitions, requirements, regulations, prohibitions, provisions and
sections of the Utah Criminal Code (title 76), and Utah Controlled Substances
Act (title 58, chapter 37), as amended, are hereby adopted by the city. Any and
all violations thereof shall be considered violations of this chapter and each
such violation shall subject the violator thereof to penalty provisions under
this chapter if proceeded hereunder. (2001 Code)
5-2-2: GREENWAY TRAIL SYSTEM REGULATIONS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide rules and
regulations for the use of and conduct on Riverdale City greenway trails.
   B.   Applicability: This section shall apply to all Riverdale City greenway
trails and surrounding areas.
   C.   Construction: In the interpretation of this and all succeeding trail
ordinances, the provisions shall be construed as follows:
      1.   Any term in the singular shall include the plural.
      2.   Any term in the masculine shall include the feminine and neuter.
      3.   Any requirement or prohibition of any act shall respectively extend
to and include the causing and procuring, directly or indirectly, of such act.
      4.   No provision hereof shall make unlawful any act necessarily
performed by an officer or employee of the city in the line of duty or work as
such, or by a person, his agent or employees, in the proper and necessary
execution of the terms of any agreement with the city.
      5.   Any act otherwise prohibited by law or local ordinance shall be
lawful if performed, under, by virtue of, and strictly within the provisions of
a permit so to do, and of the extent authorized thereby.
   D.   Definitions:
    ANIMAL: Includes cats, dogs, goats, pigs or any other living creatures not
of the human family.
   HORSE: Any horse or horse-drawn conveyance; mule, donkey or other like
animal.
   NONMOTORIZED VEHICLE: Any human muscular powered bicycle, tricycle,
wheelchair (or low speed battery powered wheelchair), or cross country skis,
in-line skates (roller blades), roller skates, or baby carriages for children
under three (3) years of age.
   PEDESTRIAN: A person afoot.
   PERMIT: Any written license issued by or under the authority of Riverdale
City permitting a special event of activity on Riverdale City greenway trails/
paths.
   PERSON: Any natural person, corporation, company, association, partnership
or firm.
   TRAIL/PATH: Any trail or foot path, walk or any path maintained for
pedestrians in the jurisdiction of Riverdale City.
   E.   Permitted Uses: Riverdale City greenway trail/paths are for use by
pedestrians and nonmotorized vehicles only. Excepted from this provision are
authorized emergency vehicles, authorized public works and utility vehicles,
and such vehicle traffic as may be allowed by written permit issued by the
city. All other uses of or on the trails/paths are strictly prohibited.
   F.   Rules Of Conduct: It shall be unlawful for any person on or near the
Riverdale City greenway trails/paths to:
      1.   Utilize the trails/paths in any manner other than as permitted in
this subsection.
      2.   No horses or other animals, except dogs and cats, shall be allowed
on the trails/paths. (1985 Code § 13-8-4.21)
      3.   Cats or dogs on the trails/paths shall be on a leash. (Ord. 622, 7-
15-2003)
      4.   Mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or in any way damage or
cause damage to the trail/pathway or its surrounding area.
      5.   Bring any glass container onto the trail/pathway.
      6.   Cause or permit to run loose any animal.
      7.   Ride a bicycle or tricycle without regard to the safety of others.
      8.   Place signs of any kind except trail guide signs, on or along the
trail/path.
      9.   Hold a parade on the trail/path.
      10.   Act in any unlawful manner as set forth in the laws of the state or
the ordinance of the city.
   G.   Closing Hours: The trail/path shall be closed from one-half (1/2) hour
after sundown to one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise daily.
   H.   Permits For Special Events: Permits for special events may be issued by
the city council. (1985 Code § 13-8-4.21)
   I.   Enforcement: The police department, other state law enforcement
agencies, the public works department, recreation department, community
development director and city administrator shall have enforcement powers with
regard to this section, and each shall diligently enforce the provisions of
this section. (Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
   J.   Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of
this section shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor and upon conviction,
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1985 Code § 13-8-4.21;
amd. 2001 Code)
5-2-3: FIREARMS AND WEAPONS:
   A.   Discharge Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge
a firearm or bow and arrow within this city, except in self-defense or in the
case of any peace officer in the discharge of his duties, or any authorized
official of the city for rodent control that has been approved by the city, at
authorized ranges or as part of a city approved, sponsored and supervised
archery class. (Ord. 872, 11-17-2015)
   B.   Concealed Weapons:
      1.   License Required: The police chief, upon proof that the person
applying is of good character, and upon showing that good cause exists for the
issuance, may issue to such person a license to carry a concealed weapon for a
period of one year from the issuance date of the license. (Ord. 815, 9-25-2012)
      2.   Application: The application for license must be in substantially
the following form:
State of Utah
County of                      Name of municipality            
   Name            
Address              
Present occupation                Name of employer              
Age                Height                Weight              
Color of eyes                Color of hair                  
Have you ever been convicted of any felony?    Yes      No    
If the answer to the above question is yes, state where and when and what the
charge was                    .
Are you addicted to any narcotics or other habit-forming drugs?
      Yes      No    
Have you ever been declared mentally incompetent?
   Yes      No    
If the answer to the above question is yes, state where and when            
Reason or reasons for issuance of license
Dated this                day of                     ,         .
Subscribed and sworn to this                day of                     ,      
  .
Notary Public                      
Residing in                   County
My commission expires:            .
(1985 Code § 13-10-5.14)
      3.   Fee For License: Each applicant for a license shall pay a fee of
twenty dollars ($20.00) at the time of filing the application. The officer
receiving the application shall also receive the twenty dollar ($20.00) fee and
shall transmit one-half (1/2) of the fee, together with the fingerprints of the
individual, to the state bureau of criminal identification. The remaining one-
half (1/2) of the fee shall be transmitted to the city treasurer. (1985 Code §
13-10-5.16; amd. 2001 Code)
      4.   Records; Copies Transmitted To Bureau: When any license is issued, a
record shall be maintained in the office of the city recorder which shall be
open to public inspection. Copies of each license issued shall be filed
immediately by the police chief with the state bureau of criminal
identification. (Ord. 815, 9-25-2012)
5-2-4: HUNTING ILLEGAL:
   A.   Hunt Defined: For the purposes of this section, "hunt" means to use a
firearm or other weapon, including bow and arrows, to pursue, harass, capture
or take any game or to carry a firearm or other weapon, including bow and
arrows, in an attempt to pursue, harass, capture or take any game.
   B.   Unlawful To Hunt: It is unlawful for any person to hunt within the city
limits.
   C.   Penalty: Hunting is a class B misdemeanor, punishable as is provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (1985 Code § 13-10-11)
CHAPTER 3
CURFEW FOR MINORS
SECTION:
5-3-1: Curfew Specified
5-3-2: Exception
5-3-3: Penalty
5-3-1: CURFEW SPECIFIED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of sixteen (16)
years, during such child's school year, to be or to remain in or upon any of
the streets, alleys, public places or vacant lots within the corporate limits
of the city on any night, except Friday night or Saturday night, between the
hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., or to be upon
said streets, alleys, public places or lots on any Friday night or Saturday
night between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:
00) A.M., unless such person is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other such
person having legal custody of such minor person. (1985 Code § 13-14-1)
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of sixteen (16)
years, during the period of the year such child is not in school, to be or
remain in or upon any of the streets, public places or vacant lots within the
corporate limits of the city on any night, except Friday night and Saturday
night, between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M., or to be upon said streets, alleys, public places or lots on any Friday
night or Saturday night between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight
and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., unless such person is accompanied by a parent,
guardian or other person having legal custody of such minor person. (1985 Code
§ 13-14-2)
5-3-2: EXCEPTION:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any such minor person who is
employed or for whom lawful business makes it necessary to be upon such
streets, alleys, public places or lots during said hours if such minor person
has upon his person a written permit from the police chief to be upon said
streets, alleys, public places or lots during said hours. (Ord. 815, 9-25-2012)
5-3-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
class B misdemeanor and upon conviction, such person shall be punished as is
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1985 Code § 13-14-4)
CHAPTER 4
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
5-4-1: Definitions
5-4-2: Animal Control Service
5-4-3: Animal Shelter
5-4-4: Licensing And Regulations
5-4-5: Regulatory Permits
5-4-6: Rabies Control
5-4-7: Bites; Duty To Report
5-4-8: Animals Attacking Persons And Animals
5-4-9: Nuisance Animals
5-4-10: Prohibited Acts And Activities
5-4-11: Impounding
5-4-12: Court Orders; Procedure
5-4-13: Penalty
5-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
these meanings respectively ascribed to them:
ABATEMENT: The relocation or euthanization of an animal deemed to be a
"nuisance" as defined in section
5-4-9 of this chapter.
ANIMAL: One of the lower animals as distinguished from man, including, but not
limited to, dogs and cats, livestock, and all other subhuman creatures both
domestic and wild, male and female, singular and plural.
ANIMAL AT LARGE: Any animal, whether or not licensed, shall be considered to be
"at large" when:
   A.   It is off the owner's property and not under restraint by means of a
durable restraint device, capable of keeping the animal restrained, or is not
confined within a vehicle, or appropriate transport device, or
   B.   On the property of the owner and not securely confined by a leash,
building, fenced area, or appropriate transport device.
ANIMAL BOARDING ESTABLISHMENT: Any establishment that takes in animals for
boarding for profit.
ANIMAL GROOMING PARLOR: Any establishment maintained for the purpose of
offering cosmetological services for animals for profit.
ANIMAL SHELTER: A facility owned and/or operated by a governmental entity or
any animal welfare organization that is incorporated within the state of Utah
under Utah Code Annotated section 76-9-302, and used for the care and custody
of seized, stray, homeless, quarantined, abandoned or unwanted dogs, cats or
other small domestic animals.
BITE: An actual puncture, tear or abrasion of the skin inflicted by the teeth
of an animal.
CAT: Any age feline of the domesticated types.
CATTERY: An establishment for boarding, breeding, buying, grooming or selling
cats for profit.
DANGEROUS ANIMAL: Any animal which is dangerously aggressive, including, but
not limited to, any animal which has bitten or in any other manner attacked any
person or animal with or without provocation on public or private property.
DOG: Any Canis familiaris over four (4) months of age. Any Canis familiaris
under four (4) months of age is a puppy.
DOMESTICATED ANIMALS: Animals accustomed to living in or about the habitation
of man, including, but not limited to, cats, dogs, and fowl.
ESTRAY: Any livestock found running at large, whose owner cannot be found after
a reasonable search.
EXOTIC PET/ANIMAL: Any animal which does not fall within the definition of the
domesticated or livestock types, including, but not limited to, ferrets,
minipigs, pygmy goats, snakes, and reptiles.
FERAL: Any cat, dog or other animal having escaped from domestication and
become wild, and/or any animal not domesticated or socially cultivated.
FREE ROAMING: Any dog, cat or other animal allowed to run at large upon any
public street or other public place, or upon any private property or premises
other than those of the owner or other person in control of said animal.
GOVERNMENT WORKING ANIMAL: An animal trained to assist officials of government
agencies in law enforcement and/or public safety exercises.
GUARD DOG: A working dog which must be kept in a fenced run or other suitable
enclosure during business hours, or on a leash or under absolute control while
working, so it cannot come into contact with the public.
GUIDE DOG: A dog trained and certified by a nationally recognized training
establishment to assist physically handicapped persons. Examples include, but
are not limited to: "hearing impaired", "mobility limited", and "seeing eye"
dogs.
HOLDING FACILITY: Any pet shop, kennel, cattery, groomery, riding school,
stable, animal shelter, veterinary hospital, humane establishment, or any other
such facility used for holding animals.
KENNEL: A commercial establishment existing for the purpose of boarding,
breeding, buying, grooming, letting for hire, training for fee, or selling,
except where such establishment shall be licensed as having sportsman's
privileges.
LIVESTOCK: Any normally domesticated animal that is not a cat or dog, such as:
cattle, sheep, goats, mules, burros, swine, horses, geese, ducks, turkeys, etc.
PET: An animal kept for pleasure rather than utility, including, but not
limited to, birds, cats, dogs, fish, hamsters, mice and other animals
associated with man's environment.
PET SHOP: Any establishment containing cages or exhibition pens, not part of a
kennel or cattery, wherein dogs, cats, birds or other pets for sale are kept or
displayed.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMAL: Any animal that, with or without provocation
chases or approaches a person upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public
grounds in a threatening or menacing fashion, or apparent attitude of attack,
or any animal with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack with
or without provocation. In addition, a potentially dangerous animal is any
animal that, because of witnessed and documented action, is believed capable of
causing injury, or otherwise posing a threat to the safety of humans or
domesticated animals or livestock.
QUARANTINE: The isolation of an animal in a substantial enclosure so that the
animal is not subject to contact or able to have contact with other animals or
unauthorized persons, but maintained so as not to cause harm to the animal.
RESTRAINT DEVICE: Any chain, leash, cord, rope or other device commonly used to
restrain an animal.
RIDING SCHOOL OR STABLE: An establishment which offers boarding and/or riding
instruction for any horse, pony, donkey, mule or burro, or which offers such
animals for hire.
STRAY: Any "animal at large", as defined in this section.
WILD ANIMAL: Any animal which is not commonly domesticated, or which is of a
wild or predatory nature, or any animal which, because of its size, growth
propensity, vicious nature or other characteristics, would constitute an
unreasonable danger to human life, health, or property if not kept, maintained
or confined in a safe and secure manner. (Ord. 750, 1-5-2010; amd. Ord. 773,
10-19-2010)
5-4-2: ANIMAL CONTROL SERVICE:
   A.   Created: There is hereby created in the city an animal control service
for the purpose of ensuring public health and safety, and resolving animal
related disputes in Riverdale City. (Ord. 619, 6-17-2003)
   B.   Administrator Of Animal Control; Officers: The animal control shall be
administered by the police chief. The city administration may, from time to
time, appoint such other officers as they shall deem necessary. Each shall take
the oath of office and be vested with the power and authority to enforce this
chapter.
   C.   Powers And Duties:
      1.   The police chief, assistants and animal control officers are hereby
authorized and empowered to apprehend and take with them and impound any animal
found in violation of this chapter, including licensable animals for which no
license has been procured in accordance with this chapter, or any unlicensed or
licensed animal for any other violation thereof.
      2.   In the enforcement of this chapter, any sworn animal control
officer, peace officer or the police chief or his or her assistants are
authorized to enter onto the open premises of any person to take possession of
any animal involved in the violation of this chapter.
      3.   The animal control officer designated by the police chief shall:
         a.   Enforce this chapter and perform other responsibilities pursuant
thereto.
         b.   Supervise the municipal animal shelter under his or her
jurisdiction.
         c.   Keep adequate records of all animals impounded and all monies
collected.
         d.   See that all animals and animal holding facilities in his or her
jurisdiction are licensed and controlled in accordance with this chapter and
other applicable regulations.
         e.   Establish, in cooperation with the Weber County health department
and other interested governmental agencies, adequate measures for rabies
immunization and control.
      4.   Each animal control officer shall:
         a.   Enforce this chapter in all respects pertaining to animal control
within the jurisdiction, including the care and impounding of animals and
prevention of cruelty to animals.
         b.   Carry out all duties prescribed or delegated by the police chief.
(Ord. 815, 9-25-2012)
5-4-3: ANIMAL SHELTER:
The city council may provide premises and facilities to be used as an animal
shelter for the care, treatment and humane destruction of dogs and other
animals required to be kept or destroyed by this chapter or laws of the state.
In lieu thereof, the city council may contract with any other municipality or
agency, public or private, for the furnishing of such services. (Ord. 619, 6-
17-2003)
5-4-4: LICENSING AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   License Required:
      1.   All dogs must be licensed each year, except as otherwise provided
herein, to a person of the age of eighteen (18) years or older.
      2.   Any person owning, possessing or harboring any dog shall obtain a
license for such animal within thirty (30) days after it reaches the age of
four (4) months; if it is over four (4) months, within fifteen (15) days of the
date of acquisition of the animal.
   B.   Application For License: License applications must be submitted
annually to the animal control service, utilizing a standard form which
requests name, address and telephone number of the applicant, breed, sex, color
and age of the animal and rabies information. The application shall be
accompanied by the prescribed license fee and by a current rabies vaccination
certificate, as well as proof of spay/neuter. Rabies vaccinations shall be
given by a licensed veterinarian.
   C.   Fee For License:
      1.   License fees shall be in such amounts as established in section
1-12-4 of this code.
      2.   The license shall be effective from the date of purchase through
December 31. After February 28, a late fee shall be imposed. Licenses for the
following year may be purchased after November 30.
      3.   No person or persons at any one residence within the city shall at
any one time own, harbor, maintain or license more than two (2) dogs, except as
otherwise provided herein.
   D.   License Tag:
      1.   Upon payment of the license fee, the animal control service shall
issue to the owner a certificate and a tag for each animal licensed. The tag
shall have stamped thereon the license number corresponding with the tag number
on the certificate. The owner shall attach the tag to the collar or harness of
the animal and see that the collar and tag are constantly worn. Failure to
attach the tag as provided shall be a violation of this chapter except that
animals which are kept for show purposes are exempt from wearing the collar and
tag while being shown.
      2.   Tags are not transferable from one animal to another. No refunds
shall be made on any license fee for any reason whatsoever. Replacements for
lost or destroyed tags shall be issued upon payment of one dollar ($1.00) to
the animal control service.
      3.   Any person removing or causing to be removed the collar, harness or
tag from any licensed animal without the consent of the owner or keeper
thereof, except a licensed veterinarian or animal control officer who removes
such for medical or proper reasons connected with his or her position, shall be
in violation of this chapter.
   E.   Exemptions:
      1.   The provisions of subsections A and B of this section shall not
apply to:
         a.   Licensed dogs, whose owners are nonresidents temporarily (up to
30 days) within the city. Licensed dogs whose owners remain within the city
longer than thirty (30) days must be licensed locally upon payment of a one
dollar ($1.00) fee and proof of current rabies vaccination.
         b.   Individual dogs that were issued a kennel license prior to
January 1, 2010, for the life of the dogs registered under the kennel permit.
      2.   The fee provisions of subsection C of this section shall not apply
to:
         a.   Seeing eye dogs properly trained to assist blind persons if such
dogs are actually being used by blind persons to assist them in moving from
place to place.
         b.   Hearing dogs properly trained to assist deaf persons if such dogs
are actually used by deaf persons to aid them in responding to sounds.
         c.   Dogs especially trained to assist officials of government
agencies in the performance of their duties and which are owned by such
agencies.
      3.   Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as to exempt any dog
from having a current rabies vaccination. (Ord. 750, 1-5-2010)
   F.   Revocation Of License: If the owner of any dog is found to be in
violation of this chapter on three (3) or more different occasions during a
twelve (12) month period, the police chief may seek a court order, revoking for
a period of one year any license such person may possess and providing for the
animal control service to pick up and impound any animal kept by the person
under such order. Any dog impounded pursuant to such an order shall be dealt
with in accordance with the provisions of this chapter except that the person
under the order of revocation shall not be allowed to redeem the animal under
any circumstances. (Ord. 815, 9-25-2012)
   G.   Cat Regulations:
      1.   Any person owning, possessing or harboring any cat that is allowed
to be free roaming, shall obtain an identification tag or microchip within
thirty (30) days of the date of acquisition of the animal. The owner shall
attach the identification to the collar or harness of the animal and see that
the collar and tag are continuously worn. Free roaming cats without
identification will be presumed to be "feral" as defined in this chapter.
      2.   Rabies vaccinations are required for all cats more than four (4)
months of age. Vaccinations must be given by a veterinarian with an approved
rabies serum.
      3.   No person owning or otherwise having a cat over six (6) months of
age shall cause, permit or allow such cat to be in or upon a public street,
road, alley or other public or private place unless such cat is spayed or
neutered.
      4.   No person or persons at any one residence within the city shall at
any one time, own, harbor, or maintain more than three (3) cats.
   H.   Exotic Pets: Exotic pet owners shall be held to the same provisions as
set forth in this chapter for domesticated animals, and/or livestock. Adequate
food, water, shelter and care appropriate to each individual species must be
provided at all times. Species subject to rabies must receive rabies
vaccinations from a veterinarian with a serum approved for that species of
animal. Adequate measures must be taken to prevent escape of any animal that
may be considered a threat to public health or safety, to include, but not be
limited to, snakes and reptiles. Exotic pets, if allowed to be free roaming at
any time, must wear identification, or otherwise be microchipped. These animals
are subject to the same fee schedule for impounds, shelter fees, and carcass
disposal as set forth in section
1-12-4 of this code. (Ord. 750, 1-5-2010)
5-4-5: REGULATORY PERMITS:
   A.   Commercial Permits: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or
maintain a kennel, cattery, pet shop, groomery, riding stable or any similar
establishment unless such person first obtains a regulatory permit from the
animal control service, in addition to all other required licenses. All
applications for permits to operate such establishments shall be submitted,
together with the required permit fee, on a printed form provided by the animal
control service. The maintenance of such permit is conditional upon continued
inspection by the service and its determination that the operation is safe,
that the care of the animals is or will be proper, and the facility presents a
good appearance in addition to the other requirements of this chapter.
      1.   Commercial Kennel: No person shall operate or maintain a dog kennel
without first obtaining a business license. All applications for a license to
operate or maintain a dog kennel shall be submitted in writing to the
department of animal control. Upon the approval of the supervisor of animal
control, the application shall then be referred to the building inspector and
upon his approval, the city shall issue the business license upon payment of
the fee hereinafter provided. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct,
operate or maintain a "kennel", as defined by this chapter, in any area not
zoned for such use by the zoning ordinances of the city.
   B.   Display Of Permit; Change In Ownership; Transferability: A valid permit
shall be posted in a conspicuous place in each establishment, and said permit
shall be considered as pertinent to the premises and not transferable to
another location. The permittee shall notify the animal control service within
thirty (30) days of any change in his or her establishment or operation which
may affect the status of the permit. In the event of a change in ownership of
the establishment, the permittee shall notify the animal control service
immediately. Permits shall not be transferable from one owner to another.
   C.   Renewal Of Permit: Any permit issued pursuant to this section shall
automatically expire on December 31 immediately following date of issue. Within
two (2) months prior to the expiration of the permit, the permittee shall apply
for a renewal of the permit and pay the required fee. Any application made
after December 31, except an application for a new establishment opening
subsequent to that date, shall be accompanied by a late application fee in
addition to the regular permit fee.
   D.   Fee For Permit: Permit fees for kennels, catteries, groomeries, pet
shops, veterinary clinics or hospitals shall be as established in section
1-12-4 of this code.
   E.   Exemptions: Research facilities where bona fide medical or related
research is being conducted, humane shelters and other animal establishments
operated by state or local government, or which are licensed by federal law,
are excluded from the licensing requirements of this section.
   F.   Inspections: All establishments required to obtain permits under this
chapter, including holders of sportsman's permits, shall be subject to periodic
inspections, and the inspector shall make a report of such inspection, with a
copy to be filed with animal control.
   G.   Suspension Or Revocation Of Permit:
      1.   Grounds: A permit may be suspended or revoked or a permit
application rejected on any one or more of the following grounds:
         a.   Falsification of facts in a permit application.
         b.   Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or any other
law or regulation governing the establishment, including noise, building and
zoning ordinances.
         c.   Conviction on a charge of cruelty to animals.
      2.   Procedure: If an inspection of kennels, catteries, groomeries, pet
shops, riding stables, veterinary clinics or hospitals, or the premises of the
holder of a sportsman's permit, reveals a violation of this chapter, the
inspector shall notify the permit holder or operator of such violation by means
of an inspection report form or other written notice. The notification shall:
         a.   Set forth the specific violation found.
         b.   Establish a specific and reasonable period of time for the
correction of the violation found.
         c.   State that failure to comply with any notice issued in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter may result in immediate suspension of the
permit.
      3.   Notice Requirements: Any permit granted under this section may be
suspended or revoked by the city council for violations listed in subsection G1
of this section. A minimum of five (5) days' notice shall be given to the
permittee advising him of the date and time for such hearing and listing the
cause or causes for such suspension or revocation. No new permit shall be
issued to any person whose permit has been previously revoked, except upon
application for a new permit, accompanied by the required application fee, and
unless and until all requirements of this chapter have been met.
      4.   Emergency Suspension: Notwithstanding the other provisions of this
chapter, when the inspecting officer finds unsanitary or other conditions in
the operation of kennels, catteries, groomeries, veterinary clinics or
hospitals, riding stables, pet shops, or any similar establishments, or
premises of the holder of a sportsman's permit which, in his or her judgment,
constitutes a substantial hazard to public health, he or she may, without
warning or hearing, issue a written notice to the permit holder or operator
citing such condition, specifying the corrective action to be taken. Such order
may state that the permit is immediately suspended and all operations are to be
discontinued. Any person to whom such an order is issued shall comply
immediately therewith. Any animals at such a facility may be confiscated by
animal control and impounded or otherwise provided for according to the
provisions of this chapter.
      5.   Service Of Notice: Notice provided for under this subsection shall
be deemed to have been properly served when the original of the inspection
report form or other notice has been delivered personally to the permit holder
or person in charge, or such notice has been sent by certified mail to the last
known address of the permit holder. A copy of such notice shall be filed with
the records of animal control. (Ord. 750, 1-5-2010)
5-4-6: RABIES CONTROL:
   A.   Proclamation Of Mayor Upon Threat Of Rabies: The mayor is hereby
authorized, upon reasonable apprehension of danger from dogs or other animals
with rabies, to issue a proclamation forbidding all dogs of every description
and other animals from running at large in the city. All dogs and other animals
shall be securely confined or on a sufficient leash or chain to hold the
animal. Any animal running loose while the proclamation is in force shall be
captured and impounded. The proclamation shall take effect upon publication in
a newspaper of general circulation in the city and posting in at least three
(3) public places.
   B.   Vaccination Required For Dogs: The owner or person having the charge or
control of a dog shall have said animal vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian
within thirty (30) days after it reaches four (4) months of age. Unvaccinated
dogs acquired by the owner or the owner of which moves into the city must be
vaccinated within thirty (30) days. A second vaccination must be obtained
twelve (12) months after the first and every twenty four (24) months thereafter
with a modified virus rabies vaccine approved by the Weber County health
department. Any person permitting any such animal to habitually be on or
remain, or be lodged or fed within such person's house, yard or premises shall
be responsible for said vaccination. This provision shall not apply to
veterinarian or kennel operators temporarily maintaining on their premises
animals owned by others.
   C.   Duties Of Veterinarian And Tag Requirements:
      1.   Certificate: It shall be the duty of each veterinarian, when
vaccinating any animal for rabies, to complete a certificate of rabies
vaccination (in duplicate), which includes the following information:
         a.   Owner's name and address.
         b.   Description of animal (breed, sex, markings, age, name).
         c.   Date of vaccination.
         d.   Rabies vaccination tag number.
         e.   Type of rabies vaccine administered.
         f.   Manufacturer's serial number of vaccine.
      2.   Distribution Of Certificate; Tag: A copy of the certificate shall be
distributed to the owner and the original retained by the issuing veterinarian.
The veterinarian and the owner shall retain their copies of the certificate for
the interval between vaccinations specified in this section. Additionally, a
metal or durable plastic rabies vaccination tag, serially numbered, shall be
securely attached to the collar or harness of the animal. An animal not wearing
such tag shall be deemed to be unvaccinated and may be impounded and dealt with
pursuant to this chapter. In lieu of such tag, an approved type of body marking
may be utilized to evidence vaccination.
      3.   Transient Animal Exception: The provisions of subsection B of this
section shall not apply to any dog owned by a person temporarily remaining
within the city for less than thirty (30) days. Such dogs shall be kept under
strict supervision by the owner. It shall be unlawful to bring any animal into
the city which does not comply with the animal health laws and import
regulations of the state.
   D.   Impoundment Of Animal Without Valid Rabies Vaccination Tag:
      1.   Any vaccinated animal impounded because of a lack of a rabies
vaccination tag may be reclaimed by its owner by furnishing proof of rabies
vaccination and payment of all impoundment fees prior to release.
      2.   Any unvaccinated animal may be reclaimed prior to disposal by
payment of impound fees and by obtaining a rabies vaccination within seventy
two (72) hours of release.
      3.   Any dog not reclaimed prior to the impound holding period shall be
disposed of pursuant to provisions of subsection 5-4-11C of this chapter.
   E.   Reporting Of Rabid Animals: Any person having knowledge of the
whereabouts of an animal known to have been exposed to, or suspected of having,
rabies, or of an animal or person bitten by such a suspect animal, shall notify
the animal control service, the Weber County health department or the state
division of health.
   F.   Quarantining And Disposition Of Biting, Bitten Or Rabid Animals:
      1.   Reporting; Confinement: An animal that has rabies or shows signs of
having rabies, and every animal bitten by another animal affected with rabies
or that has been exposed to rabies shall be reported by the owner as set forth
in subsection E of this section and shall immediately be confined in a secure
place by the owner, which place shall not be harmful to the animal. The owner
shall turn over the animal to the animal control service upon demand.
      2.   Surrender Of Animal: The owner of any animal of a species subject to
rabies which has been bitten shall surrender the animal to an authorized
official upon demand. Any person authorized to enforce this chapter may enter
upon private property to seize the animal; if the owner refuses to surrender
the animal, the officer shall immediately obtain a search warrant authorizing
seizure and impoundment of the animal. (Ord. 619, 6-17-2003)
      3.   Quarantine: Any animal of a species subject to rabies that bites a
person or animal or is suspected of having rabies may be seized and quarantined
for observation for a period of not less than ten (10) days by the animal
control service and/or the health department. Any person authorized to enforce
this chapter may enter upon private property to seize the animal; if the owner
refuses to surrender the animal, the officer shall immediately obtain a search
warrant authorizing seizure and impoundment of the animal. The owner of the
animal shall bear the cost of confinement. The animal shelter shall be the
normal place of quarantine, but other arrangements, including confinement by
the owner, may be made by the police chief and/or the director of health if the
animal had a current rabies vaccination at the time the bite was inflicted or
if there are other special circumstances justifying an exception. A person who
has custody of an animal under quarantine shall immediately notify the animal
control service if the animal shows signs of sickness or abnormal behavior, or
if the animal escapes confinement. It shall be unlawful for any person who has
custody of a quarantined animal to fail or refuse to allow a health or animal
control officer to make an inspection or examination during the period of
quarantine. If the animal dies within ten (10) days from the date of the bite,
the person having custody shall immediately notify the service or immediately
remove and deliver the head of the animal to the state health department
laboratory to be examined for rabies. If, at the end of the ten (10) day
period, the police chief examines the animal and finds no sign of rabies, the
animal may be released to the owner or in the case of a stray, it shall be
disposed of as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 815, 9-25-2012)
      4.   Unvaccinated Bitten Animals:
         a.   In the case of an unvaccinated animal of a species subject to
rabies which is known to have been bitten by a known rabid animal, said bitten
or exposed animal shall be immediately destroyed.
         b.   If the owner is unwilling to destroy the bitten or exposed
animal, the animal shall be immediately isolated and quarantined for fourteen
(14) days under veterinary supervision, the cost of such confinement to be paid
in advance by the owner. The animal shall be destroyed if the owner does not
comply herewith.
      5.   Vaccinated Bitten Animals:
         a.   If the bitten or exposed animal has been vaccinated, the animal
shall be revaccinated within twenty four (24) hours and quarantined for a
period of thirty (30) days following revaccination at the expense of the owner;
or
         b.   If the animal is not revaccinated within twenty four (24) hours,
the animal shall be isolated and quarantined under veterinary supervision for
six (6) months at the expense of the owner.
         c.   The animal shall be destroyed if the owner does not comply with
subsections F5a and F5b of this section.
      6.   Removal Of Quarantined Animal: It shall be unlawful for any person
to remove any such animal from the place of quarantine without written
permission of the animal control service. (Ord. 619, 6-17-2003)
      7.   Dangerous Animal: If any animal bites or attacks a person or animal
two (2) times or more, such animal may be immediately impounded by the animal
control service without court order and held at owner expense pending court
action. Any such animal shall be deemed a dangerous animal, and the police
chief or appointed animal control officer may seek a court order as provided in
section
5-4-12 of this chapter for destruction of the animal. Parties owning such
animal shall, if possible, be notified immediately of the animal's location by
the animal control service. (Ord. 815, 9-25-2012)
5-4-7: BITES; DUTY TO REPORT:
   A.   Reporting Required: Any person having knowledge of any individual or
animal having been bitten by an animal of a species subject to rabies shall
report the incident immediately to animal control or to the county health
department.
   B.   Time Limit: The owner of an animal that bites a person and any person
bitten by an animal shall report the bite to animal control or the health
department within twenty four (24) hours of the bite, regardless of whether or
not the biting animal is of a species subject to rabies.
   C.   Physicians And Other Medical Personnel: A physician or other medical
personnel who renders professional treatment to a person bitten by an animal,
shall report the fact that he or she has rendered professional treatment to
animal control or the county health department within twenty four (24) hours of
his or her first professional attendance. He or she shall report the name, sex
and address of the person bitten as well as the type and location of the bite.
If known, he or she shall give the name and address of the owner of the animal
that inflicted the bite, and any other facts that may assist animal control in
ascertaining the immunization status of the animal.
   D.   Persons Treating Animals: Any person treating an animal bitten, injured
or mauled by another animal shall report the incident to animal control. The
report shall contain the name and address of the owner of the wounded, injured
or bitten animal, the name and address of the owner and description of the
animal which caused the injury, and the location of the incident.
   E.   Violation: Any person not conforming with the requirements of this
section shall be in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 619, 6-17-2003)
5-4-8: ANIMALS ATTACKING PERSONS AND ANIMALS:
   A.   Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for the owner or person having charge
or control of an animal to allow such animal to, and it shall be unlawful for
any animal to, attack, chase or worry any person, any domestic animal, or any
species of hoofed protected wildlife, or to attack domestic fowl. "Worry", as
used in this section, shall mean to harass by scratching, tearing, biting or
shaking with the teeth or claws.
   B.   Defenses: The following shall be considered in mitigating the penalties
or damages or in dismissing the charge:
      1.   That the animal was properly confined on the premises.
      2.   That the animal was deliberately or maliciously provoked. (Ord. 619,
6-17-2003)
   C.   Restraint, Muzzle Required: It shall be unlawful for the owner of any
fierce, dangerous or vicious animal to suffer or to permit such animal to go or
be off the premises of the owner unless such animal is under restraint and
properly muzzled so as to prevent it from injuring any person or property or
another animal. Every animal so vicious and dangerous that it cannot be
controlled by reasonable restraints, and every dangerous and vicious animal not
effectively controlled by its owner or person having charge or control of such
animal, so that it shall not injure any person or property is a hazard to
public safety, and the police chief shall seek a court order for destruction of
or muzzling of the animal. (Ord. 815, 9-25-2012)
5-4-9: NUISANCE ANIMALS:
   A.   Nuisance Defined: Any owner or person having charge, care, custody or
control of an animal or animals causing a "nuisance", as defined in this
section, shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to the penalties
provided herein. The following shall be deemed a nuisance: Any animal which:
      1.   Causes damage to the property of anyone other than its owner.
      2.   Is an animal previously declared potentially dangerous or dangerous
and is found in violation of restrictions placed on that dog by the division of
animal control.
      3.   Causes unreasonable fouling of the air by odors.
      4.   Causes unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings by
inadequate removal of excrement to a proper receptacle.
      5.   Defecates on any public sidewalk, trail, park or building, or on any
private property without the consent of the owner of such private property,
unless the person owning, having a proprietary interest in, harboring or having
care, custody, control or possession of such animal shall remove immediately
any such defecation to a proper trash receptacle.
      6.   Barks, whines or howls or makes other disturbing noises in an
excessive, continuous or untimely fashion.
      7.   Molests passersby or chases passing vehicles.
      8.   Attacks other domestic animals.
      9.   Is an animal which has been impounded for being at large, or its
owner or possessor has been convicted for the dog being at large, or being in
violation of any combination of ordinances on three (3) separate occasions
within a twelve (12) month period.
   B.   Abatement: When it reasonably appears to the animal control officer
that any animal is a nuisance as defined in this section, and that such
nuisance should be abated, the officer, or his/her authorized representative
shall first attempt to obtain the written consent of the animal owner to abate
the animal. If the animal owner's consent cannot be readily obtained, the
animal control officer may file a complaint with the court charging the
maintenance of a nuisance. The charge shall set forth the facts according to
the best of the officer's information and belief, indicating the owner is
maintaining a nuisance, and the nuisance should be abated. Until the owner may
be summoned to appear before the court, the animal(s) may be taken into impound
by the division of animal control and held there pending a decision by the
court. If the complaint is denied a hearing will be set pursuant to the normal
procedure of the court. If the court finds the complaint of maintaining a
nuisance has been proven, the division will seek an order from the court
setting out the method of abatement. Abatement by relocation shall not be an
option if the animal represents a continuing threat of serious harm, such as in
the case of a dangerous dog. If relocation is ordered, the court may set
whatever conditions are necessary to guarantee the said animal shall not
constitute a nuisance in the future. If the court determines that animal is a
nuisance, the owner shall pay the cost of all impoundment fees, or any other
fee that may incur as a result of such impoundment. (Ord. 619, 6-17-2003)
5-4-10: PROHIBITED ACTS AND ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Interference: It is unlawful for any person to interfere with any peace
officer or animal control officer or their assistants in the discharge of their
duties under this chapter, or likewise any officer or authorized personnel of
the humane society.
   B.   Harboring Stray Dogs: It shall be unlawful for any person, except an
animal welfare society, to harbor or keep any lost or strayed dog. Whenever any
dog shall be found which appears to be lost or strayed, it shall be the duty of
the finder to notify the animal control service within forty eight (48) hours,
and the service shall impound the dog as herein provided.
   C.   Animals At Large: It shall be unlawful for the owner or person having
charge or control of any dog to allow such dog at any time to run at large. The
owner or person charged with responsibility for a dog found running at large
shall be strictly liable for a violation of this subsection regardless of the
precautions taken to prevent the escape of the animal and regardless of whether
or not he or she knows that the animal is running at large.
   D.   Animals On Unenclosed Premises: It shall be unlawful for any person to
chain, stake out or tether any animal on any unenclosed premises in such a
manner that the animal may go beyond the property line, unless such person has
permission by the owner of the affected property. No animals are to be staked
or tethered along public roadway easements or business or public walkways.
   E.   Female Dogs In Heat: Any owner or person having charge or control of
any female dog in heat shall, in addition to restraining such dog from running
at large, cause such dog to be constantly confined in a building or secure
enclosure so as to prevent it from attracting by scent or coming into contact
with other animals and creating a nuisance.
   F.   Places Prohibited To Animals; Exception:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to take or permit any animal,
whether loose or on a leash or in arms, in or about any establishment or place
of business where food or food products are sold or distributed, including, but
not limited to, restaurants, grocery stores, meat markets, and fruit or
vegetable stores.
      2.   This section shall not apply to dogs provided for in subsection 5-4-
4E2 of this chapter.
   G.   Cruelty To Animals Prohibited:
      1.   Physical Abuse: It is unlawful for any person to wilfully or
maliciously kill, maim, disfigure, torture, beat with a stick, chain, club or
other object, mutilate, burn or scald, overdrive or otherwise cruelly set upon
any animals. Each offense shall constitute a separate violation.
      2.   Hobbling Animals: It is unlawful for any person to hobble livestock
or other animals by any means which may cause injury or damage to any animal.
      3.   Care And Maintenance: It shall be the duty of any person to provide
any animal in his charge or custody as owner or otherwise, with adequate food,
drink, care and shelter.
      4.   Animals In Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or
confine any animals in or upon any vehicle in a cruel or inhumane manner,
including, but not limited to, carrying or confining such animal without
adequate ventilation or for an unusual length of time, or for a period of time
likely to cause or within which harm may result to the animal.
      5.   Abandonment: It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any
animal within the city.
      6.   Poisoning: It shall be unlawful for any person by any means to make
accessible to any animal, with intent to cause harm or death, any substance
which has in any manner been treated or prepared with any harmful or poisonous
substance. This provision shall not be interpreted so as to prohibit the use of
poisonous substances for the control of vermin in furtherance of the public
health when applied in such a manner as to reasonably prohibit access to other
animals.
      7.   Injury By Motorists:
         a.   Every operator of a motor or other self-propelled vehicle upon
the streets of the city shall, immediately upon injuring, striking, maiming or
running down any domestic animal, give such aid as can reasonably be rendered.
In the absence of the owner, he shall immediately notify animal control,
furnishing requested facts relative to such injury.
         b.   It shall be the duty of such operator to remain at or near the
scene until such time as the appropriate authorities arrive, and upon the
arrival of such authorities, the operator shall immediately identify himself to
such authorities. Alternatively, in the absence of the owner, a person may give
aid by taking the animal to the animal control facility or other appropriate
facility and notifying animal control. Such animal may be taken in by the
animal control facility and dealt with as deemed appropriate under the
circumstances.
         c.   Emergency vehicles are exempted from the requirements of the
foregoing provisions while proceeding on an emergency.
      8.   Animals For Fighting:
         a.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
raise, keep or use any animal, fowl or bird for the purpose of fighting or
baiting; and for any person to be a party to or be present as a spectator at
any such fighting or baiting of any animal or fowl; and for any person, firm or
corporation to knowingly rent any building, shed, room, yard, ground or
premises for any such purposes as aforesaid or to knowingly suffer or permit
the use of his buildings, sheds, rooms, yards, grounds or premises for the
purposes of the aforesaid.
         b.   Law enforcement officers or animal control officials may enter
any building or place where there is an exhibition of fighting or baiting of a
live animal, or where preparations are being made for such an exhibition, and
the law enforcement officers may arrest persons there present and take
possession of all animals engaged in fighting, along with all implements or
applications used in such exhibition. This provision shall not be interpreted
to authorize a search or arrest without a warrant when such is required by law.
      9.   Killing Of Birds: It shall be unlawful for any person to take or
kill any bird or to rob or destroy any nest, egg or young of any bird in
violation of the laws of the state, unless sanctioned by the authority of the
county health department or animal control.
      10.   Malicious Impounding: It shall be unlawful for any person
maliciously to secrete or impound the animal of another, or to cause the same
to be done.
   H.   Sale Of Animals:
      1.   Animals Or Fowl: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer
for sale, barter or give away ducklings in any quantity less than two (2), or
other fowl under two (2) months of age, in any quantity of less than six (6).
Animals or fowl offered for sale shall not be artificially dyed or colored.
Nothing in this provision shall be construed to prohibit the raising of fowl by
a private individual for his personal use and consumption; provided, that he
shall maintain proper brooders and other facilities for the care and
containment of such animals or fowl while they are in his possession and comply
with all zoning ordinances relating thereto.
      2.   Premiums And Novelties: It shall be unlawful for any person to offer
as a premium, prize, award, novelty or incentive to purchase merchandise, any
live animal, except fish.
      3.   Pet Turtles: It shall be unlawful for any pet shop to sell any
Psuedemys scripta-elegans or P. troostii family testudinidae, "pet turtles",
less than four inches (4") in diameter or in contravention of any state or
federal law or regulation dealing with same.
   I.   Wild Animals: It shall be unlawful for any person other than a publicly
maintained and supervised zoo, zoological garden, a duly authorized circus or
sideshow, or an educational institution with adequate and proper facilities, to
keep and maintain any dangerous or poisonous reptile, lion, tiger, cougar,
jaguar, wild cat, lynx, cheetah, bear or other dangerous wild animal, fish or
reptile. In such cases, animals must be maintained by means of protective
devices adequate to prevent such animals from escaping or injuring the public.
Every facility controlling or maintaining such animals shall comply with all
state and federal regulations regarding quarantine and vaccination as directed
for each species. All such wild animals or reptiles shall be kept under
confinement on the premises of the owner, and shall not be allowed to run at
large, and shall be maintained on the premises or private property of the owner
in such a manner as to not endanger the life or limb of any persons lawfully
entering such premises.
   J.   Allowing Domestic Fowls To Trespass Prohibited: It is unlawful for the
owner of any domestic fowls such as turkeys, ducks, geese, chickens, peacocks
or any other variety of fowl to permit such fowls to trespass or go upon the
premises of another or to run at large on any public property or roadway. Fowls
kept and maintained by municipalities within the confines of public parks or
aviaries are exempt, except that they shall not be allowed on public roadways.
   K.   Animal Waste: It is unlawful for the owner of any animal to allow or
permit such animal to defecate on any public property or improved private
property, other than that of the owner. The person having custody of an animal
shall be responsible for the immediate removal of any excrete deposited by his/
her animal on any public walk, trail, recreation area, or private property
other than that belonging to the owner of the animal.
   L.   Feeding Feral Cats And Dogs Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any
person to intentionally provide food, water, or other forms of sustenance to
any feral cat or dog within the city, except after confinement of the feral cat
or dog within a kennel authorized by the Riverdale City animal control services
and operated in conformance with this code. (Ord. 619, 6-17-2003)
5-4-11: IMPOUNDING:
   A.   Animals To Be Impounded: The police chief shall place all animals which
he or she takes into custody in a designated animal impound facility. The
police chief shall cause deceased animals to be disposed of. The following
animals may be taken into custody by the police chief and impounded without the
filing of a complaint: (Ord. 815, 9-25-2012)
      1.   Any animal being kept or maintained contrary to the provisions of
this chapter with any reasonable means used to immobilize or capture said
animal.
      2.   Any animal running at large contrary to the provisions of this
chapter.
      3.   Any animal which is by this chapter required to be licensed and is
not licensed. An animal not wearing a tag shall be presumed to be unlicensed
for purposes of this subsection.
      4.   Sick or injured animals whose owner cannot be located, or whose
owner requests relinquishment and agrees to pay reasonable fees for services
rendered.
      5.   Any abandoned or neglected animal whose safety may be threatened
should the animal not be readily placed into protective custody.
      6.   Animals which are not vaccinated for rabies in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
      7.   Any animal to be held for quarantine.
      8.   Any vicious animal not properly confined as required by section
5-4-8 of this chapter.
   B.   Records Maintained: The impounding authority shall keep records showing
the following:
      1.   Complete description of the animal, including tag numbers.
      2.   The manner and date of impound.
      3.   The location of the pick up and name of the officer picking up the
animal.
      4.   The manner and date of disposal.
      5.   The name and address of the redeemer or purchaser.
      6.   The name and address of any person relinquishing an animal to an
impound facility.
      7.   All fees received.
      8.   All expenses accruing during impoundment.
   C.   Disposition Of Animals:
      1.   Animals shall be impounded for a minimum of three (3) working days
before further disposition, except as otherwise provided herein. Reasonable
effort shall be made to notify the owner of any animal wearing a license or
other identification during that time. Notice shall be deemed given when mailed
to the last known address of the listed owner. If a resident wishes to
relinquish an animal, it is the responsibility of the owner to pay all costs
for such a relinquishment. The city will not be responsible for necessary
charges imposed by the animal shelter for animal relinquishment. Any animal
voluntarily relinquished to the animal control facility by the owner thereof
for destruction or other disposition need not be kept for the minimum holding
period before release or other disposition as herein provided. (Ord. 619, 6-17-
2003)
      2.   All dogs and cats, except for those quarantined or confined by court
order, held longer than the minimum impound period, and all dogs and cats
voluntarily relinquished to the impound facility, may be destroyed or sold as
the police chief shall direct. If the animals are sold, the fee charged shall
be the same as the adoption fees charged by the animal facility used by the
city. Any person who buys or adopts an animal that has been placed in the
facility by the city shall also purchase a mandatory spay/neuter agreement for
an additional thirty dollars ($30.00).
      3.   Any licensed animal impounded and having or suspected of having
serious injury or contagious disease requiring medical attention, may, in the
discretion of the police chief, be released to the care of the veterinarian
with the consent of the owner. (Ord. 815, 9-25-2012)
      4.   When, in the judgment of the animal control officer, it is
determined that an animal should be destroyed for humane reasons or to protect
the public from imminent danger to persons or property, such animal may be
destroyed without regard to any time limitations otherwise established herein,
and without court order.
   D.   Redemption Fees:
      1.   The owner of any impounded animal or his authorized representative
may redeem such animal before disposition provided he pays:
         a.   The impound fee.
         b.   The daily board fee.
         c.   Veterinary fees incurred during the impound period, including
rabies vaccination.
         d.   License fee.
      2.   Impound fees shall be in such amounts as provided in the
consolidated fee schedule set forth in title 1, chapter 12 of this code. (Ord.
619, 6-17-2003)
5-4-12: COURT ORDERS; PROCEDURE:
Unless modified by the court, court orders pursuant to this chapter shall be
sought according to the following minimum notice and procedure:
   A.   Complaint: The animal control officer, or his or her authorized
representative, shall petition the court of applicable jurisdiction for the
desired action by filing a complaint, together with supporting affidavits, if
deemed necessary.
   B.   Service: The petition for the action, together with supporting
affidavits, shall be served on the party against whom the action is taken at
least five (5) days prior to the hearing. (Ord. 619, 6-17-2003)
5-4-13: PENALTY:
Any person, corporation, firm or association violating any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be punished
as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, and/or as provided in section 76-9-301 of the Utah criminal
and traffic code. (Ord. 619, 6-17-2003)
CHAPTER 5
BICYCLE REGISTRATION
SECTION:
5-5-1: Definitions
5-5-2: Record Of Sales By Dealer
5-5-3: Completion And Delivery Of Registration Certificate
5-5-4: Insignia Attached
5-5-5: Sales Other Than By Dealers
5-5-6: Previously Registered Owners
5-5-7: Cycles Bearing No Serial Or Frame Number
5-5-8: Currently Owned Cycles Not Registered
5-5-9: Mutilation, Alteration Or Removal Of Insignia
5-5-10: Penalty
5-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following words shall have the below
stated meanings:
CYCLE: A device upon which any person may ride propelled by human power through
a belt, chain or gears and having one or more wheels in tandem or other
arrangement. Cycles with wheels of at least twenty inches (20") in diameter and
frame size of at least fourteen inches (14") shall be mandatorily subject to
this chapter. Other cycles may be registered by the owner at his option.
CYCLE DEALER: Any person engaged in buying, selling, bartering and exchanging
cycles, whether dealing exclusively in cycles or in conjunction with other
wares, goods and merchandise.
SALE: All transactions wherein ownership of a cycle is transferred from one
person to another whether by sale, exchange, gift or other means. (1985 Code §
5-1-1)
5-5-2: RECORD OF SALES BY DEALER:
All cycle dealers shall make and maintain a record of all sales of cycles
within the limits of the city, containing the following information:
   A.   The name and address of the cycle dealer.
   B.   The name and address of the purchaser.
   C.   The serial or frame number, brand name, model, number of speeds, frame
size, wheel size, color, whether new or used, whether a man's or woman's make
and such other descriptive items as will assist in identifying the cycle.
   D.   Additionally, the record shall include the coded NCIC agency identifier
number of the area in which the cycle was sold and the registration number.
(1985 Code §
5-1-2)
5-5-3: COMPLETION AND DELIVERY OF REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE:
   A.   Required: All cycle dealers at the time of sale of a cycle shall
complete a cycle registration certificate in triplicate. The certificate of
registration shall bear the information required by section
5-5-2 of this chapter and such other information for which provision is made
upon the registration form and shall bear the signature of the dealer and date
of issuance.
   B.   Distribution: The dealer shall deliver a copy of said registration
certificate to the buyer, shall retain a copy for the dealer's files and shall,
within thirty (30) days of the sale, furnish the original certificate of
registration to the office of the city recorder. (1985 Code § 5-1-3)
   C.   Forms: The dealer shall acquire registration certificate forms from the
city bearing the requisite NCIC agency identifier numbers and registration
numbers, together with the described registration insignia provided in section
5-5-4 of this chapter. (1985 Code § 5-1-3)
5-5-4: INSIGNIA ATTACHED:
All cycle dealers shall at the time of sale of a cycle attach to the down tube
of the frame of the cycle a registration insignia provided to the dealer by the
city for that purpose. Said registration insignia shall bear the applicable
NCIC agency identifier number and the registration number of the cycle. Said
numbers shall coincide with the numbers appearing upon the registration
certificate required by this chapter. (1985 Code § 5-1-4)
5-5-5: SALES OTHER THAN BY DEALERS:
In the event that an owner acquires a cycle other than through a sale to him by
a cycle dealer, he shall make application with the office of the city recorder
in person, by mail or otherwise for registration certificates and registration
insignia. Upon receipt thereof, the buyer shall complete said registration form
and file the original thereof with the office of the city recorder. He shall
thereupon attach the registration insignia to the down tube of the frame of the
cycle in the same manner as above required of cycle dealers. (1985 Code § 5-1-
5)
5-5-6: PREVIOUSLY REGISTERED OWNERS:
In the event that the sale of a cycle involves a cycle previously registered
and bearing a registration insignia, the dealer or buyer, whichever is
applicable, shall in addition to all other reporting and recording, make a
record of the former number and make a report of the former insignia number to
the city recorder's office at the time that the registration certificate
involving the sale is filed. (1985 Code § 5-1-6)
5-5-7: CYCLES BEARING NO SERIAL OR FRAME NUMBER:
No cycle dealer shall sell or deliver a cycle which does not bear a serial
number on its frame. Whenever the cycle has no serial number or frame number,
the dealer shall stamp or have stamped on the frame the registration number
that is to be issued for that cycle, the year in which the license was issued
or year of expiration of license, and the NCIC agency identifier number of the
political subdivision regulating the dealer. (1985 Code § 5-1-7)
5-5-8: CURRENTLY OWNED CYCLES NOT REGISTERED:
All persons owning cycles which have not been registered pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter or of any other predecessor ordinance permitting or
requiring registration may apply to the office of the city recorder for
registration forms and registration insignia, complete the registration
certificate, file it with the office of the city recorder and attach the
applicable registration insignia to the cycle as above provided for dealers.
(1985 Code § 5-1-8)
5-5-9: MUTILATION, ALTERATION OR REMOVAL OF INSIGNIA:
No person shall wilfully or maliciously destroy or alter the serial or frame
number of any cycle, or the registration insignia attached to any cycle while
the same is valid. (1985 Code § 5-1-9)
5-5-10: PENALTY:
Any person violating, causing or permitting violation of any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and upon conviction, shall be subject
to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1985 Code § 5-1-10; amd. 2001 Code)
CHAPTER 6
INTOXICATING CHEMICAL COMPOUNDS
SECTION:
5-6-1: Unlawful Intoxicating Chemical Compounds
5-6-1: UNLAWFUL INTOXICATING CHEMICAL COMPOUNDS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, including a corporation or other
entity, to manufacture, distribute, use, possess, purchase, attempt to
purchase, sell, publicly display for sale, attempt to sell, give, trade or
barter any one or more of the following chemical compounds and/or substances or
their salts, isomers, homologues, and salts of their isomers and homologues:
      1.   Salvia divinorum or Salvinorum A: all parts of the plant presently
classified botanically as Salvia divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds
thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and every compound,
manufacture, salts derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds
or extracts;
      2.   Pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-018);
      3.   (6ar, 10ar)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6, 6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-
6a, 7, 10, 10a-tetrahydrobenzo[c] chromen-1-ol (also known as HU-210 or 1, 1-
dimethylheptyl-11-hydroxy-delta8-tetrahydrocannabinol);
      4.   2-(3-hydroxycyclohexyl)-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl) phenol (also known as
CP-47, 497), and the dimethylhexyl, dimethyloctyl and dimethylnonyl homologues
of CP-47, 497;
      5.   1-Butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-073);
      6.   1-(2-(4-(morpholinyl)ethyl))-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as
JWH-200);
      7.   1-Pentyl-3-(2-methoxyphenylacetyl) indole (also known as JWH-250);
      8.   1-Hexyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-019 or JWH-015);
      9.   1-Pentyl-3-(4-chloro-1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-398);
      10.   N-benzylpiperazine (also known as BZP);
      11.   1-(3-trifluoromethylphenyl) piperazine (also known as TFMPP);
      12.   Any similar structural analogs of the above chemical compounds; or
      13.   Any other synthetic cannabinoids that activate the cannabinoid,
CB1, receptor agonist.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person, corporation, or other entity, to possess
paraphernalia associated with chemical compounds listed in this section. For
purposes of this section "paraphernalia" shall mean any equipment, product, or
material used, or intended to be used, to manufacture, compound, convert,
produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, package, repackage, store, contain,
conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, transdermal absorption, or to otherwise
introduce a chemical compound listed in this section into the human body.
   C.   The aforementioned intoxicating chemical compounds and associated
paraphernalia are contraband and are to be confiscated by law enforcement
officials.
   D.   This section shall not apply to drugs or substances lawfully prescribed
or to drugs or substances which have been approved by the federal food and drug
administration or which are specifically permitted by Utah law.
   E.   A violation of this section is a class B misdemeanor and is punishable
as such.
   F.   It is not an offense under subsection A of this section if the person
was acting at the direction of an authorized agent of the city of Riverdale to
enforce or ensure compliance with this law prohibiting the sale of the
aforementioned intoxicating chemical compound.
   G.   Each day during which a violation of this chapter occurs shall
constitute a separate offense.
   H.   The city of Riverdale shall have the authority to seek an injunction to
compel compliance of any business which fails or refuses to comply with this
section. (Ord. 774, 10-19-2010, eff. 10-19-2010)
TITLE 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
TRAFFIC CODE AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Traffic Code Adopted By Reference
6-1-2: Motor Vehicle Defined
6-1-3: Driving And Traffic Regulations
6-1-4: Penalty
6-1-1: TRAFFIC CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
Except insofar as the application thereof is clearly impractical or
inappropriate, in view of the context of purposes or penalty as provided, all
of the definitions, requirements, regulations, prohibitions, provisions and
sections of the Utah traffic code (title 41), as amended, are hereby adopted by
the city. Any and all violations thereof shall be considered violations of this
chapter and each such violation shall subject the violator thereof to penalty
provisions under this chapter if proceeded hereunder. (1985 Code § 12-1-1; amd.
2001 Code)
6-1-2: MOTOR VEHICLE DEFINED:
The words "motor vehicle", as used in this title, shall be defined as every
self-propelled device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be
transported. (1985 Code § 12-1-6)
6-1-3: DRIVING AND TRAFFIC REGULATIONS:
   A.   Approving Authority: The approving authority shall be invested in city
administration and staff for any changes to Riverdale City traffic regulations
and shall be consistent with the state traffic code referenced in this code.
   B.   Proper Lookout Required: No person shall drive a motor vehicle within
the corporate limits of the city in such manner as to endanger life or property
by failing to keep a safe and proper lookout for other traffic, objects or
persons.
   C.   Reasonable Care Required When Driving: It shall be unlawful for any
person to drive a vehicle without the care and caution of a reasonable, prudent
person under the circumstances then and there existing, or in a manner so as to
endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property.
   D.   Use Of Compression Release Engine Braking Systems Or "Jake Brakes"
Restricted: It is unlawful for any person to use, operate or engage any
compression release engine braking system within the city which is designed to
slow the speed of a vehicle by turning the engine into an air compressor
(commonly referred to as a jacobs brake, jake brake, engine brake or
compression brake). The use of such devices is allowed in emergency situations
or when the operator of the vehicle needs it for safe operation. Firetrucks and
other emergency vehicles shall be exempt from the prohibitions of this
subsection.
   E.   Penalty: Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a
class B misdemeanor; and upon conviction, such person shall be punished as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 804, 4-3-2012)
6-1-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this title, unless otherwise specifically
designated, shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor, and upon conviction,
shall be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1985 Code § 12-1-7; amd. 2001 Code)
CHAPTER 2
OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES IN PUBLIC PARKS
SECTION:
6-2-1: Definitions
6-2-2: Vehicles In Public Parks
6-2-3: Youthful Citizens Operating Motor Assisted Scooters
6-2-4: Penalty
6-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
MOTOR ASSISTED SCOOTER: A self-propelled device with at least two (2) wheels in
contact with the ground, a braking system capable of stopping the unit under
typical operating conditions, a gas or electric motor not exceeding forty (40)
cubic centimeters, a deck designed for a person to stand while operating the
device, and the ability to be propelled by human power alone.
PUBLIC PARK: Any real property owned or operated by the city of Riverdale for
any recreation purpose. (1985 Code § 12-2-1; amd. 2001 Code)
6-2-2: VEHICLES IN PUBLIC PARKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon any public
park within the city except in the following cases:
   A.   Upon roadways and parking areas, hard surfaced, or designated for motor
vehicle operation.
   B.   By a city employee in the course of his employment.
   C.   By a person having in his possession written authority signed by a city
officer or employee. (1985 Code § 12-2-2)
6-2-3: YOUTHFUL CITIZENS OPERATING MOTOR ASSISTED SCOOTERS:
A person younger than sixteen (16) years of age may operate a motor assisted
scooter (using the motor) on a two (2) lane city street with a posted speed
limit of no more than twenty five (25) miles per hour when the operator is
within fifty feet (50') of his or her parent or guardian. The motor assisted
scooter shall be subject to the provisions for bicycles, mopeds or motor-driven
cycles found in Utah Code Annotated title 41, chapter 6. (1985 Code § 12-2-3)
6-2-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating this chapter shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor, and
upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. The parent or guardian of a person younger than sixteen
(16) years of age are each jointly and severally responsible with the minor for
violation of this chapter. (1985 Code § 12-2-4; amd. 2001 Code)
CHAPTER 3
IMPOUNDING OF MOTOR VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-3-1: Authority To Impound; Nuisance Abatement
6-3-2: Reclaiming Of Impounded Vehicles; Fee
6-3-3: Fees And Storage Charges; Waiver; Lien
6-3-4: Notice Of Impounding
6-3-5: Sale Of Unclaimed Vehicles
6-3-6: Records Maintained
6-3-7: Designation Of Vehicle Pound And Treatment Of Vehicle
6-3-8: Impounding Does Not Preclude Criminal Prosecution
6-3-1: AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND; NUISANCE ABATEMENT:
Every police officer of the city is authorized summarily to seize and take
possession of every abandoned and/or illegally parked or operated vehicle,
without a warrant, wherever found, by removing or causing such vehicle to be
removed and impounded in any authorized vehicle pound. Every police officer of
the city is also further authorized to seize and take possession of any vehicle
which is being operated upon the public streets of the city with improper
registration, registration that has been expired for more than three (3)
months, or registration that is suspended or revoked. A police officer may also
impound a vehicle which he has good reason to believe has been stolen, or on
which any motor number, manufacturer's number or identification mark has been
defaced, altered or obliterated. Additionally, if the vehicle being impounded
has an attached trailer, the trailer may also be seized to transport the
vehicle. Every police officer so impounding a vehicle shall, within twenty four
(24) hours, make written report thereof to the police chief, specifying the
manufacturer's trade name and model of the impounded vehicle, its license and
motor number, the time and place where the vehicle was taken and impounded, and
the cause of impounding. The vehicle used to impound the vehicle in violation
shall meet the standards of the department of public safety and the motor
safety carrier act. (Ord. 815, 9-25-2012)
6-3-2: RECLAIMING OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLES; FEE:
The owner of an impounded vehicle may reclaim and obtain the release thereof
upon and only upon full compliance with the following conditions precedent:
(1985 Code § 12-3-2; amd. 2001 Code)
   A.   Identity; Proof Of Ownership: He shall furnish to the police chief or
his authorized representative, satisfactory evidence of his identity and his
ownership of said vehicle.
   B.   Service Fee: He shall pay to the city an impound service fee, which fee
is hereby levied upon the impounding of every such vehicle. Said sum is hereby
determined to be the reasonable cost of impounding a vehicle.
   C.   Storage Costs And Expenses: He shall pay to the city all of its storage
costs and expenses incident to storing the vehicle in the authorized vehicle
pound and to giving notice of the impounding thereof as hereinafter provided.
In cases where a vehicle has been impounded pursuant to this chapter as
originally adopted or as amended, in a vehicle pound maintained and operated by
the city, he shall pay to the city storage charges, which charges are hereby
determined to be the reasonable cost for storing and keeping an impounded
vehicle by the city. (Ord. 826, 11-20-2012)
   D.   Promise To Appear For Criminal Charge: If a criminal charge is made
against the owner of such vehicle for the illegal parking thereof or for the
operation thereof while said vehicle is improperly registered or without proper
license plates, he shall sign a written promise to appear at a time certain, as
fixed by the police chief, to answer such charge, or, if required by the police
chief, or his representative, shall post bail to secure such appearance. It is
specifically provided, however, that if the owner of said vehicle resides
outside of the county, the posting of bail, as fixed by the justice court judge
or any bail commissioner having jurisdiction thereof, to answer such charge,
shall be required before such vehicle is released.
   E.   Order Of Release: He shall obtain the written order of the police chief
or his representative, directing the release of the vehicle by the pound
keeper, and upon receiving the vehicle he shall execute a written receipt
therefor. (Ord. 815, 9-25-2012)
   F.   Improperly Registered, Stolen Vehicles: In cases where a vehicle has
been impounded, as hereinafter provided, by reason of the vehicle having been
improperly registered or stolen, or by reason of the obliteration of motor or
manufacturer's numbers or identification marks, such vehicle shall not be
released, in any event, until the requirements of Utah Code Annotated sections
41-1a-1101 and 41-1a-1102, shall have been satisfied, or until such release has
been specifically authorized by the motor vehicle division of the state tax
commission. (1985 Code § 12-3-2; amd. 2001 Code)
6-3-3: FEES AND STORAGE CHARGES; WAIVER; LIEN:
   A.   Waiver: If, upon the reclaiming of an impounded vehicle by the owner
thereof, it shall be made to appear to the police chief by evidence
satisfactory to him that the said vehicle was stolen from the owner thereof and
that the owner is not responsible for the cause for which such vehicle was
impounded, the police chief may waive the impounding fee, and, if said vehicle
has been kept and stored in a pound maintained by the city itself, the storage
charges assessed against said vehicle. (Ord. 815, 9-25-2012)
   B.   Fee And Expense A Lien: The impounding fee levied hereby and all
storage charges and all costs and expenses incident to the giving of notice of
impounding and to the sale of said vehicle as herein provided shall be a lien
upon the impounded vehicle, which lien may be summarily foreclosed in the
manner hereinafter provided. (1985 Code § 12-3-4)
6-3-4: NOTICE OF IMPOUNDING:
   A.   Required: If the owner of an impounded vehicle fails to appear and
reclaim it as hereinbefore provided within five (5) days after it is impounded,
the police chief shall send to the registered owner thereof, and to every owner
of legal title thereto or lienholder thereon, as disclosed by the records of
the motor vehicle division of the state tax commission, a written notice of the
impounding of such vehicle and shall state that unless the vehicle is reclaimed
within thirty (30) days of the date of giving notice it will be deemed to be
abandoned and will be sold by the police chief in accordance with the
ordinances of the city. The notice shall be sent by the United States
registered mail, directed to the persons to be notified at their last known
addresses as disclosed by the records of the state tax commission as aforesaid.
If the police chief is unable to ascertain the name or address of any person
having an interest in the impounded vehicle, such notice shall, in lieu of
mailing by registered mail as aforesaid, be published once in a newspaper
having general circulation in the city, and copies thereof shall be mailed to
such person or persons as the police chief may have reason to believe have or
claim some right, title or interest in said vehicle at their last post office
address according to the information, if any, received by the police chief from
sources other than the records of the state tax commission aforesaid.
   B.   Form Of Notice:
      1.   The notice required by subsection A of this section may be
substantially in the following form:
            Notice of Impounding and of Intention to Sell Vehicle
To                                 , the owner or owners, and to all other
persons claiming any right, title or interest in the vehicle hereinafter
described:
Take notice that on the            day of               ,           , the
following described vehicle, to-wit:
 
Make and   Year   License Motor
body type: model: number: number:
 
was parked on a public street of the city of Riverdale, Utah, in violation of
(specifying the ordinance or statute violated), or, as the case may be, was
operated with improper registration, or was found with the motor number
defaced, and was on that date impounded by the city of Riverdale pursuant to
Riverdale Municipal Code title 6, chapter 3.
Said vehicle may be reclaimed as provided in Riverdale Municipal Code title 6,
chapter 3 upon application at the office of the police chief, city of Riverdale
police department, Riverdale, Utah. If not so reclaimed within thirty (30) days
of the mailing (or publication, as the case may be) of this notice, said
vehicle will be deemed abandoned, and will be sold at public auction by the
city of Riverdale.
Dated:       
      CITY OF RIVERDALE
BY:       
         Police Chief
      2.   If the police chief has not received, within five (5) days of the
impounding of such vehicle, information regarding the ownership and claimants
of the ownership of such vehicle, he shall note that fact upon the record of
impounding kept by him as hereinafter provided, and in such case the notice may
be directed generally to "any person claiming any interest in the following
vehicle". (Ord. 815, 9-25-2012)
   C.   Proof Of Notice: Proof by affidavit of the giving of notice of
impounding as hereinbefore provided shall be made in duplicate and preserved
with the record of impounding hereinafter provided. (1985 Code § 12-3-7)
6-3-5: SALE OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES:
   A.   Authority; Notice; Sale:
      1.   If any vehicle impounded as hereinbefore provided is not claimed
within thirty (30) days after the giving of notice as aforesaid, it shall be
deemed to have been abandoned by the owner thereof. At the expiration of which
period of time, the police chief shall advertise such vehicle for sale and sell
the same at public auction to the highest bidder for cash. Such advertisement
shall be by publication of a notice of sale at least once, not less than seven
(7) nor more than fourteen (14) days prior to the time fixed for the sale in a
newspaper having a general circulation in the city, and by publicly posting a
notice of such sale for not less than seven (7) nor more than fourteen (14)
days prior thereto, as follows: one copy at the front door of the city office
building; one copy at some other public place in the city to be selected by the
police chief; and one copy at the entrance to the vehicle pound where said
vehicle is stored. The police chief, in his discretion, may further advertise
said sale by further notice of advertisement in a newspaper by him deemed to be
most likely to give notice to prospective purchasers; provided, that the cost
of such additional advertisement does not exceed five dollars ($5.00), but such
additional notice is not required.
      2.   The notice of sale shall describe the vehicle by manufacturer's
trade name or make, body type, year, model, if known, and motor and license
numbers, if any, and shall specify the time and place of sale, which shall be
within the corporate limits of the city. A copy of the notice of sale shall be
mailed to the owner of said vehicle, if known, at their last known address, at
least seven (7) days prior to the date of said sale.
      3.   At the time and place fixed for the sale, the police chief shall
offer for sale and sell the said vehicle at public auction to the highest
bidder for cash.
      4.   At such sale, the city may bid upon and purchase said vehicle. If
the city becomes the purchaser at such sale, it may credit upon the purchase
price the pound service fee, the storage costs and charges incident to the
impounding of the vehicle, and its costs and expenses incident to the making of
such sale. If the vehicle is not sold to another purchaser, as hereinbefore
provided, the police chief shall strike off and sell the same to the city for
the amount of such service fee, storage costs, charges and expenses.
   B.   Certificate Of Sale: Upon consummation of the sale and receipt of the
purchase price therefor, the police chief shall deliver possession of the
vehicle to the purchaser and shall also execute and deliver to the purchaser
his certificate of such sale. The certificate shall describe the vehicle in
substantially the same manner as the notice of impounding, shall recite the
fact of the sale, the price paid, and the purchaser's name and address, and
shall contain a reference to subsection A of this section, which constitutes
the authority for the sale. A copy of the certificate shall be filed with the
city recorder.
   C.   Disposition Of Monies Received: All monies received by the police chief
upon the sale of such vehicle shall be deposited in the city treasury. At any
time within one year from and after such sale, the former owner of the vehicle
sold, upon application to the city council, and upon presentation of
satisfactory proof of ownership of the vehicle sold, shall be paid the proceeds
of such sale, less the impounding fee, storage charges and expenses of sale
hereinbefore provided. If the proceeds of such sale are not reclaimed within
the said period of one year, they shall be credited to the general fund of the
city. (Ord. 815, 9-25-2012)
6-3-6: RECORDS MAINTAINED:
The police chief shall keep a record in duplicate of all vehicles impounded by
manufacturer's trade name or make, body type, year, model and license number,
the names of the owners of such vehicles, if the same are known, and the names
and addresses of all persons claiming the same, and such other descriptive
matter as may identify such vehicle, the nature and circumstances of the
impounding thereof, and the violation, if any, on account of which such
vehicles were impounded, the date of such impounding, the name and address of
any person to whom any such vehicle is released, a record of all notices given
with respect to the impounding and sale of such vehicle, and a record of the
sale thereof, if any. Whenever such vehicle has been sold, as hereinbefore
provided, one of the copies of such record shall be filed with the city
recorder with the certificate of sale, and a copy of the affidavit of the
giving of notice upon the impounding and sale of such vehicle. (Ord. 815, 9-25-
2012)
6-3-7: DESIGNATION OF VEHICLE POUND AND TREATMENT OF VEHICLE:
The police chief, with the approval of the city council, shall designate such
vehicle pounds and appoint such vehicle pound keepers to have charge thereof as
may be necessary or convenient to carry out the provisions hereof, and agree
with such pound keepers as to the terms of their service. No person having
charge over the impounded vehicle shall operate or allow a vehicle to be
operated without prior written permission of the owner of the vehicle unless
the operation is incidental and necessary to move the vehicle from one parking
space to another within the facility and is necessary for the normal management
of the facility. The police officer shall record the mileage shown on the
vehicle's odometer at the time of seizure if that information is accessible.
(Ord. 815, 9-25-2012)
6-3-8: IMPOUNDING DOES NOT PRECLUDE CRIMINAL PROSECUTION:
Neither the impounding nor the sale of a vehicle, nor the payment of the
impounding fee, storage charges and other expenses as hereinbefore provided,
shall preclude the criminal prosecution of the owner or operator of the
impounded vehicle for any public offense. (1985 Code § 12-3-13)
CHAPTER 4
PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-4-1: Parking Over Seventy Two Hours
6-4-2: South Side Of Highland Drive And Cherry Drive
6-4-3: Signs Prohibiting Parking
6-4-4: Snowstorms
6-4-5: Trailers, Recreational Vehicles; Exception
6-4-6: Disabled Persons Parking
6-4-7: Nuisance; Impounding
6-4-8: Penalty
6-4-1: PARKING OVER SEVENTY TWO HOURS:
It is unlawful for the owner, lessee, purchaser, operator or possessor of any
vehicle to park or leave such vehicle on any public street within the city in
the same location for a period in excess of seventy two (72) hours. (1985 Code
§ 12-4-1)
6-4-2: SOUTH SIDE OF HIGHLAND DRIVE AND CHERRY DRIVE:
It shall be prohibited for the owner, lessee, purchaser or operator of any
motor vehicle to park or allow to remain unattended said motor vehicle on the
south side of Highland Drive or the south side of Cherry Drive of this city
between 300 West Street and 500 West Street. (1985 Code § 12-4-2)
6-4-3: SIGNS PROHIBITING PARKING:
Permission is granted for the operator of a motor vehicle to park anywhere
within the city without penalty, except where signs regulate parking or where
parking is regulated by this chapter. (1985 Code § 12-4-3)
6-4-4: SNOWSTORMS:
In order to adequately remove snow and to avoid property damage as far as
possible, it is necessary to keep public streets and highways clear of all
parked vehicles and other obstacles left on or adjacent to the travelway during
snowstorms. Therefore, when snow removal becomes necessary, no person who owns
or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle or other object shall park
or place such vehicle or object upon or immediately adjacent to any street
travelway until the street is cleared. This prohibition does not apply to
physicians or other authorized emergency service personnel. Any such vehicle or
object so parked or placed is declared a public nuisance. (1985 Code § 12-4-4)
6-4-5: TRAILERS, RECREATIONAL VEHICLES; EXCEPTION:
   A.   Parking Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to park or leave
standing at any time on any street, public roadway, alley or city property any
unattached trailer of any type, whether for the occupancy of people, storage of
items or for towing purposes; any boat, whether the same is loaded or not on an
unattached trailer or otherwise; any camper not mounted on a vehicle; any motor
home or mini-motor home of any length; and any combination of a pulling or
towing vehicle with an attached trailer, whether loaded or not; provided,
however, that it is lawful to park such a combination or a motor home that is
being loaded or is ready for departure for a period not to exceed seventy two
(72) hours. It is further unlawful to park in any such area, at any time, any
vehicle or motor vehicle having a registered gross weight capability of twelve
thousand (12,000) pounds or more. (Ord. 743, 9-15-2009)
   B.   Exception: With a valid permit, a resident of the city will be
permitted to park a vehicle with a registered gross weight capacity of twelve
thousand (12,000) pounds or more on a city street in order to make light
repairs for no longer than four (4) hours where such parking and repairs pose
no substantial hazard to the city. Permits shall be obtained from the police
department headquarters during normal business hours. (Ord. 815, 9-25-2012)
6-4-6: DISABLED PERSONS PARKING:
   A.   Authority: Any disabled person qualifying under Utah Code Annotated
section 41-1a-414 shall be allowed to park an appropriately marked motor
vehicle for reasonable periods without charge in metered parking zones and
restricted parking areas, other than those available for emergency use, in a
manner which allows proper access to the automobile by the disabled person.
   B.   Plate Or Identification Card Required; Enforcement: Only those vehicles
carrying a distinctive (logo) handicapped license plate or lawfully possessed
transferable identification card may park in a parking space which is clearly
identified as reserved for use by the handicapped. This subsection applies to
and may be enforced on public property and on private property which is used or
intended for use by the public. (Ord. 875, 12-15-2015)
6-4-7: NUISANCE; IMPOUNDING:
Every vehicle found stopped, standing or parked upon the public streets of the
city where prohibited by section
6-4-4 and subsection 6-4-5A of this chapter, or where prohibited by any law of
the state, and every vehicle abandoned in the streets is hereby declared to be
an obstruction in the street and a public nuisance. Such nuisances may be
abated as provided in chapter 3 of this title. (1985 Code § 12-4-8)
6-4-8: PENALTY:
Upon conviction of a violation of this chapter, a person shall be guilty of an
infraction and shall be assessed a fine as determined by the justice court
judge. (1985 Code § 12-4-7)
CHAPTER 5
LEAVING PERSONS UNATTENDED IN A MOTOR VEHICLE
SECTION:
6-5-1: Definitions
6-5-2: Conditions
6-5-3: Exception
6-5-4: Enforcement
6-5-5: Violation; Penalty
6-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter:
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled but not operated upon
rails.
UNATTENDED: The responsible person is unable to continuously observe the child.
(Ord. 657, 4-18-2006)
6-5-2: CONDITIONS:
A parent, legal guardian or other person, who is responsible for a child eight
(8) years of age or younger, or a person who is mentally or physically impaired
and incapable of caring for him/herself, shall not recklessly, negligently or
knowingly and intentionally leave that child or other affected person,
unattended in a motor vehicle if:
   A.   The conditions present a significant risk to the health and safety of
the child; or
   B.   In such a manner, or for such a period of time, as to pose a threat to
such child's health, safety and welfare; or
   C.   The engine of the motor vehicle is running or the keys to the vehicle
are in the ignition, unless the child is being supervised by, and within the
sight of, a person who is at least twelve (12) years of age. (Ord. 723, 11-18-
2008)
6-5-3: EXCEPTION:
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to a person who unintentionally
locks a motor vehicle with a child in the vehicle. (Ord. 657, 4-18-2006)
6-5-4: ENFORCEMENT:
A law enforcement officer, emergency services personnel or any other citizen
who reasonably believes that a violation of this chapter has occurred may,
without incurring civil liability, use any reasonable means necessary to
protect the child and to remove the child from the motor vehicle. (Ord. 657, 4-
18-2006)
6-5-5: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   A person who violates the provisions of section
6-5-2 of this chapter is guilty of a class B misdemeanor.
   B.   Violation of this chapter shall constitute a public offense and subject
the violator to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and no
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), a term of imprisonment not
exceeding six (6) months, or both. In addition to the above noted penalty
provisions, the judge may, in addition to those provisions, order any person
convicted of this chapter to attend and complete a community education program
relating to improving parenting skills.
   C.   Nothing in this section precludes prosecution under any other provision
of law. (Ord. 657, 4-18-2006)
CHAPTER 6
OFF HIGHWAY VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-6-1: Purpose
6-6-2: Definitions
6-6-3: Regulations
6-6-4: Restrictions On Privately Owned Land
6-6-5: Prohibited Uses
6-6-6: Designation Of Routes
6-6-7: Exceptions
6-6-8: Penalty
6-6-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is for the purpose of adopting, in part, the Utah off-highway
vehicle act, title 41, chapter 22, Utah Code Annotated (1953), as amended, and
designating Riverdale City roads, streets or highways open for off highway
vehicles and establishing rules and regulations thereto. Off highway vehicles,
as hereinafter defined, and subject to the restrictions and requirements of
this chapter, may be operated within the limits of the boundaries of the city
of Riverdale, as follows. (Ord. 788, 9-20-2011)
6-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ALL-TERRAIN TYPE I VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle fifty two inches (52") or less in
width having an unladen dry weight of eight hundred (800) pounds or less,
traveling on three (3) or more low pressure tires, having a seat designed to be
straddled by the operator or designed for or capable of travel over unimproved
roads.
ALL-TERRAIN TYPE II VEHICLE: Any other motor vehicle not defined herein as an
"all-terrain type I vehicle" designed for or capable of travel over unimproved
terrain. This term does not include golf carts, any vehicle designed to carry a
disabled person, any vehicle not specifically designed for recreational use, or
farm tractors as defined under section 41-1a-102 of the Utah code.
OFF HIGHWAY VEHICLE (OHV): All all-terrain type I and type II vehicles, but
shall not include snowmobiles and motorcycles. (Ord. 788, 9-20-2011)
6-6-3: REGULATIONS:
Any person operating an off highway vehicle must:
   A.   Possess a valid operator's license and is subject to all the provisions
of title 41, chapter 6 of the Utah Code Annotated (1953), as amended.
   B.   Except when making a left hand turn, operate the street legal all-
terrain vehicle on the extreme right hand side of the roadway.
   C.   Not exceed the lesser of:
      1.   The posted speed limit; or
      2.   Any speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the existing
conditions.
   D.   Unless exempted under section 41-22-9 of the Utah code, not operate and
may not give another person permission to operate, any off highway vehicle on
any public land, trail, street, or highway within the city of Riverdale unless
the off highway vehicle has been registered in accordance with the requirements
of title 41, chapter 22 of the Utah code.
   E.   Be equipped with all of the items listed in Utah code 41-6a-1509(3).
   F.   For a person under the age of eighteen (18), may not operate or ride on
an all-terrain type I vehicle on any public land, trail, street, or highway
within the city of Riverdale, unless the person is wearing properly fitted and
fastened, United States department of transportation safety rated protective
headgear designed for motorized vehicle use.
      1.   The owner of an off highway vehicle or any other person may not give
permission to a person who is under the age of eighteen (18) years to operate
or ride on an off highway vehicle in violation of this subsection F. (Ord. 788,
9-20-2011)
6-6-4: RESTRICTIONS ON PRIVATELY OWNED LAND:
   A.   No person shall operate or accompany a person operating an off highway
vehicle upon privately owned land of any other person, firm or corporation
without permission from the owner or person in charge.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person operating or accompanying a person
operating an off highway vehicle to refuse to immediately leave private land
upon request of the owner or person in charge of such land.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to tear down, mutilate, or destroy
any sign, signboards, or other notice which regulates trespassing for purposes
of operating an off highway vehicle on privately owned land, or to tear down,
deface, or destroy any fence or other enclosure or any gate or bars belonging
to any such fence or enclosure. (Ord. 788, 9-20-2011)
6-6-5: PROHIBITED USES:
No person may operate an off highway vehicle in connection with acts of
vandalism, harassment of wildlife or domestic animals, burglaries or other
crimes, or damage to the environment which includes excessive pollution of air,
water, or land, abuse of the land, trail, park, watershed, impairment of or
damage to plant or animal life, or excessive mechanical noise. (Ord. 788, 9-20-
2011)
6-6-6: DESIGNATION OF ROUTES:
   A.   Within the city of Riverdale, any city street, highway or road, under
the jurisdiction of Riverdale City, and dedicated for the travel of full sized
motor vehicles, shall be approved as OHV routes as allowed by Utah code 41-22-
10.5, unless such road is an interstate freeway or a limited access highway as
defined in Utah code section 41-6a-102.
   B.   OHVs shall not be operated on shoulders of the roads, sidewalks or in
ditches. (Ord. 788, 9-20-2011)
6-6-7: EXCEPTIONS:
None of the provisions of this chapter shall apply to any person when an
emergency exists or when the operation is directed by a peace officer or public
authority. (Ord. 788, 9-20-2011)
6-6-8: PENALTY:
Penalties for a violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a class C
misdemeanor and subject to a penalty in accordance with section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 788, 9-20-2011)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
OBSTRUCTIONS
SECTION:
7-1-1: General Regulations
7-1-2: Penalty
7-1-1: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Weeds, Litter, Snow And Ice: All owners or occupants, or the agent of
any owner or occupant, of real property located within the city shall remove
all weeds, noxious vegetation, and any other debris or obstructions from such
property, to the curb line of the street. If standard concrete curb and gutter
does not exist, the "curb line" shall mean the edge of the driving surface of
the street. All owners, occupants or agents of said property are also
responsible to keep all sidewalks; meaning any hard surface including asphalt,
concrete or pavers; adjacent to such property free from litter, snow, ice and
obstructions.
   B.   Obstructions:
      1.   All persons are hereby forbidden to obstruct the sidewalks,
crosswalks or streets of this city, or to permit any gate or other obstruction
to swing across any sidewalk of the city to the annoyance of another; provided,
however, that special permission may be granted by the city council to place
obstructions on sidewalks or streets when necessary for improving the same or
to provide protection when buildings are in the course of construction.
      2.   A person may not drive or place any vehicle, animal or other thing
upon or along any sidewalk except in crossing the sidewalk to or from abutting
property or permit the vehicle, animal or other thing to remain on or across
any sidewalk in a way that impedes or obstructs the ordinary use of the
sidewalk. When the object does not impede the ordinary use of a sidewalk,
vehicles, building materials or other similar things may be placed temporarily
on highways in a manner that will not impede, endanger or obstruct ordinary
traffic. A police officer may prohibit or may require the removal of vehicles,
building material or other obstructions on a highway in his or her
jurisdiction. (Ord. 748, 11-17-2009)
7-1-2: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a class B misdemeanor and upon conviction, such person shall be
punished as is provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 748, 11-17-2009)
CHAPTER 2
OFFICIAL STREET MAP
SECTION:
7-2-1: Authority
7-2-2: Adoption; Amendments
7-2-3: Appeal To Board Of Adjustment
7-2-1: AUTHORITY:
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority of Utah Code Annotated
section 10-9a-407, as amended, and other applicable state laws and is for the
purpose of preserving the integrity of any official map and the official
streets indicated thereon as may be adopted by the city council and recorded
with the county recorder. (Ord. 650, 11-1-2005)
7-2-2: ADOPTION; AMENDMENTS:
   A.   The city council may from time to time adopt, pursuant to law, an
official map of the whole or any part or parts of the city theretofore existing
and established by laws as public streets. Such official map may also show the
location of the lines of streets on plats of subdivisions which shall have been
approved by the planning commission. The city council may make, from time to
time, other additions to or modifications of the official map by placing
thereon the lines of proposed new streets or street extensions, widening,
narrowings or vacations which have been accurately surveyed and definitively
located; provided, however, that before taking any such action, the planning
commission shall hold a public hearing thereon; and provided, further, that
such proposed addition to or modification of the official map shall then be
submitted to the city council for a public meeting and its final approval, and
in the event of such approval, such addition or modification shall require the
favorable vote of not less than a majority of the entire membership of the city
council. The placing of any street or street lines upon the official map shall
not in and of itself constitute or be deemed to constitute the opening or
establishment of any street or the taking or acceptance of any land for street
purposes. Upon adoption of the ordinance creating the official map or making
any amendments therein, the city council shall direct that said ordinance be
recorded in the office of the county recorder.
   B.   The Riverdale City street map, dated November 18, 1987, is the official
map of the city. (Ord. 650, 11-1-2005)
7-2-3: APPEAL TO BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT:
   A.   Authority: Any owner of land within or bordering a street for which the
official map has been adopted and for which a building permit has been refused
by the building inspector may appeal to the board of adjustment.
   B.   Permit Issuance; Findings Required: The board of adjustment shall have
the power to authorize the grant of a permit for a building or structure or
part thereof within or adjoining any mapped street location upon finding:
      1.   That the property of the appellant of which such mapped street
location forms a part will not yield a reasonable return to the owner unless
such permit be granted; or
      2.   That, in balancing the interest of the city in preserving the
integrity of the official map and the interest of the owner in the use and
benefits of the property, the grant of such permit is required by a
consideration of justice and equity.
   C.   Public Meeting: Before taking any action, the board of adjustment shall
hold a public meeting thereon.
   D.   Conditions May Be Imposed: In the event that the board of adjustment
decides to authorize a building permit, it shall have the power to specify the
exact location, yard and ground area, height, and other details, and conditions
of extent and character as it may determine, and also the duration of the
building, structure or part thereof to be permitted. (Ord. 650, 11-1-2005)
CHAPTER 3
MUNICIPAL IMPROVEMENT TAXES
SECTION:
7-3-1: Municipal Improvement District Act Adopted
7-3-1: MUNICIPAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT ACT ADOPTED:
Utah Code Annotated section 17A-3-301 et seq., is hereby adopted and made a
part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein as the city's procedure
for the levy of special taxes to make improvements. (1985 Code § 17-2-1)
CHAPTER 4
EXCAVATIONS
ARTICLE A.  STREET EXCAVATIONS
SECTION:
7-4A-1: Definitions
7-4A-2: Permit Required; Basis For Issuance
7-4A-3: Application For Permit
7-4A-4: Fee For Permit
7-4A-5: Deposit Required
7-4A-6: Permit Provisions
7-4A-7: Other Highway Permits
7-4A-8: Compliance With Specifications; Site Permittee Identification
7-4A-9: Relocation Of Structures In Public Way
7-4A-10: Impact On Existing Improvements
7-4A-11: Restoration Of Public Property
7-4A-12: Emergency Work
7-4A-13: Tampering With Traffic Barricades
7-4A-14: Failure To Comply
7-4A-15: Appeal Of Suspension, Revocation Or Stop Order
7-4A-16: Hold Harmless Agreement; Nonliability Of City
7-4A-17: Conflicting Provisions
7-4A-18: Penalty
7-4A-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
APPLICANT: Any person who makes application for a permit.
BUSINESS: Any place in the city in which there is conducted or carried on
principally or exclusively any pursuit or occupation for the purpose of gaining
a livelihood.
CITY: The corporation of Riverdale City, a municipal corporation of the state
of Utah.
EMERGENCY: Any unforeseen circumstances or occurrence, the existence of which
constitutes an immediate danger to persons or property, or which causes
interruption of utility or public services.
ENGINEERING REGULATIONS, REGULATIONS, SPECIFICATIONS AND/OR DESIGN STANDARDS:
The latest version of the engineering regulations, specifications, design
standards or criteria published or adopted by the public works director.
EXCAVATION: Digging in, cutting into the surface of, or breaking the surface of
any street, road, shoulder or highway in the city, with the exception of state
highways.
FAILURE: A work site restoration which fails to meet the public works
director's specifications, or which results in a deteriorated or substandard
condition within the duration of the warranty period. Failure may be settlement
of surfaces, deterioration of materials or other surface irregularities.
Measurement of failure shall be further defined in the engineering regulations.
INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: A person providing to another, for the purpose of
providing telecommunication services to customers, all or part of the necessary
system which uses the right of way.
OPERATOR: Any person who provides service over a telecommunications system and
directly or through one or more affiliates owns a controlling interest in such
system, or who otherwise controls or is responsible for the operation of such a
system.
PERMITTEE: Any person which has been issued a permit and thereby has agreed to
fulfill the requirements of this article.
PERSON: Means and includes any natural person, partnership, firm, association,
provider, corporation, company, organization or entity of any kind.
PIPE DRIVEWAY: A driveway approach which uses a pipe or other means to bridge
the gutter.
PRIVATE DRAIN LINE: A pipe installed solely for the transmission of water
collected or generated on private property such as drainage, spring or storm
water, or condensate into the public drainage system.
PROPERTY OWNER: Person or persons who have legal title to property and/or
equitable interest in the property, or the ranking official or agent of a
company having legal title to property and/or equitable interest in the
property.
PROVIDER: An operator, infrastructure provider, reseller, system lessee or
public utility company.
PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY: Any company subject to the jurisdiction of the Utah
state public service commission, or any mutual corporation providing gas,
electricity, water, telephone or other utility product or services for use by
the general public.
PUBLIC WAY: Means and includes all public rights of way and easements, public
footpaths, walkways and sidewalks, public streets, public roads, public
highways, public alleys and public drainageways. It does not, however, include
utility easements not within public ways of the city.
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR: The public works director or his/her authorized
representative.
RESELLER: Any person that provides service over a system for which a separate
charge is made, where that person does not own or lease the underlying system
used for the transmission and does not install any system in the rights of way.
RESIDENT: The person or persons currently making their home at a particular
dwelling.
STORM DRAIN: A dedicated pipe, conduit, waterway or ditch installed in a right
of way or easement for the transmission of storm and drainage water. This term
does not include private drain lines.
SYSTEM LESSEE: Any person that leases a system or a specific portion of a
system to provide services.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM OR SYSTEM: All conduits, manholes, poles, antennas,
transceivers, amplifiers and all other electronic devices, equipment, wire and
appurtenances owned, leased or used by a provider located in the construction,
ownership, operation, use or maintenance of a telecommunications system.
WORK SITE RESTORATION: Means and includes the restoring of the original ground
or paved hard surface area to comply with engineering regulations, and
includes, but is not limited to, repair, cleanup, backfilling, compaction and
stabilization, paving and other work necessary to place the site in acceptable
condition following the conclusion of the work, or the expiration or revocation
of the permit. (Ord. 555, 1-20-1999; amd. 2001 Code; Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
7-4A-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; BASIS FOR ISSUANCE:
Any person desiring to perform work of any kind in a public way within the
city, shall make application for a permit. The decision by the city to issue a
permit shall include, among other factors determined by the city, the
following:
   A.   The capacity of the public way to accommodate the facilities or
structures proposed to be installed in the public way;
   B.   The capacity of the public way to accommodate multiple wires in
addition to cables, conduits, pipes or other facilities or structures of other
users of the public way, such as electrical power, telephone, gas, sewer and
water;
   C.   The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities,
improvements or landscaping previously existing in the public way;
   D.   The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of
construction from numerous excavations of the public way. (Ord. 555, 1-20-1999)
7-4A-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Application for a permit shall be filed with the public works director on a
form or forms to be furnished by the city forty eight (48) hours prior to the
excavation. Property owners and/or tenants for whom work is being done shall be
responsible for obtaining the permits; provided, however, contractors may
obtain the permit in the contractor's name. (Ord. 555, 1-20-1999; amd. 2001
Code; Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
   A.   Eligible Persons: No person shall be eligible to apply for or receive
permits to do work within the public ways of the city, save and except the
following:
      1.   Contractors licensed by the state as general contractors;
      2.   Providers; (Ord. 555, 1-20-1999; amd. 2001 Code)
      3.   Property owners installing, replacing or maintaining less than five
hundred (500) square feet or one hundred (100) linear feet of sidewalk, curb
and gutter, or driveway approach, or other work approved by the public works
director, upon a portion of the public way adjacent to their residence; or
(Ord. 555, 1-20-1999; amd. 2001 Code; Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
      4.   Persons offering a service which requires occupation of the public
way, such as scaffold or staging, staging of a crane, installation or
maintenance of electric signs, glass, awnings and painting or cleaning of
buildings or signboards or other structures. (Ord. 555, 1-20-1999; amd. 2001
Code)
   B.   Denial Based On Past Performance: The public works director may deny
the issuance of permits to contractors, utility companies or other permit
applicants who have shown by past performance that in the opinion of the public
works director they will not consistently conform to the engineering
regulations, specifications, design standards or the requirements of this
article.
   C.   Plans May Be Required: When necessary, in the judgment of the public
works director, to fully determine the relationship of the work proposed to
existing or proposed facilities within the public ways, or to determine whether
the work proposed complies with the engineering regulations, construction
specifications and design standards, the public works director may require the
filing of engineering plans, specifications and sketches showing the proposed
work in sufficient detail to permit determination of such relationship or
compliance, or both, and the application shall be deemed suspended until such
plans and sketches are filed and approved.
   D.   Approval Required Prior To Commencement: It shall be unlawful for any
person to commence work upon any public way until the public works director has
approved the application and until a permit has been issued for such work,
except as specifically approved to the contrary in this article.
   E.   Appeal: The disapproval or denial of an application by the public works
director may be appealed by the applicant by the filing of a written notice of
appeal within ten (10) days of the action of the public works director. The
chief administrative officer shall hear such appeal, if written request
therefor be timely filed as soon as practicable, and render his/her decision
within two (2) weeks following notice of such appeal.
   F.   Limited Authority Of Public Works Director: In approving or
disapproving work within any public way, or permits therefor, in the inspection
of such work; in reviewing plans, sketches or specifications; and generally in
the exercise of the authority conferred upon him/her by this article, the
public works director shall act in such manner as to preserve and protect the
public way and the use thereof, but shall have no authority to govern the
actions or inaction of permittees and applicants or other persons which have no
relationship to the use, preservation or protection of the public way.
   G.   Exceptions To Permit Requirements: A permit is not required from the
public works director for hand digging excavations for installation or repair
of sprinkler systems and landscaping within the nonpaved areas of the public
way. However, these excavations are done at the risk of the excavators and
conformance to all city specifications outlined in this article is required.
(Ord. 555, 1-20-1999; amd. 2001 Code; Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
7-4A-4: FEE FOR PERMIT:
   A.   Consolidated Fee Schedule: The city shall charge and the permittee
shall pay upon issuance of the permit, fees for costs associated with the work
performed under the permit as outlined in the consolidated fee schedule set
forth in subsection 1-12-6C of this code. Such costs include costs for
reviewing the project and issuing the permit, inspections of the project,
deterioration of the public way or diminution of the useful life of the public
way, and other costs to the city associated with the work to be done under the
permit. All costs shall be assessed in a nondiscriminatory manner. (Ord. 555,
1-20-1999; amd. 2001 Code)
   B.   Waiver: The public works director may waive permit fees or penalties or
portion thereof provided for in this article, when he/she determines that such
permit fee or penalty: (Ord. 555, 1-20-1999; amd. 2001 Code; Ord. 854, 5-6-
2014)
      1.   Pertains to construction or rehabilitation of housing for persons
whose income is below the median income level for the city; or
      2.   Pertains to an encroachment on the public way involving a
beautification project which furthers specific goals and objectives set forth
in the city's strategic plan, master plans or other official documents,
including decorative street lighting, building facade lighting, flower and
planter boxes, and landscaping. (Ord. 555, 1-20-1999; amd. 2001 Code)
   C.   Additional Charges Authorized: Additional charges to cover the
reasonable cost and expenses of any required engineering review, inspection and
work site restoration associated with each undertaking may be charged by the
city to each permittee, in addition to the permit fee. Additional fees shall be
levied at the discretion of the public works director. (Ord. 555, 1-20-1999;
amd. 2001 Code; Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
7-4A-5: DEPOSIT REQUIRED:
Before a permit is issued, the applicant shall furnish to the city a deposit in
the amount set forth in the consolidated fee schedule set forth in title 1,
chapter 12 of this code. If faithful performance of the work authorized by a
permit granted pursuant to this article is maintained, the deposit shall be
returned to the permittee. The permittee shall guarantee the materials and
workmanship for a period of one year from completion of such work, with
reasonable wear excepted. (Ord. 555, 1-20-1999; amd. 2001 Code)
7-4A-6: PERMIT PROVISIONS:
   A.   Duration; Extensions:
      1.   Each permit application shall state the starting date and estimated
completion date. Work shall be completed within five (5) days from the starting
date or as determined by the public works director. Such determination shall be
based upon factors reasonably related to the work to be performed under the
permit. Such factors may include, in addition to other factors related to the
work to be performed, the following: (Ord. 555, 1-20-1999; amd. 2001 Code; Ord.
854, 5-6-2014)
         a.   The scope of work to be performed under the permit;
         b.   Maintaining the safe and effective flow of pedestrian and
vehicular traffic on the public way affected by the work;
         c.   Protecting the existing improvements to the public way impacted
by the work;
         d.   The season of the year during which the work is to be performed
as well as the current weather and its impact on public safety and the use of
the public way by the public;
         e.   Use of the public way for extraordinary events anticipated by the
city. (Ord. 555, 1-20-1999; amd. 2001 Code)
      2.   The public works director shall be notified by the permittee of
commencement of the work within twenty four (24) hours prior to commencing
work. The permit shall be valid for the time period specified in the permit.
      3.   If the work is not completed during such period, prior to the
expiration of the permit, the permittee may apply to the public works director
for an additional permit or an extension, which may be granted by the public
works director for good cause shown.
      4.   The length of the extension requested by the permittee shall be
subject to the approval of the public works director. (Ord. 555, 1-20-1999;
amd. 2001 Code; Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
   B.   Transfer Or Assignment Prohibited: Permits shall not be transferable or
assignable, and work shall not be performed under a permit in any place other
than that specified in the permit. Nothing herein contained shall prevent a
permittee from subcontracting the work to be performed under a permit;
provided, however, that the holder of the permit shall be and remain
responsible for the performance of the work under the permit, and for all
bonding, insurance and other requirements of this article and under said
permit. (Ord. 555, 1-20-1999; amd. 2001 Code)
7-4A-7: OTHER HIGHWAY PERMITS:
   A.   Applicability To City Permit Requirements: Holders of permits for work
on highways owned or under the jurisdiction of other government entities, but
located within the city limits, shall not be required to obtain permits from
the city under the provisions of this article, unless the work extends beyond
the back side of the curb, or beyond any other designated jurisdictional
boundary. Any city permit shall not be construed to permit or allow work on a
county road or on a state highway within the city without an applicable county
or state permit. (Ord. 555, 1-20-1999; amd. 2001 Code)
   B.   Regulation By City Authorized: The public works director, in his or her
discretion, shall have the right and authority to regulate work under permits
issued by other governmental entities with respect to hours and days of work,
and measures required to be taken by the permittee of said governmental entity
for the protection of traffic and safety of persons and property.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing in this article shall be construed to
impose any duty, implied or express, on the city or its employees, officers,
agents or assigns, relative to the protection of traffic and safety of persons
or property, arising out of the issuance of any permit issued by government
entities other than the city, or arising out of any work performed on any
public way owned or within the jurisdiction of the city. (Ord. 555, 1-20-1999;
amd. 2001 Code; Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
7-4A-8: COMPLIANCE WITH SPECIFICATIONS; SITE PERMITTEE IDENTIFICATION:
   A.   Compliance Required: The work performed in the public way shall conform
to the requirements of the engineering regulations, design standards,
construction specifications and traffic control regulations of the city, copies
of which shall be available from the public works director, kept on file in the
office of the city recorder and be open to public inspection during office
hours. (Ord. 555, 1-20-1999; amd. 2001 Code; Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
   B.   Identification At Site: Where a job site is left unattended before
completion of the work, signage with minimum two inch (2") high letters shall
be attached to a barricade or otherwise posted at the site indicating the
permittee's name, or company name, telephone number, and after hours telephone
number. (Ord. 555, 1-20-1999; amd. 2001 Code)
   C.   Manner Of Excavations, Generally; Barricades: All excavations shall be
conducted in a manner resulting in a minimum amount of interference or
interruption of street or pedestrian traffic. Inconvenience to residents and
businesses fronting on the public way shall be minimized. Suitable, adequate
and sufficient barricades and/or other structures will be available and used
where necessary to prevent accidents involving property or persons. Barricades
must be in place until all of the permittee's equipment is removed from the
site and the excavation has been backfilled and proper temporary gravel surface
is in place. The permittee shall have a professional patching crew repair all
road cuts. The permittee will be responsible for the patch for a period of one
year. If the patch fails within one year, the permittee will be notified to
replace the patch. If the permittee fails to replace the patch within ten (10)
days, the city will use the deposit to replace the patch. If the patch remains
functional for one year, the deposit will be returned. From sunset to sunrise,
all excavations and intrusions into the right of way shall be clearly and
properly barricaded in accordance with the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control
Devices". The permittee shall notify the police department and fire department
at least twenty four (24) hours in advance of any planned excavation requiring
street closure or traffic detour. (Ord. 815, 9-25-2012)
7-4A-9: RELOCATION OF STRUCTURES IN PUBLIC WAY:
   A.   Authority To Direct: The public works director may direct any person
owning or maintaining facilities or structures in the public way to alter,
modify or relocate such facilities or structures as the public works director
may require as set forth herein. Sewers, pipes, drains, tunnels, conduits, pipe
driveways, vaults, trash receptacles and overhead and underground gas,
electric, telephone, telecommunication and communication facilities shall
specifically be subject to such directives. The person owning or maintaining
the facilities or structures shall, at their own cost and expense and upon
reasonable written notice by the city, promptly protect, or promptly alter or
relocate such facilities or structures, or part thereof, as directed by the
city. In the event that such person refuses or neglects to conform to the
directive of the city, the city shall have the right to break through, remove,
alter or relocate such part of the facilities or structures without liability
to such person. Such person shall pay to the city all costs incurred by the
city in connection with such work performed by the city, including also design,
engineering, construction, materials, insurance, court costs and attorney fees.
   B.   Conditions Authorizing: Any directive by the public works director
shall be based upon one of the following:
      1.   The facility or structure was installed, erected or is being
maintained contrary to law or determined by the public works director to be
structurally unsound or defective; (Ord. 555, 1-20-1999; amd. 2001 Code; Ord.
854, 5-6-2014)
      2.   The facility or structure constitutes a "nuisance", as defined under
state statute;
      3.   The permit under which the facility or structure was installed has
expired or has been revoked;
      4.   The public way is about to be repaired or improved and such
facilities or structures may pose a hindrance to construction; or
      5.   The grades or lines of the public way are to be altered or changed.
(Ord. 555, 1-20-1999; amd. 2001 Code)
   C.   Police Power: Any directive of the public works director under this
section shall be under and consistent with the city's police power. Unless an
emergency condition exists, the public works director shall make a good faith
effort to consult with the person regarding any condition that may result in a
removal or relocation of facilities in the public way to consider possible
avoidance or minimization of removal or relocation requirements and provide the
directive as far enough in advance of the required removal or relocation to
allow the person a reasonable opportunity to plan and minimize cost associated
with the required removal or relocation. (Ord. 555, 1-20-1999; amd. 2001 Code;
Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
   D.   Exception: This obligation does not apply to facilities or structures
originally located on private property pursuant to a private easement, which
property was later incorporated into the public way, if that prior private
easement grants a superior vested right. (Ord. 555, 1-20-1999; amd. 2001 Code)
   E.   Penalty For Failure To Comply: Any person owning or maintaining
facilities or structures in the public way who fails to alter, modify or
relocate such facilities or structures upon notice to do so by the public works
director shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor and upon conviction, subject
to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. All costs of alteration, modification or relocation shall
be borne by the person owning or maintaining the facilities or structures
involved. (Ord. 555, 1-20-1999; amd. 2001 Code; Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
   F.   Emergency; Action By City: The city may, at any time, in case of fire,
disaster or other emergency, as determined by the city in its reasonable
discretion, cut or move any parts of the system and appurtenances on, over or
under the public way, in which event the city shall not be liable therefor to a
person. The city shall notify a person in writing prior to, if practicable, but
in any event as soon as possible and in no case later than the next business
day following any action taken under this subsection. (Ord. 555, 1-20-1999;
amd. 2001 Code)
7-4A-10: IMPACT ON EXISTING IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Temporary Sidewalk Or Curb Ramp: If any sidewalk or curb ramp is
blocked by excavation work, a temporary sidewalk or curb ramp shall be
constructed or provided. Said temporary improvement shall be safe for travel
and convenient for users, and consistent with city standards for such.
   B.   Paved Areas; Temporary Gravel Surface: Where excavations are made in
paved areas, the surface shall be replaced with a temporary gravel surface
until such time as the permanent repairs are completed.
   C.   Disturbance Of Property:
      1.   At any time a permittee disturbs the yard, residence or the real or
personal property of a private property owner or the city, such permittee shall
ensure that such property is returned, replaced and/or restored to a condition
that is comparable to the condition that existed prior to the commencement of
the work.
      2.   The costs associated with the disturbance and the return,
replacement and/or restoration shall be borne by the permittee. Further, a
permittee shall reimburse a property owner or the city for any actual damage
caused by the permittee, its subcontractor or its independent contractor, in
connection with the disturbance of such property. However, nothing in this
subsection shall require the permittee to pay a subscriber or private property
owner when that subscriber or private property owner requests that the
permittee remove, replace or relocate improvements associated with the service
provided by the permittee to the property owner and when the permittee
exercises due care in the performance of that service, or when the subscriber
or private property owner provided false information to the permittee on which
the permittee relied to its detriment.
   D.   Included Acts Specified: Examples of types of acts specifically
included in this section are the following:
      1.   Removal of sod, lawn, shrubbery, flowers, trees, driveways or fence
to install, trench, repair, replace, remove or locate, equipment, cable or
other appurtenances of the permittee;
      2.   Installation or removal of equipment or other appurtenances of the
permittee's system within a private property owner's property or residence
which requires drilling, excavating, plastering or the like on the part of the
permittee;
      3.   Temporarily relocating or moving a piece of personal property or a
fixture of a private property owner (such as a motor vehicle, fence, air
conditioning, heating unit, or the like) in order to perform some sort of
construction, maintenance or repair by the permittee; or
      4.   Permanently removing a permittee's equipment or other appurtenances
due to the revocation, termination or nonrenewal of the franchise (if
applicable). (Ord. 555, 1-20-1999)
   E.   Drainage Channels Free From Debris: Existing drainage channels, such as
gutters or ditches, shall be kept free of dirt or other debris so that natural
flow will not be interrupted. When it is necessary to block or otherwise
interrupt flow of the drainage channel, a method of rerouting the flow must be
submitted for approval by the public works director prior to the blockage of
the channel. (Ord. 555, 1-20-1999; amd. 2001 Code; Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
   F.   Extension Of Requirements: The requirements imposed upon the permittee
extend to any subcontractor or independent contractor that the permittee might
employ to perform the tasks pursuant to the permit.
   G.   Exception: The requirements of this section shall not apply to the
removal by a permittee of a permanent structure placed by a property owner in a
public way, unless such property owner has received prior written permission
from the city granting the property owner the right to install a permanent
structure on a public way, and such written permission has been recorded in the
office of the county recorder. (Ord. 555, 1-20-1999)
7-4A-11: RESTORATION OF PUBLIC PROPERTY:
The permittee shall, at its own expense, restore the surface of any public way
to its original condition and replace any removed or damaged pavement. All
restoration shall conform to the engineering regulations, design standards and
specifications promulgated by the city and shall be accomplished within the
time limits set forth in the permit, unless additional time is granted in
writing by the public works director. (Ord. 555, 1-20-1999; amd. 2001 Code;
Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
7-4A-12: EMERGENCY WORK:
   A.   Authorized: Any person maintaining pipes, lines or facilities in the
public way may proceed with work upon existing facilities without a permit when
emergency circumstances demand the work to be done immediately; provided a
permit could not reasonably and practicably have been obtained beforehand.
(Ord. 555, 1-20-1999)
   B.   During Business Hours; Notification: In the event that emergency work
is commenced on or within any public way of the city during regular business
hours, the public works director shall be notified within one-half (1/2) hour
from the time the work is commenced. The person commencing and conducting such
work shall take all necessary safety precautions for the protection of the
public and the direction and control of traffic, and shall ensure that work is
accomplished according to engineering regulations, the "Manual On Uniform
Traffic Control Devices" and other applicable laws, regulations or generally
recognized practices in the industry.
   C.   Other Than Business Hours; Notification: Any person commencing
emergency work in the public way during other than business hours without a
permit shall immediately thereafter apply for a permit or give notice during
the first hour of the first regular business day on which city offices are open
for business after such work is commenced. The person commencing and conducting
such work shall take all necessary safety precautions for the protection of the
public and the direction and control of traffic, and shall ensure that work is
accomplished according to engineering regulations, the "Manual On Uniform
Traffic Control Devices" and other applicable laws, regulations or generally
recognized practices in the industry. A permit for such emergency work may be
issued which shall be retroactive to the date when the work was begun, at the
discretion of the public works director. (Ord. 555, 1-20-1999; amd. 2001 Code;
Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
7-4A-13: TAMPERING WITH TRAFFIC BARRICADES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously or wantonly or without
authorization and legal cause, extinguish, remove or diminish any light
illuminating any barricade or excavation, or to tear down, remove or in any
manner alter any rail, fence or barricade protecting any excavation or other
construction site. (Ord. 555, 1-20-1999)
7-4A-14: FAILURE TO COMPLY:
   A.   Default In Performance:
      1.   Any permit may be revoked or suspended and a stop order issued by
the public works director, after notice to the permittee for: (Ord. 555, 1-20-
1999; amd. 2001 Code; Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
         a.   Violation of any condition of the permit, the security or of any
provision of this article;
         b.   Violation of any provision of any other ordinance of the city or
law relating to the work; or
         c.   Existence of any condition or the doing of any act which does
constitute, may constitute, or cause a condition endangering life or property.
(Ord. 555, 1-20-1999; amd. 2001 Code)
      2.   A suspension or revocation by the public works director, and a stop
order, shall take effect immediately upon entry thereof by the public works
director and notice to the person performing the work in the public way. Notice
to the person performing the work shall be accomplished when the public works
director has posted a stop work order at the location of the work and written
notice has been mailed, return receipt requested, to the address indicated by
the permittee on the permit.
   B.   Design Standards: For failure to conform to the design standards and
regulations, the public works director may: (Ord. 555, 1-20-1999; amd. 2001
Code; Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
      1.   Suspend or revoke the permit;
      2.   Issue a stop order;
      3.   Order removal and replacement of faulty work;
      4.   Require an extended warranty period; and/or
      5.   Negotiate a cash settlement to be applied toward future maintenance
costs. (Ord. 555, 1-20-1999; amd. 2001 Code)
7-4A-15: APPEAL OF SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR STOP ORDER:
Any suspension, revocation or stop order by the public works director may be
appealed by the permittee by filing a written notice of appeal within ten (10)
days of the action of the public works director with the city recorder. The
city administrator shall hear such appeal, if written request therefor be
timely filed, as soon as practicable, and render his/her decision within a
reasonable time following filing of notice of appeal. (Ord. 555, 1-20-1999;
amd. 2001 Code; Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
7-4A-16: HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT; NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
   A.   The permittee agrees to save the city, its officers, employees and
agents harmless from any and all costs, damages and liabilities which may
accrue or be claimed to accrue by reason of any work performed under the
permit. The issuance and acceptance of any permit under this article shall
constitute such an agreement by the permittee to this section.
   B.   This article shall neither be construed as imposing upon the city, its
officers, employees and agents, any liability or responsibility for damages to
any person injured by or by reason of the performance of any work within the
public way, or under a permit issued pursuant to this article; nor shall the
city, its officers, officials, employees, agents, volunteers or assigns thereof
be deemed to have assumed any such liability or responsibility by reason of
inspection authorized hereunder, the issuance of any permit, or the approval of
any work. (Ord. 555, 1-20-1999)
7-4A-17: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
Should there be a conflict between the provisions of this article and the
provisions of any other ordinance, agreement, franchise or other document
governing the excavation of a public way, the more restrictive provisions of
the aforesaid documents shall apply. (Ord. 555, 1-20-1999)
7-4A-18: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise specified in this article, a violation of any provision of
this article, or failure to comply with an order of suspension, revocation or
stop work, shall be a class B misdemeanor and upon conviction, subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day the violation exists shall be a separate offense.
No criminal conviction shall excuse the person from otherwise complying with
the provisions of this article. (Ord. 555, 1-20-1999; amd. 2001 Code)
ARTICLE B.  MINING OPERATIONS AND GRAVEL PITS
SECTION:
7-4B-1: Purpose
7-4B-2: Excavation Defined
7-4B-3: Enforcement
7-4B-4: Operational Requirements
7-4B-5: Rehabilitation
7-4B-6: Exceptions
7-4B-7: Penalty
7-4B-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose and object of this article to establish reasonable and
uniform limitations, safeguards and controls on excavation within the city as
herein described. These provisions are deemed necessary in the public interest
to affect practices which will provide protection of the tax base, provide for
the economical use of vital materials necessary for our economy and give due
consideration to the present and future use of land in the interest of
promoting the public health, comfort, safety and general welfare. (1985 Code §
8-1-1)
7-4B-2: EXCAVATION DEFINED:
For the purpose of this article, "excavation" shall mean the removal of clay,
soil, sand or gravel from the earth by digging, stripping, leveling or any
other process, together with all other types of mining operations where
material is removed from the earth, except that dredging operations in the bed
of existing rivers and streams shall not be covered by this article. (1985 Code
§
8-1-2)
7-4B-3: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Public Works Director To Enforce: The public works director, appointed
by the city, is hereby designated and authorized as the officer charged with
the enforcement of this article. (1985 Code §
8-3-1; amd. 2001 Code; Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
   B.   Powers And Duties: It shall be the duty of the public works director to
inspect or cause to be inspected at regular intervals of not more than three
(3) months, or as often as necessary, all excavations. Where it is determined
by the public works director that excavation is proceeding not in compliance
with the provisions of this article, he shall enforce the provisions of this
article and in performance of this duty, may enter actions in the courts where
necessary, and his failure to do so shall not legalize any violation of such
provisions. (1985 Code §
8-3-2; amd. 2001 Code; Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
7-4B-4: OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   General: Persons, firms or corporations engaged in the operation of
gravel pits, or making excavations for the removal of soil and gravel, shall,
at all times, keep and maintain the same so that they shall not be a public
nuisance, and the pits and excavations shall be protected so that children
cannot enter upon the premises and so be exposed to conditions that could be
hazardous to the lives of such children. The owners and operators of such pit
shall, at all times during its operation, keep the same in a sanitary condition
and free from hazards to life and health. (1985 Code §
8-4-1)
   B.   Restrictions Specified: All excavation operations conducted or carried
on are subject to the following limitations, restrictions and controls: (1985
Code §
8-4-2; amd. 2001 Code)
      1.   Equipment, Machinery: All equipment and machinery used on the site
of an excavation operation shall be constructed, maintained and operated in
such a manner as to minimize dust, noise, vibration, smoke and odor. Access and
haulage roads on the site shall be maintained in a dust free condition by
asphalt or dustproof oil surfacing or other approved treatment as determined by
the public works director.
      2.   Barriers: Fencing or other suitable barriers shall be created and
maintained on the excavation site or on portions of the site where such fencing
is practicable and necessary because of dangerous conditions created by the
excavation as determined by the public works director. (1985 Code §
8-4-2; amd. 2001 Code; Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
      3.   Landscaping: The planting of trees and shrubs and other appropriate
landscaping are encouraged where natural conditions make such feasible and
practicable in order to screen excavation operations from normal view, to
enhance the general appearance and to minimize the damaging effect of such
operations to the beauty and character of the surrounding countryside.
      4.   Manufacturing Processes: The manufacture of concrete building blocks
or other similar blocks, the production or manufacture of lime products, the
production of ready mixed concrete, the production of asphalt mixes and any
similar production or manufacturing process which might be related to the
excavation operation shall not be permitted except as otherwise provided in
title 10, "Zoning And Subdivision Regulations", of this code.
      5.   Wastewater Discharges: The washing of sand and gravel shall be done
so as to prevent the discharge of wastewater onto any public or private roads
or any private property without the consent of the owner, or into any running
stream without permission of the proper authority. (1985 Code §
8-4-2; amd. 2001 Code)
      6.   Excavation And Backfilling:
         a.   Where backfilling is required in accordance with section
7-4B-5 of this article, the excavation shall be graded or backfilled with
nonnoxious, nonflammable, noncombustible solids. The materials used or the
method of fill shall not be such as to create a health hazard nor which would
be objectionable as determined by the public works director because of odor or
unsightliness. This backfill must be of such material as will encourage natural
vegetation to reappear. (1985 Code §
8-4-2; amd. 2001 Code; Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
         b.   The graded or backfilled area shall not be contoured so that it
will collect and permit stagnant water to remain thereon.
         c.   The peaks and depressions of the excavation area shall be reduced
to a surface which will result in level or gently sloping topography in
substantial conformity to the land area immediately surrounding and which will
minimize erosion due to rainfall.
         d.   In any rehabilitation procedure which takes place in sand and
gravel excavations or on other sites where the material is of loose or friable
nature, no slope shall be left which is steeper than a ratio of one and one-
half horizontal to one vertical (11/2:1). In no case shall any slope exceed the
normal angle of repose of the material involved. (1985 Code §
8-4-2; amd. 2001 Code)
      7.   Removal Of Temporary Structures: Within a reasonable time not to
exceed one year after the cessation of the operation, all temporary structures
(except fences), equipment, rock piles, rubble heaps or other debris shall be
removed or backfilled into the excavation so as to leave the premises in a neat
and orderly condition as determined by the public works director. (1985 Code §
8-4-2; amd. 2001 Code; Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
7-4B-5: REHABILITATION:
   A.   Required: When soil or gravel is removed from any gravel pit or
excavation, and the use of the pit is completed, the owner and operator thereof
shall level the same and fill in such pit so that there will be no stagnant
water remaining therein which might breed mosquitoes or other pests, and to
place the same in as neat and sanitary condition as possible, and so that the
same will not be detrimental or dangerous to the health of the inhabitants of
the city. (1985 Code § 8-5-1)
   B.   Rehabilitation Requirements: In order to ensure that the area of
excavation operation shall be rehabilitated to a condition of practical
usefulness and reasonable physical attractiveness, the owner or operator shall,
prior to the commencement of excavation, submit to the planning commission a
plan for such excavation and rehabilitation in the form of the following:
      1.   A full and adequate description of all phases of the contemplated
operation and the specific mention of type of machinery and equipment which
will be or might be necessary to carry on the operation.
      2.   A legal description of the proposed site with a map showing its
location with indications of private access roads, existing or proposed, and of
public highways adjacent to the site which will be affected by the operation.
      3.   A topographic map of the area at a maximum contour interval of five
feet (5') extending beyond the site to the nearest public street or highway or
to a minimum distance of three hundred feet (300') on all sides.
      4.   A physical rehabilitation plan showing the proposed contours of the
excavation before and after rehabilitation and other special features of
rehabilitation, and the method by which such rehabilitation is to be
accomplished. (1985 Code § 8-5-2)
      5.   A bond, written by a licensed surety company, a certified check or
other financial guarantee in an amount to be fixed by the city as recommended
by the city engineer sufficient to secure the performance of the rehabilitation
agreement. Such amount may be determined only after an adequate and thorough
investigation of such operation, and after issuance of special findings based
on a rehabilitation cost analysis which clearly justifies the amount of the
bond. Such agreement and financial guarantee shall be in a form approved by the
city attorney. In the event of the applicant's failure to fulfill this
agreement, such bond, check or other financial guarantee shall be deemed
forfeit for the purpose of performing the rehabilitation. (1985 Code § 8-5-2;
amd. 2001 Code)
      6.   Rehabilitation shall proceed in a progressive manner as the
excavation operation is being carried on, to be determined by the public works
director. The owner or operator shall submit a plan for progressive
rehabilitation to the planning commission as the excavation operation is being
carried on. The required bond in such case shall be sufficient to cover
progressive stages of the rehabilitation as provided in the approved plan for
periods of not less than two (2) years. (1985 Code § 8-5-2; amd. 2001 Code;
Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
   C.   Approval:
      1.   The planning commission shall consider the excavation and
rehabilitation plans and all data and information pertaining thereto and shall
have thirty (30) days in which to make a recommendation to the city council.
(1985 Code § 8-5-3; amd. 2001 Code)
      2.   The city council may approve or disapprove the proposal. If
approved, the city council shall instruct the public works director to issue an
excavation permit, which shall state any conditions or limitations to be
imposed. If disapproved, the city council shall indicate its disapproval in
writing to the applicant with reasons therefor. (1985 Code § 8-5-3; amd. 2001
Code; Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
7-4B-6: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Sod: The provisions of this article shall not apply to the removal of
sod. (1985 Code §
8-6-1)
   B.   Topsoil: The provisions of this article shall not apply to the removal
of topsoil, providing the operation be not closer than ten feet (10') to any
property line or to a depth in excess of eighteen inches (18") or so as to
adversely affect the drainage of the area. (1985 Code §
8-6-2)
   C.   Commercial Disposal: The provisions of this article shall not apply to
any operation where excavation is necessary for construction of a legitimate
use of the premises only; provided, however, where such operation involves the
commercial disposal of the material removed, such commercial disposal of
material removed shall be limited to a maximum period of six (6) months. (1985
Code §
8-6-3)
   D.   Unusual Conditions: In cases where unusual topographical or other
exceptional conditions exist, variations and exceptions from this article may
be made by the city council after recommendation by the planning commission.
(1985 Code §
8-6-4)
   E.   Street And Shoulder Excavation: The provisions of this article shall
not apply to street and shoulder excavations, as those terms are defined in
article A of this chapter. (1985 Code §
8-6-5)
7-4B-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
class B misdemeanor and upon conviction, such person shall be punished as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1985 Code §
8-3-3)
CHAPTER 5
TELECOMMUNICATIONS; USE OF RIGHTS OF WAY
SECTION:
7-5-1: Findings And Intent; Authority
7-5-2: Definitions
7-5-3: Administration; General Provisions
7-5-4: Applicability; Exceptions
7-5-5: Franchise Required
7-5-6: Application For Franchise
7-5-7: Compensation, Fees And Payments
7-5-8: Insurance, Record Requirements
7-5-9: Construction, Technical Requirements
7-5-10: Private Property; Obligation To Notify
7-5-11: Transfer Of Franchise And License
7-5-12: Enforcement; Rights Of City
7-5-13: Severability
7-5-1: FINDINGS AND INTENT; AUTHORITY:
   A.   Rights Of Way: The city finds that the rights of way within the city:
      1.   Are critical to the travel and transport of persons and property in
the business and social life of the city;
      2.   Are intended for public uses and must be managed and controlled
consistent with that intent;
      3.   Can be partially occupied by the facilities of utilities and other
public service entities delivering utility and public services rendered for
profit, to the enhancement of the health, welfare and general economic well-
being of the city and its citizens; and
      4.   Are a unique and physically limited resource requiring proper
management to maximize the efficiency and to minimize the costs to the
taxpayers of the foregoing uses and to minimize the inconvenience to and
negative effects upon the public from such facilities' construction, placement,
relocation and maintenance in the rights of way.
   B.   Compensation: The city finds that the city should receive fair and
reasonable compensation for use of the rights of way.
   C.   Local Concern: The city finds that while telecommunications systems are
in part an extension of interstate commerce, their operations also involve
rights of way, municipal franchising and vital business and community service,
which are of local concern.
   D.   Promotion Of Telecommunications Services: The city finds that it is in
the best interests of its taxpayers and citizens to promote the rapid
development of telecommunications services, on a nondiscrimination basis,
responsive to community and public interest, and to assure availability for
municipal, educational and community services.
   E.   Franchise Standards: The city finds that it is in the interests of the
public to franchise and to establish standards for franchising providers in a
manner that:
      1.   Fairly and reasonably compensates the city on a competitively
neutral and nondiscriminatory basis as provided herein;
      2.   Encourages competition by establishing terms and conditions under
which providers may use the rights of way to serve the public;
      3.   Fully protects the public interests and the city from any harm that
may flow from such commercial use of rights of way;
      4.   Protects the police powers and rights of way management authority of
the city, in a manner consistent with federal and state law;
      5.   Otherwise protects the public interests in the development and use
of the city infrastructure;
      6.   Protects the public's investment in improvements in the rights of
way; and
      7.   Ensures that no barriers to entry of telecommunications providers
are created and that such franchising is accomplished in a manner that does not
prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting telecommunication services, within
the meaning of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (P.L. No. 104-104).
   F.   Power To Manage Rights Of Way: The city adopts this telecommunications
chapter pursuant to its power to manage the rights of way, pursuant to common
law, the Utah Constitution and statutory authority, and receive fair and
reasonable compensation for the use of rights of way by providers as expressly
set forth by section 253 of the Act. (1985 Code § 11-9-1.1)
7-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivatives shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the
context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. Words used in the
present tense include the future tense, words in the single number include the
plural number, words in the plural number include the singular. The words
"shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Words not defined
shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.
APPLICATION: The process by which a provider submits a request and indicates a
desire to be granted a franchise to utilize the rights of way of all, or a
part, of the city. An application includes all written documentation, verbal
statements and representations, in whatever form or forum, made by a provider
to the city concerning: the construction of a telecommunications system over,
under, on or through the rights of way; the telecommunications services
proposed to be provided in the city by a provider; and any other matter
pertaining to a proposed system or service.
CITY: Riverdale City, Utah.
COMPLETION DATE: The date that a provider begins providing services to
customers in the city.
CONSTRUCTION COSTS: All costs of constructing a system, including make-ready
costs, other than engineering fees, attorney or accountant fees, or other
consulting fees.
CONTROL OR CONTROLLING INTEREST: Actual working control in whatever manner
exercised, including, without limitation, working control through ownership,
management, debt instruments or negative control, as the case may be, of the
system or of a provider. A rebuttable presumption of the existence of control
or a controlling interest shall arise from the beneficial ownership, directly
or indirectly, by any person or group of persons acting in concert, of more
than twenty five percent (25%) of any provider (which person or group of
persons is hereinafter referred to as "controlling person"). "Control" or
"controlling interest", as used herein, may be held simultaneously by more than
one person or group of persons.
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto.
FRANCHISE: The rights and obligations extended by the city to a provider to
own, lease, construct, maintain, use or operate a system in the rights of way
within the boundaries of the city. Any such authorization, in whatever form
granted, shall not mean or include:
   A.   Any other permit or authorization required for the privilege of
transacting and carrying on a business within the city required by the
ordinances and laws of the city;
   B.   Any other permit, agreement or authorization required in connection
with operations on rights of way or public property, including, without
limitation, permits and agreements for placing devices on or in poles, conduits
or other structures, whether owned by the city or a private entity, or for
excavating or performing other work in or along the rights of way.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT: A contract entered into in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter between the city and a franchisee that sets forth, subject to
this chapter, the terms and conditions under which a franchise will be
exercised.
GROSS REVENUE: Includes all revenues of a provider that may be included as
gross revenue within the meaning of Utah Code Annotated title 11, chapter 26,
as amended.
INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: A person providing to another, for the purpose of
providing telecommunication services to customers, all or part of the necessary
system which uses the rights of way.
OPEN VIDEO SERVICE: Any video programming services provided to any person
through the use of rights of way by a provider that is certified by the FCC to
operate an open video system pursuant to section 651 et seq., of the
Telecommunications Act (to be codified at 47 USC title VI, part V), regardless
of the system used.
OPEN VIDEO SYSTEM: The system of cables, wires, lines, towers, wave guides,
optic fiber, microwave, laser beams and any associated converters, equipment,
or facilities designed and constructed for the purpose of producing, receiving,
amplifying or distributing open video services to or from subscribers or
locations within the city.
OPERATOR: Any person who provides service over a telecommunications system and
directly or through one or more persons owns a controlling interest in such
system, or who otherwise controls or is responsible for the operation of such a
system.
ORDINANCE OR TELECOMMUNICATIONS ORDINANCE: This telecommunications chapter
concerning the granting of franchises in and by the city for the construction,
ownership, operation, use or maintenance of a telecommunications system.
PSC: The Public Service Commission or any successor thereto.
PERSON: Includes any individual, corporation, partnership, association, joint
stock company, trust or any other legal entity, but not the city.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES FACILITIES: Has the same meaning as provided in
section 704 of the Act (47 USC 332(c)(7)(c)), which includes what is commonly
known as cellular and PSC services that do not install any system or portion of
a system in the rights of way.
PROVIDER: An operator, infrastructure provider, reseller or system lessee.
RESELLER: Refers to any person that provides local exchange service over a
system for which a separate charge is made, where that person does not own or
lease the underlying system used for the transmission.
RIGHTS OF WAY: The surface of and the space above and below any public street,
sidewalk, alley or other public way of any type whatsoever, now or hereafter
existing as such within the city.
SIGNAL: Any transmission or reception of electronic, electrical, light or laser
or radio frequency energy or optical information, in either analog or digital
format.
SYSTEM LESSEE: Refers to any person that leases a system or a specific portion
of a system to provide services.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: The transmission, between or among points specified by the
user, of information of the user's choosing (e.g., data, video and voice),
without change in the form or content of the information sent and received.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE OR SERVICES: Any telecommunications services
provided by a provider within the city that the provider is authorized to
provide under federal, state and local law, and any equipment and/or facilities
required for and integrated with the services provided within the city, except
that these terms do not include "cable service", as defined in the Cable
Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended by the Cable Television Consumer
Protection and Competition Act of 1992 (47 USC 521 et seq.) and the
Telecommunications Act of 1996. Telecommunications service or services also
includes an open video service.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM OR SYSTEM: All conduits, manholes, poles, antennas,
transceivers, amplifiers and all other electronic devices, equipment, wire and
appurtenances owned, leased or used by a provider, located in the rights of way
and utilized in the provision of services, including fully digital or analog,
voice, data and video imaging and other enhanced telecommunications services.
Telecommunications system or systems also includes an open video system.
WIRE: Fiber optic telecommunications cable, wire, coaxial cable or other
transmission medium that may be used in lieu thereof for similar purposes.
(1985 Code § 11-9-2; amd. 2001 Code)
7-5-3: ADMINISTRATION; GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Conflicts: In the event of a conflict between any provision of this
chapter and a franchise entered pursuant to it, the provisions of this chapter
in effect at the time the franchise is entered into shall control. (1985 Code §
11-9-11.1)
   B.   New Developments: It shall be the policy of the city to liberally amend
this chapter, upon application of a provider, when necessary to enable the
provider to take advantage of any developments in the field of
telecommunications which will afford the provider an opportunity to more
effectively, efficiently or economically serve itself or the public. (1985 Code
§ 11-9-11.3)
   C.   Notices: All notices from a provider to the city required under this
chapter or pursuant to a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be
directed to the officer as designated by the mayor. A provider shall provide in
any application for a franchise the identity, address and phone number of the
person designated to receive notices from the city. A provider shall
immediately notify the city of any change in its name, address or telephone
number. (1985 Code § 11-9-11.4; amd. 2001 Code)
   D.   Exercise Of Police Power: To the full extent permitted by applicable
law either now or in the future, the city reserves the right to adopt or issue
such rules, regulations, orders or other directives that it finds necessary or
appropriate in the lawful exercise of its police powers. (1985 Code § 11-9-
11.5)
   E.   Construction:
      1.   Federal And State Statutes: This chapter shall be construed in a
manner consistent with all applicable federal and state statutes. (1985 Code §
11-9-12.1)
      2.   Applicability: This chapter shall apply to all franchises granted or
renewed after the effective date hereof. This chapter shall further apply, to
the extent permitted by applicable federal or state law, to all existing
franchises granted prior to the effective date hereof and to a provider
providing services, without a franchise, prior to the effective date hereof.
(1985 Code § 11-9-12.2)
      3.   Other Applicable Ordinances: A provider's rights are subject to the
police powers of the city to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to the
health, safety and welfare of the public. A provider shall comply with all
applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the city pursuant to its
police powers. In particular, all providers shall comply with the city zoning
and other land use requirements. (1985 Code § 11-9-12.3)
      4.   City Failure To Enforce: A provider shall not be relieved of its
obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or any
franchise granted pursuant to this chapter by reason of any failure of the city
to enforce prompt compliance. (1985 Code § 11-9-12.4)
      5.   Construed According To Utah Law: This chapter and any franchise
granted pursuant to this chapter shall be construed and enforced in accordance
with the substantive laws of the state. (1985 Code § 11-9-12.5)
7-5-4: APPLICABILITY; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Providers: This chapter shall provide the basic local scheme for
providers of telecommunications services and systems that require the use of
the rights of way, including providers of both the system and service, those
providers of the system only and those providers who do not build the system
but who only provide services. This chapter shall apply to all future providers
and to all providers in the city prior to the effective date hereof, whether
operating with or without a franchise as set forth in subsection 7-5-3E2 of
this chapter.
   B.   Excluded Activities:
      1.   Cable Television Operators: This chapter shall not apply to cable
television operators otherwise regulated by title 11 of this code (the cable
television ordinance).
      2.   Wireless Service Facilities: This chapter shall not apply to
personal wireless service facilities.
   C.   Excluded Providers; Provisions Applicable: Providers excused by other
law that prohibits the city from requiring a franchise shall not be required to
obtain a franchise, but all of the requirements imposed by this chapter through
the exercise of the city's police power and not preempted by other law shall be
applicable. (Ord. 843, 8-20-2013)
7-5-5: FRANCHISE REQUIRED:
   A.   Nonexclusive Franchise; Authority: The city is empowered and authorized
to issue nonexclusive franchises governing the installation, construction and
maintenance of systems in the city's rights of way, in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. The franchise is granted through a franchise
agreement entered into between the city and provider. (1985 Code § 11-9-3.1)
   B.   Provider Required To Obtain: Except to the extent preempted by federal
or state law, as ultimately interpreted by a court of competent jurisdiction,
including any appeals, every provider must obtain a franchise prior to
constructing a telecommunications system or providing telecommunications
services using the rights of way, and every provider must obtain a franchise
before constructing an open video system or providing open video services via
an open video system. Any open video system or service shall be subject to the
customer service and consumer protection provisions applicable to the cable TV
companies to the extent the city is not preempted or permitted as ultimately
interpreted by a court of competent jurisdiction, including any appeals. The
fact that particular telecommunications systems may be used for multiple
purposes does not obviate the need to obtain a franchise for other purposes. By
way of illustration and not limitation, a cable operator of a cable system must
obtain a cable franchise, and, should it intend to provide telecommunications
services over the same system, must also obtain a telecommunications franchise.
(1985 Code § 11-9-3.2)
   C.   Nature Of Grant: A franchise shall not convey title, equitable or
legal, in the rights of way. A franchise is only the right to occupy rights of
way on a nonexclusive basis for the limited purposes and for the limited period
stated in the franchise; the right may not be subdivided, assigned or
subleased. A franchise does not excuse a provider from obtaining appropriate
access or pole attachment agreements before collocating its system on the
property of others, including the city's property. This subsection shall not be
construed to prohibit a provider from leasing conduit to another provider, so
long as the lessee has obtained a franchise. (1985 Code § 11-9-3.3)
   D.   Current Providers; Time Limit To Request: Except to the extent exempted
by federal or state law, any provider acting without a franchise on the
effective date hereof shall request issuance of a franchise from the city
within ninety (90) days of the effective date hereof. If such request is made,
the provider may continue providing service during the course of negotiations.
If a timely request is not made, or if negotiations cease and a franchise is
not granted, the provider shall comply with the provisions of subsection 7-5-
12D of this chapter. (1985 Code § 11-9-3.4)
   E.   Nature Of Franchise: The franchise granted by the city under the
provisions of this chapter shall be a nonexclusive franchise providing the
right and consent to install, repair, maintain, remove and replace its system
on, over and under the rights of way in order to provide services. (1985 Code §
11-9-3.5)
   F.   Regulatory Approval Needed: Before offering or providing any services
pursuant to the franchise, a provider shall obtain any and all regulatory
approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses for the offering or provision of
such services from the appropriate federal, state and local authorities, if
required, and shall submit to the city, upon the written request of the city,
evidence of all such approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses. (1985 Code
§ 11-9-3.6)
   G.   Term: No franchise issued pursuant to this chapter shall have a term of
less than five (5) years or greater than fifteen (15) years. Each franchise
shall be granted in a nondiscriminatory manner. (1985 Code § 11-9-3.7)
7-5-6: APPLICATION FOR FRANCHISE:
   A.   Required; Form: To obtain a franchise to construct, own, maintain or
provide services through any system within the city, to obtain a renewal of a
franchise granted pursuant to this chapter or to obtain the city approval of a
transfer of a franchise, as provided in subsection 7-5-11A2 of this chapter,
granted pursuant to this chapter, an application must be filed with city on the
form attached to the ordinance codified herein as Exhibit A, which is hereby
incorporated by reference and on file in the city office. The application form
may be changed by the mayor so long as such changes request information that is
consistent with this chapter. Such application form, as amended, is
incorporated by reference. (1985 Code § 11-9-5.1)
   B.   Criteria: In making a determination as to an application filed pursuant
to this chapter, the city may, but shall not be limited to, request the
following from the provider:
      1.   A copy of the order from the PSC granting a certificate of
convenience and necessity.
      2.   Certification of the provider's financial ability to compensate the
city for provider's intrusion, maintenance and use of the rights of way during
the franchise term proposed by the provider.
      3.   Provider's agreement to comply with the requirements of section
7-5-9 of this chapter. (1985 Code § 11-9-5.2)
   C.   Determination By City: The city, in its discretion, shall determine the
award of any franchise on the basis of these and other considerations relevant
to the use of the rights of way, without competitive bidding. (1985 Code § 11-
9-5.3)
7-5-7: COMPENSATION, FEES AND PAYMENTS:
   A.   Compensation; Provider Obligations: As fair and reasonable compensation
for any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, a provider shall have the
following obligations:
      1.   Application Fee: In order to offset the cost to the city to review
an application for a franchise and in addition to all other fees, permits or
charges, a provider shall pay to the city, at the time of application, five
hundred dollars ($500.00) as a nonrefundable application fee.
      2.   Franchise Fee: The franchise fee, if any, shall be set forth in the
franchise agreement. The obligation to pay a franchise fee shall commence on
the completion date. The franchise fee is offset by any business license fee or
business license tax enacted by the city.
      3.   Excavation Permits: The provider shall also pay fees required for an
excavation permit as provided in article 4A of this title. (1985 Code § 11-9-
4.1)
   B.   Due Monthly: Unless otherwise agreed to in the franchise agreement, all
franchise fees shall be paid on a monthly basis within forty five (45) days of
the close of each calendar month. (1985 Code § 11-9-4.2)
   C.   Statement Of Calculation; Certification: Unless a franchise agreement
provides otherwise, each fee payment shall be accompanied by a statement
showing the manner in which the fee was calculated and shall be certified as to
its accuracy. (1985 Code § 11-9-4.3)
   D.   Future Costs: A provider shall pay to the city or to third parties, at
the direction of the city, an amount equal to the reasonable costs and
reasonable expenses that the city incurs for the services of third parties
(including, but not limited to, attorneys and other consultants) in connection
with any renewal or provider-initiated renegotiation, or amendment of this
chapter or a franchise; provided, however, that the parties shall agree upon a
reasonable financial cap at the outset of negotiations. In the event the
parties are unable to agree, either party may submit the issue to binding
arbitration in accordance with the rules and procedures of the American
Arbitration Association. Any costs associated with any work to be done by the
city to provide space on city-owned poles, if any, shall be borne by the
provider. (1985 Code § 11-9-4.4; amd. 2001 Code)
   E.   Taxes, Assessments: To the extent taxes or other assessments are
imposed by taxing authorities, other than the city, on the use of the city
property as a result of a provider's use or occupation of the rights of way,
the provider shall be responsible for payment of its pro rata share of such
taxes, payable annually unless otherwise required by the taxing authority. Such
payments shall be in addition to any other fees payable pursuant to this
chapter. (1985 Code § 11-9-4.5)
   F.   Interest On Late Payments: In the event that any payment is not
actually received by the city on or before the applicable date fixed in the
franchise, interest thereon shall accrue from such date until received at the
rate charged for delinquent state taxes. (1985 Code § 11-9-4.6)
   G.   Acceptance Of Fee; Not Construed Satisfaction: No acceptance by the
city of any fee shall be construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact
the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of such fee payment be construed
as a release of any claim the city may have for additional sums payable. (1985
Code § 11-9-4.7)
   H.   Additional Taxes Or Fees Still Applicable: The fee payment is not a
payment in lieu of any tax, fee or other assessment, except as specifically
provided in this chapter or as required by applicable law. By way of example,
and not limitation, excavation permit fees and fees to obtain space on the
city-owned poles are not waived and remain applicable. (1985 Code § 11-9-4.8)
   I.   Operation After Term; Continuing Obligation And Holdover: In the event
a provider continues to operate all or any part of the system after the term of
the franchise, such operator shall continue to comply with all applicable
provisions of this chapter and the franchise, including, without limitation,
all compensation and other payment provisions throughout the period of such
continued operation; provided, that any such continued operation shall in no
way be construed as a renewal or other extension of the franchise, nor as a
limitation on the remedies, if any, available to the city as a result of such
continued operation after the term, including, but not limited to, damages and
restitution. (1985 Code § 11-9-4.9)
   J.   Publication Costs: A provider shall assume any publication costs
associated with its franchise that may be required by law. (1985 Code § 11-9-
4.10)
7-5-8: INSURANCE, RECORD REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Insurance Required: Prior to the execution of a franchise, a provider
will deposit with the city an irrevocable, unconditional letter of credit or
surety bond as required by the terms of the franchise, and shall obtain and
provide proof of the insurance coverage required by the franchise. A provider
shall also indemnify the city as set forth in the franchise. (1985 Code § 11-9-
8.1)
   B.   Oversight: The city shall have the right to oversee, regulate and
inspect periodically the construction, maintenance and upgrade of the system,
and any part thereof, in accordance with the provisions of the franchise and
applicable law. A provider shall establish and maintain managerial and
operational records, standards, procedures and controls to enable a provider to
prove, in reasonable detail, to the satisfaction of the city at all times
throughout the term, that a provider is in compliance with the franchise. A
provider shall retain such records for not less than the applicable statute of
limitations. (1985 Code § 11-9-8.2)
   C.   Records Maintenance: A provider shall at all times maintain:
      1.   On file with the city, a full and complete set of plans, records and
as-built hard copy maps and, to the extent the maps are placed in an electronic
format, they shall be made in electronic format compatible with the city's
existing GIS system, of all existing and proposed installations and the types
of equipment and systems installed or constructed in the rights of way,
properly identified and described as to the types of equipment and facility by
appropriate symbols and marks, which shall include annotations of all rights of
way where work will be undertaken. As used herein, as-built maps include file
construction prints. Maps shall be drawn to scale. As-built maps, including the
compatible electronic format, as provided above, shall be submitted within
thirty (30) days of completion of work or within thirty (30) days after
completion of modification and repairs. As-built maps are not required of the
provider who is the incumbent local exchange carrier for the existing system to
the extent they do not exist.
      2.   Throughout the term of the franchise, a provider shall maintain
complete and accurate books of account and records of the business, ownership
and operations of a provider with respect to the system in a manner that allows
the city at all times to determine whether a provider is in compliance with the
franchise. Should the city reasonably determine that the records are not being
maintained in such a manner, a provider shall alter the manner in which the
books and/or records are maintained so that a provider comes into compliance
with this section. All financial books and records which are maintained in
accordance with the regulations of the FCC and any governmental entity that
regulates utilities in the state and generally accepted accounting principles
shall be deemed to be acceptable under this section. (1985 Code § 11-9-8.3)
   D.   Confidentiality: If the information required to be submitted is
proprietary in nature or must be kept confidential by federal, state or local
law, upon proper request by a provider, such information shall be classified as
a protected record within the meaning of the Utah government records access and
management act (GRAMA), making it available only to those who must have access
to perform their duties on behalf of the city; provided, that a provider
notifies the city, and clearly labels the information which a provider deems to
be confidential, proprietary information. Such notification and labeling shall
be the sole responsibility of the provider. (1985 Code § 11-9-8.4)
   E.   Provider's Expense: All reports and records required under this chapter
shall be furnished at the sole expense of a provider, except as otherwise
provided in this chapter or a franchise. (1985 Code § 11-9-8.5)
   F.   Right Of Inspection: For the purpose of verifying the correct amount of
the franchise fee, the books and records of the provider pertaining thereto
shall be open to inspection or audit by duly authorized representatives of the
city at all reasonable times, upon giving reasonable notice of the intention to
inspect or audit the books and records; provided, that the city shall not audit
the books and records of the provider more often than annually. The provider
agrees to reimburse the city the reasonable costs of an audit if the audit
discloses that the provider has paid ninety five percent (95%) or less of the
compensation due the city for the period of such audit. In the event the
accounting rendered to the city by the provider herein is found to be
incorrect, then payment shall be made on the corrected amount within thirty
(30) calendar days of written notice, it being agreed that the city may accept
any amount offered by the provider, but the acceptance thereof by the city
shall not be deemed a settlement of such item if the amount is in dispute or is
later found to be incorrect. (1985 Code § 11-9-8.6)
7-5-9: CONSTRUCTION, TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Compliance Required; Excavation Permit: No provider shall receive a
franchise unless it agrees to comply with each of the terms set forth in this
section governing construction and technical requirements for its system, in
addition to any other reasonable requirements or procedures specified by the
city or the franchise, including requirements regarding locating and sharing in
the cost of locating portions of the system with other systems or with city
utilities. A provider shall obtain an excavation permit, pursuant to chapter 4,
article A of this title, before commencing any work in the rights of way.
   B.   Quality And Performance Of Work: All work involved in the construction,
maintenance, repair, upgrade and removal of the system shall be performed in a
safe, thorough and reliable manner, using materials of good and durable
quality. If, at any time, it is determined by the FCC or any other agency
granted authority by federal law or the FCC to make such determination, that
any part of the system, including, without limitation, any means used to
distribute signals over or within the system, is harmful to the public health,
safety or welfare, or quality of service or reliability, then a provider shall,
at its own cost and expense, promptly correct all such conditions.
   C.   Licenses And Permits: A provider shall have the sole responsibility for
diligently obtaining, at its own cost and expense, all permits, licenses or
other forms of approval or authorization necessary to construct, maintain,
upgrade or repair the system, including, but not limited to, any necessary
approvals from persons and/or the city to use private property, easements,
poles and conduits. A provider shall obtain any required permit, license,
approval or authorization, including, but not limited to, excavation permits,
pole attachment agreements, etc., prior to the commencement of the activity for
which the permit, license, approval or authorization is required.
   D.   Relocation Of System:
      1.   New Grades Or Lines; Excavation Requirements: If the grades or lines
of any rights of way are changed at any time in a manner affecting the system,
then a provider shall comply with the requirements of chapter 4, article A of
this title.
      2.   Emergency; City Authority To Move System: The city may, at any time,
in case of fire, disaster or other emergency, as determined by the city in its
reasonable discretion, cut or move any parts of the system and appurtenances
on, over or under the rights of way of the city, in which event the city shall
not be liable therefor to a provider. The city shall notify a provider in
writing prior to, if practicable, but in any event as soon as possible and in
no case later than the next business day following any action taken under this
section. Notice shall be given as provided in subsection 7-5-3C of this
chapter.
      3.   Temporary Move For Third Party: A provider shall, upon prior
reasonable written notice by the city or any person holding a permit to move
any structure, and within the time that is reasonable under the circumstances,
temporarily move any part of its system to permit the moving of said structure.
A provider may impose a reasonable charge on any person other than the city for
any such movement of its systems.
      4.   Change In Rights Of Way; Obligation To Move System: When the city is
changing a right of way and makes a written request, a provider is required to
move or remove its system from the right of way, without cost to the city, to
the extent provided in the excavation ordinance, as provided in chapter 4,
article A of this title. This obligation does not apply to systems originally
located on private property pursuant to a private easement, which property was
later incorporated into the rights of way, if that private easement grants a
superior vested right. This obligation exists whether or not the provider has
obtained an excavation permit.
   E.   Protection Of Structures, Landmarks: In connection with the
construction, maintenance, repair, upgrade or removal of the system, a provider
shall, at its own cost and expense, protect any and all existing structures
belonging to the city and all designated landmarks, as well as all other
structures within any designated landmark district. A provider shall obtain the
prior written consent of the city to alter any water main, power facility,
sewerage or drainage system, or any other city structure on, over or under the
rights of way of the city required because of the presence of the system. Any
such alteration shall be made by the city or its designee on a reimbursable
basis. A provider agrees that it shall be liable for the costs incurred by the
city to replace or repair and restore to its prior condition, in a manner as
may be reasonably specified by the city, any municipal structure or any other
rights of way of the city involved in the construction, maintenance, repair,
upgrade or removal of the system that may become disturbed or damaged as a
result of any work thereon by or on behalf of a provider pursuant to the
franchise.
   F.   Obstructions Prohibited: In connection with the construction,
maintenance, upgrade, repair or removal of the system, a provider shall not
unreasonably obstruct the rights of way of fixed guideway systems, railways,
passenger travel or other traffic to, from or within the city without the prior
consent of the appropriate authorities.
   G.   Safety Precautions: A provider shall, at its own cost and expense,
undertake all necessary and appropriate efforts to prevent accidents at its
work sites, including the placing and maintenance of proper guards, fences,
barricades, security personnel and suitable and sufficient lighting, and such
other requirements prescribed by OSHA and Utah OSHA. A provider shall comply
with all applicable federal, state and local requirements, including, but not
limited to, the national electrical safety code.
   H.   Repair Of Rights Of Way: After written reasonable notice to the
provider, unless, in the sole determination of the city, an imminent danger
exists, any rights of way within the city which are disturbed or damaged during
the construction, maintenance or reconstruction by a provider of its system may
be repaired by the city at the provider's expense, to a condition as good as
that prevailing before such work was commenced. Upon doing so, the city shall
submit to such a provider an itemized statement of the cost for repairing and
restoring the rights of way intruded upon. The provider shall, within thirty
(30) days after receipt of the statement, pay to the city the entire amount
thereof.
   I.   Maintenance Of System: A provider shall:
      1.   Install and maintain all parts of its system in a nondangerous
condition throughout the entire period of its franchise.
      2.   Install and maintain its system in accordance with standard prudent
engineering practices and shall conform, when applicable, with the national
electrical safety code and all other applicable federal, state and local laws
or regulations.
      3.   At all reasonable times, permit examination by any duly authorized
representative of the city of the system and its effect on the rights of way.
   J.   Trimming Trees; Authority: A provider shall have the authority to trim
trees, in accordance with all applicable utility restrictions, ordinance and
easement restrictions, upon and hanging over rights of way so as to prevent the
branches of such trees from coming in contact with its system. (Ord. 843, 8-20-
2013)
7-5-10: PRIVATE PROPERTY; OBLIGATION TO NOTIFY:
Before entering onto any private property, a provider shall make a good faith
attempt to contact the property owners in advance and describe the work to be
performed. (1985 Code § 11-9-10.1)
7-5-11: TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE AND LICENSE:
   A.   Notification Of Sale:
      1.   PSC Approval: When a provider is the subject of a sale, transfer,
lease, assignment, sublease or disposal, in whole or in part, either by force
or involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale, consolidation or otherwise, such that
it or its successor entity is obligated to inform or seek the approval of the
PSC, the provider or its successor entity shall promptly notify the city of the
nature of the transaction. The notification shall include either:
         a.   The successor entity's certification that the successor entity
unequivocally agrees to all of the terms of the original provider's franchise
agreement; or
         b.   The successor entity's application, in compliance with section
7-5-6 of this chapter.
      2.   Transfer Of Franchise: Upon receipt of a notification and
certification in accordance with subsection A1a of this section, the city
designee, as provided in subsection 7-5-12A1 of this chapter, shall send notice
affirming the transfer of the franchise to the successor entity. If the city
has good cause to believe that the successor entity may not comply with this
chapter or the franchise agreement, it may require an application for the
transfer. The application shall comply with section
7-5-6 of this chapter.
      3.   PSC Approval No Longer Required: If the PSC no longer exists or if
its regulations or state law no longer require approval of transactions
described in subsection A1 of this section, and the city has good cause to
believe that the successor entity may not comply with this chapter or the
franchise agreement, it may require an application. The application shall
comply with section
7-5-6 of this chapter. (1985 Code § 11-9-7.1)
   B.   Events Of Sale: The following events shall be deemed to be a sale,
assignment or other transfer of the franchise requiring compliance with
subsection A of this section:
      1.   The sale, assignment or other transfer of all or a majority of a
provider's assets to another person;
      2.   The sale, assignment or other transfer of capital stock or
partnership, membership or other equity interests in a provider by one or more
of its existing shareholders, partners, members or other equity owners so as to
create a new controlling interest in a provider;
      3.   The issuance of additional capital stock or partnership, membership
or other equity interest by a provider so as to create a new controlling
interest in such a provider; or
      4.   The entry by a provider into an agreement with respect to the
management or operation of such provider or its system. (1985 Code § 11-9-7.2)
7-5-12: ENFORCEMENT; RIGHTS OF CITY:
   A.   Enforcement; Remedies:
      1.   City Designee: The city is responsible for enforcing and
administering this chapter, and the city or its designee, as appointed by the
mayor, is authorized to give any notice required by law or under any franchise
agreement.
      2.   Enforcement Provisions: Any franchise granted pursuant to this
chapter shall contain appropriate provisions for enforcement, compensation and
protection of the public, consistent with the other provisions of this chapter,
including, but not limited to, defining events of default, procedures for
accessing the bond/security fund and rights of termination or revocation. (1985
Code § 11-9-9.1)
   B.   Force Majeure: In the event a provider's performance of any of the
terms, conditions or obligations required by this chapter or a franchise is
prevented by a cause or event not within a provider's control, such inability
to perform shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be
imposed as a result thereof. For the purpose of this subsection, causes or
events not within the control of a provider shall include, without limitation,
acts of God, strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances, failure or loss of
utilities, explosions, acts of public enemies and natural disasters such as
floods, earthquakes, landslides and fires. (1985 Code § 11-9-9.2)
   C.   Extended Operation; Continuity Of Services:
      1.   Continuation After Expiration: Upon either expiration or revocation
of a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, the city shall have discretion
to permit a provider to continue to operate its system or provide services for
an extended period of time not to exceed six (6) months from the date of such
expiration or revocation. A provider shall continue to operate its system under
the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise granted pursuant to
this chapter.
      2.   Incumbent Local Exchange Carrier; Negotiate Renewal: If the provider
is the incumbent local exchange carrier, it shall be permitted to continue to
operate its system and provide services without regard to revocation or
expiration, but shall be obligated to negotiate a renewal in good faith. (1985
Code § 11-9-9.3)
   D.   Removal Or Abandonment Of Franchise Property:
      1.   Abandoned System: In the event that: a) the use of any portion of
the system is discontinued for a continuous period of twelve (12) months and
thirty (30) days after no response to written notice from the city to the last
known address of provider; b) any system has been installed in the rights of
way without complying with the requirements of this chapter or franchise; or c)
the provisions of subsection 7-5-5E of this chapter are applicable and no
franchise is granted, a provider, except the provider who is an incumbent local
exchange carrier, shall be deemed to have abandoned such system.
      2.   Removal Of Abandoned System: The city, upon such terms as it may
impose, may give a provider written permission to abandon, without removing,
any system, or portion thereof, directly constructed, operated or maintained
under a franchise. Unless such permission is granted or unless otherwise
provided in this chapter, a provider shall remove within a reasonable time the
abandoned system and shall restore, using prudent construction standards, any
affected rights of way to their former state at the time such system was
installed, so as not to impair their usefulness. In removing its plant,
structures and equipment, a provider shall refill, at its own expense, any
excavation necessarily made by it and shall leave all rights of way in as good
condition as that prevailing prior to such removal without materially
interfering with any electrical or telephone cable or other utility wires,
poles or attachments. The city shall have the right to inspect and approve the
condition of the rights of way, cables, wires, attachments and poles prior to
and after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of this
chapter and any security fund provided in a franchise shall continue in full
force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by a
provider with the terms and conditions of this section.
      3.   Transfer Of Abandoned System To City: Upon abandonment of any system
in place, a provider, if required by the city, shall submit to the city a
written instrument, satisfactory in form to the city, transferring to the city
the ownership of the abandoned system.
      4.   Removal Of Aboveground System: At the expiration of the term for
which a franchise is granted, or upon its revocation or earlier expiration, as
provided for by this chapter, in any such case without renewal, extension or
transfer, the city shall have the right to require a provider to remove, at its
expense, all aboveground portions of a system from the rights of way within a
reasonable period of time, which shall not be less than one hundred eighty
(180) days. If the provider is the incumbent local exchange carrier, it shall
not be required to remove its system, but shall negotiate a renewal in good
faith.
      5.   Leaving Underground System: Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
set forth in this chapter, a provider may abandon any underground system in
place so long as it does not materially interfere with the use of the rights of
way or with the use thereof by any public utility, cable operator or other
person. (1985 Code § 11-9-9.4)
7-5-13: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter is held by any federal, state or local court
of competent jurisdiction to be invalid as conflicting with any federal or
state statute, or is ordered by a court to be modified in any way in order to
conform to the requirements of any such law and all appellate remedies with
regard to the validity of the ordinance provisions in question are exhausted,
such provision shall be considered a separate, distinct and independent part of
this chapter, and such holding shall not affect the validity and enforceability
of all other provisions hereof. In the event that such law is subsequently
repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed, so that the provision which
had been held invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with such law, the
provision in question shall return to full force and effect and shall again be
binding on the city and the provider; provided, that the city shall give the
provider thirty (30) days, or a longer period of time as may be reasonably
required for a provider to comply with such a rejuvenated provision, written
notice of the change before requiring compliance with such provision. (1985
Code § 11-9-11.2)
CHAPTER 6
RESERVED
CHAPTER 7
PUBLIC PARKS AND TRAILS
SECTION:
7-7-1: Definitions
7-7-2: Prohibited Acts Relating To Park Property
7-7-3: Traffic
7-7-4: Recreational Activities
7-7-5: Behavior
7-7-6: Dogs
7-7-7: Merchandising And Sign Regulations
7-7-8: Park And Trail System Operating Policy
7-7-9: Enforcement
7-7-10: Application
7-7-11: Penalties
7-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
DEPARTMENT: The Riverdale City department of public works.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled, except vehicles moved
solely by human power and motorized wheelchairs.
PARK: Any and all lands, buildings, reserves, sports complexes, trails and
other special places, including the Riverdale Trail, that are owned, operated
or maintained by Riverdale City, and are delineated generally in the Riverdale
City parks map, and/or specifically in the inventory of park properties at the
office of the city recorder.
PATHWAY: Any constructed trail which has been designated for the use of
pedestrians, bicyclists, and other wheeled activities moved solely by human
power.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person afoot and any person operating a wheelchair or motorized
wheelchair.
TRAIL: Any improved pathway within the city of Riverdale available for use by
the public on public or private property. (Ord. 783, 3-15-2011)
7-7-2: PROHIBITED ACTS RELATING TO PARK PROPERTY:
Park limitations, access, encroachments, construction, use and easements:
   A.   Purpose And Objectives:
      1.   The department is responsible for the stewardship of all Riverdale
City parks and trail properties, and thus any encroachments upon them. The
department shall regulate all nonpark related construction activity on or
across park property and provide conditions to assure preservation of the
public's interest and proper restoration of the parks. Riverdale City projects
shall be subject to internal policies and are specifically exempt from the
provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Prohibitions: No person in any park or trail shall:
      1.   Use any park or trail property for access to adjoining or nearby
property for any purpose, or to construct or install any facility or
improvement upon, over or beneath park or city property except by license or
easement issued or granted pursuant to the provisions of this code or by
permission from the Riverdale City council.
      2.   Wilfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace or
remove, any building, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, paving or
paving material, water lines or other public utilities or parts or
appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal property, or have in his
possession any of the foregoing things or objects, or any part thereof.
      3.   Fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a neat
and sanitary condition. No person over the age of five (5) years shall use the
restrooms and washrooms designated for the opposite sex.
      4.   Construct or erect any building, inflatable or structure of whatever
kind, whether permanent or temporary in character, or run or string any public
service utility into, upon or across such lands, except by written permit
issued pursuant to this chapter.
      5.   Climb upon or go inside security fences, maintenance service areas,
or other permanent or temporary restricted areas.
      6.   Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or injure
the bark, or pick the flowers or seeds, of any tree or plant. Nor shall any
person attach any rope, wire or other contrivance to any tree or plant located
in any park except as may be authorized by the public works director by duly
promulgated rule or regulation. A person shall not dig in or otherwise disturb
grass areas, drive stakes of any kind into the ground or climb trees, or in any
other way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area, except
that retrieval of personal property unintentionally lodged in a tree or other
plant shall be permitted, provided that such removal is achieved safely and
without damage to any tree or plant.
      7.   Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, annoy, shoot
or throw missiles at any animal, reptile or bird located within or upon any
city park or property unless otherwise permitted by duly authorized Riverdale
personnel or as necessitated as part of a city work responsibility or
authorized under this chapter or other ordinances; nor shall they remove or
have in their possession the young of any wild animal, or the eggs or nest, or
young of any reptile or bird; nor shall they collect, remove, have in his
possession, give away, sell or offer to sell, buy or offer to buy, or accept as
a gift, any specimen alive or dead collected from any park areas. This section
does not apply to fish lawfully taken from the Weber River.
      8.   Feeding of animals within park areas is prohibited unless otherwise
permitted by duly authorized Riverdale personnel.
      9.   Horseback riding is illegal, except for police officers and their
service animals in the official performance of their duties or with a special
event written permit from the city, to ride a horse in park areas or upon city
property. Where permitted, horses shall be thoroughly broken and properly
restrained, and ridden with due care, and shall not be allowed to graze or go
unattended.
      10.   No horses or other animals, except dogs and cats, shall be allowed
unless otherwise permitted by duly authorized Riverdale personnel. (Ord. 843,
8-20-2013)
7-7-3: TRAFFIC:
   A.   Restrictions: No person in any park shall:
      1.   Fail to obey all police officers, city or park employees, and other
such persons authorized and instructed to direct traffic whenever and wherever
needed in the parks.
      2.   Fail to observe all traffic signs or markings indicating speed,
direction, caution, stopping or parking, and all others posted for proper
control of traffic and to safeguard life and property.
      3.   Ride or drive a vehicle at an excessive or dangerous rate of speed
except upon such roads designated, by posted signs, for faster travel.
      4.   Drive any vehicle on any area except the paved official park roads
or parking areas, or such other areas as may on occasion be specifically
designated as temporary parking areas. The paved trail is not a recognized road
under this section. This section does not apply to city personnel in their
authorized capacity as city employees.
      5.   Park a vehicle in other than an established or designated parking
area, and such use shall be in accordance with the posted directions and with
the instructions of any police officers or duly authorized representatives of
the city who may be present.
      6.   Be allowed to use more than one marked parking space.
      7.   Leave a vehicle standing or parked after closing hours of the park,
except by permit in designated areas.
      8.   Park a vehicle on grass or turf, except by permit or permission and
only in designated areas.
   B.   Restricted Vehicles: No motor vehicles shall be permitted on any grass,
sidewalk or pathway of any park or river trail system except:
      1.   Vehicles operated by law enforcement or department personnel;
      2.   Emergency vehicles operated for purposes of transporting humans in
need of emergency services;
      3.   Vehicles authorized or permitted by the department. (Ord. 783, 3-15-
2011)
7-7-4: RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Boating, Swimming Or Wading: No person in any park shall bathe in any
water or waterways except in such water and at such places as are provided
therefor and in compliance with such rules and regulations promulgated and
posted by the city. (Ord. 843, 8-20-2013)
   B.   Hunting, Firearms And Projectiles:
      1.   Use Prohibited: No person in any park or river trail system shall:
         a.   Use firearms of any description including, but not limited to,
air rifles, spring guns, bows and arrows, rockets, slings, paint guns, or any
other forms of weapons potentially harmful to wildlife or dangerous to human
safety.
         b.   Use any instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank
cartridges, except as provided in subsection 7-7-2B7 of this chapter.
         c.   Use any kind of trapping device. Live traps may be used by animal
control or other duly authorized representatives of the city.
         d.   Discharge, or have in his possession, any fireworks, except as
provided in subsection 7-7-2B7 of this chapter.
         e.   Discharge or shoot firearms of any description as defined in
subsection B1a of this section, into any park from beyond park boundaries.
      2.   Exceptions:
         a.   It shall be lawful for police officers or other duly authorized
officers to use and carry firearms while on duty;
         b.   The provisions prohibiting the discharge of arrows shall not
apply to a city sponsored archery class;
         c.   A special use event may be located and used in such portions of a
park or trail system designated by the city, and subject to rules and
regulations promulgated and posted by the city for that event. (Ord. 872, 11-
17-2015)
   C.   Picnic And Park Areas And Use: No person in any park shall:
      1.   Fail or refuse to comply with directions given by police officers or
duly authorized representatives of the city in regulating the activities in any
area when necessary to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use for the
comfort and convenience of all.
      2.   Violate the regulation that use of the individual fireplaces, tables
and benches follows generally the rules of "first come, first served" unless
specifically reserved through the city offices.
      3.   Use any portion of the picnic areas or of any building or structure
within the park system for the purpose of holding events to the exclusion of
other persons, nor shall any person use such area and facilities for an
unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded; provided, however,
reservations in advance may be made for any park facility where diamonds,
courts, halls, rooms, gyms, gardens, picnic shelters or fireplaces are
provided. All persons requesting advance reservation shall pay a fee as
provided by the city and shall observe all park rules and regulations. Failure
to observe such rules and regulations shall, in addition to other applicable
penalties, result in the immediate termination of the advance reservation.
      4.   Conduct, sponsor, promote or publicly advertise any meeting,
concert, theater, athletic event or other public activity in park facilities or
any activities which include amplified sound, use of equipment or apparatus,
sales, closing parkways, fundraising, field marking paint, or interference with
the normal and regular use or maintenance of the park without obtaining a
special event permit.
      5.   Move reserved tables without consulting a duly authorized
representative of the city.
      6.   Violate the duty to leave all halls, rooms, gyms and other building
and park facilities reserved for use in a condition identical to that when
those facilities were permitted to the reservation holder for use. All trash in
the nature of boxes, papers, cans, bottles, garbage and other refuse is placed
in disposal receptacles where provided. If no such trash receptacles are
available or are full, then refuse and trash shall be carried away from the
park area to be properly disposed of elsewhere.
   D.   Camping: No person in any park or trail system shall set up tents,
shacks, or any other temporary shelter for the purpose of camping, except by
special permission by the city administrator or public works director, nor
shall any person leave in a park after closing hours any movable structure or
special vehicle to be used, or that could be used, for such purpose such as a
motor home, camp trailer, or the like.
   E.   Fires: No person in any park or trail system shall light, build, or
maintain a fire in any public park, except for culinary purposes in park
grills, fireplaces, or privately owned grills, and no person shall leave the
immediate area without first extinguishing such fire.
   F.   Games: No person in any park or trail system shall take part in or abet
the playing of any games involving thrown or otherwise propelled dangerous
objects such as stones, arrows or javelins except in areas set apart for such
forms of recreation. Golfing or driving golf balls is prohibited.
   G.   Tennis Courts:
      1.   No person in any park shall fail to observe and/or violate the rules
of the use of such courts as promulgated by the city.
      2.   No person shall ride or operate a skateboard, roller skates,
scooter, in-line skates, bicycle or other wheeled recreation equipment on the
tennis courts.
   H.   Hot Air Balloons: No person in any park shall tether or launch a hot
air balloon except by permit issued pursuant to rules and regulations
promulgated by the city.
   I.   Metal Detectors: No person in any park or trail system shall cause any
damage to city property while operating a metal detector.
   J.   Vehicles: No vehicle shall be permitted in or upon any park or trail
system except: 1) those vehicles authorized by the city and operated and used
for pleasure and designed to carry passengers, 2) those vehicles employed by
the city, and 3) those vehicles making deliveries within a park.
   K.   Wheeled Devices:
      1.   No person in any park or trail system shall ride or operate a
skateboard, roller skates, scooter, in-line skates, bicycle or other wheeled
recreation equipment on any brickwork, ornamental surface, picnic table, bench,
tennis court, fountain area, wading pool, planter, sculpture or other structure
unless otherwise designated as an area where wheeled devices are permitted.
      2.   No person in any park or trail system shall ride or operate a
skateboard, roller skates, scooter, in-line skates, bicycle, or other wheeled
recreation equipment without regard to the safety of others. (Ord. 843, 8-20-
2013)
7-7-5: BEHAVIOR:
   A.   Alcohol:
      1.   Persons may not possess beer, wine or any alcoholic beverage within
a Riverdale City park, trail system or facility.
      2.   Within Riverdale City parks, trail system and facilities, it shall
be unlawful to possess or consume any alcoholic beverage upon any street,
parking lot, restroom, pathway, playground, community center, senior center,
neighborhood center, skatepark, horseshoe range, BMX facility or youth sports
complex, on the greenbelt or trail and entrances thereto under the jurisdiction
or control of the city, including the area within two hundred fifty feet (250')
of the bank of the Weber River and those areas closed to possession or
consumption of alcoholic beverages by order of the city.
   B.   Smoking: Smoking, including electronic cigarettes, is prohibited within
a Riverdale City park, trail system or facility.
   C.   Safety And Health: No person shall endanger the safety or health of any
other person by any conduct or act. Examples include, but are not limited to,
skydiving, hang gliding, helicopter landing, bungee jumping, operating trains
or cart kite flying.
   D.   Rules And Regulations: No person shall violate any rules and
regulations for the use of a park, trail system or any of its facilities or
programs, promulgated by the city.
   E.   Sound: No person shall operate or aid in the operation of private
radios, stereophonic or sound amplification devices at a greater operating
level than eighty six (86) decibels measured at a distance of twenty five feet
(25') from such radios or devices or exceed a noise level of sixty two (62)
decibels on any residential property except by permit in designated areas or as
defined and enforced under the city's nuisance ordinance or permit policy.
   F.   Park Closure: No person shall enter or remain in the park or trail
system during hours of closure, except as authorized by permit.
   G.   Glass Containers: No person shall use, carry, or be in the possession
of any container made of glass.
   H.   Unlawful Conduct: No person shall engage in any unlawful conduct or
criminal activity or in any way commit a violation or breach of the peace, as
defined by Utah code and/or this code. (Ord. 843, 8-20-2013)
7-7-6: DOGS:
   A.   No person owning or having the care, custody, possession, or control of
a dog shall permit or allow such dog to enter or remain in any park or trail
system except:
      1.   Where such dog is controlled by a leash:
         a.   Leash Length: Leash length shall not exceed eight feet (8')
within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the greenbelt or trail.
         b.   Retractable Leash: Retractable leash mechanisms are allowed so
long as their use is in compliance with the requirements of this section.
         c.   Riverdale Park: Leashed dogs shall be allowed on the asphalt
trail only.
      2.   Where such dog is confined in a motor vehicle.
   B.   No person owning or having the care, custody, possession, or control of
a dog shall:
      1.   Fail to have in his/her possession the equipment necessary to remove
his/her dog's fecal matter when accompanied by said dog in any park or trail;
or
      2.   Fail to remove the fecal matter deposited by his/her dog in any park
or trail before the owner leaves the immediate area where the fecal matter was
deposited.
   C.   Unless otherwise listed under another state or city code section, a
violation of this section shall be an infraction, the penalty for which shall
be forty five dollars ($45.00) excluding court costs and fees. An infraction is
a civil public offense, not constituting a crime, which is punishable only by a
penalty not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) and for which no period of
incarceration may be imposed. There is no right to trial by jury of a citation
or complaint for an infraction and such trials shall be held before the court
without a jury. (Ord. 843, 8-20-2013)
7-7-7: MERCHANDISING AND SIGN REGULATIONS:
No person in any park or trail system shall:
   A.   Expose or offer for sale any article or thing, nor shall he station or
place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any
such article or thing, except when operating as a licensed concessionaire
acting by and under the authority and regulation of the city.
   B.   Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any signs, plaques, advertisement
or inscription whatever, except plaques, tablets or signs, of a size, design
and location approved by the city, recognizing or acknowledging donations or
contributions to any city park or to public facilities therein. (Ord. 783, 3-
15-2011)
7-7-8: PARK AND TRAIL SYSTEM OPERATING POLICY:
   A.   Hours Of Operation: Parks and trail systems shall be open to the public
every day of the year from five o'clock (5:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
Visitors and vehicles shall be excluded during the hours of closure except when
authorized by permit, or where hours are otherwise posted. The mayor shall have
the authority to change the hours of any park by proclamation and the
publication of that proclamation in the official newspaper of Riverdale City.
   B.   Closed Areas: Any section or part of any park or trail system may be
declared closed to the public by the city administrator, police, fire or public
works director at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or
at regularly and stated intervals (daily or otherwise) and either entirely or
merely to certain uses, as the administrator or director shall find reasonably
necessary.
   C.   Effect Of A Permit: Permittees shall be bound by all park rules and
regulations and all applicable ordinances as fully as though the same were
explicitly stated in said permit. The person or persons to whom a permit is
issued shall be liable for any loss, damage or injuries sustained by any person
or property by reason of the negligence of the person or persons to whom such
permit shall have been issued. The city administrator, or a duly authorized
representative, shall have the authority to revoke a permit upon a finding of
violation of any rule or ordinance, or upon good cause. (Ord. 843, 8-20-2013)
7-7-9: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Officials: Except where otherwise provided herein, police officers, the
city administrator, and other duly authorized representatives of the city shall
enforce the provisions of this chapter. Animal control officers duly employed
or appointed by Riverdale City's animal control also shall be allowed to
enforce the provisions of any code or policy sections involving dogs or animals
in city parks, trails or property.
   B.   Ejectment: A police officer, the city administrator, public works
director or a duly authorized representative, shall have the authority to eject
from the park any person acting in violation of this chapter. Any person
ejected from the park shall leave promptly and peaceably and shall not return
to the park for any reason on the same calendar day of his ejectment.
   C.   Seizure Of Property: A police officer shall have the authority to seize
and confiscate any property, thing or device in the park, or used in violation
of this chapter.
   D.   Removal Of Vehicles: Any vehicle parked in violation of this chapter is
subject to removal. (Ord. 783, 3-15-2011)
7-7-10: APPLICATION:
This chapter shall not apply to:
   A.   Police officers and their service animals during the official
performance of their duties;
   B.   Handlers of search and rescue animals during the official performance
of their duties;
   C.   Public works or other city employees during the official performance of
their duties; or
   D.   Persons with disabilities utilizing assistance animals. (Ord. 783, 3-
15-2011)
7-7-11: PENALTIES:
A person violating any of the provisions of this chapter for which a fixed
penalty has not been designated shall be deemed guilty of a class B misdemeanor
and upon conviction thereof can be fined in an amount not exceeding one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or be imprisoned for a period not exceeding six
(6) months, or be both so fined and imprisoned. Nothing in this chapter shall
be construed as to limit city employees or other authorized persons from
performing their official or city authorized duties. (Ord. 783, 3-15-2011)
TITLE 8
WATER AND SEWER
CHAPTER 1
WATER USE AND SERVICE
SECTION:
8-1-1: Application For Service
8-1-2: Fees, Rates And Charges
8-1-3: Termination Of Service; Delinquency
8-1-4: Meters
8-1-5: Extensions; Service Area, Permit Required
8-1-6: Private Fire Protection Systems; Permit, Fee
8-1-7: Fire Hydrant Use
8-1-8: Repair Of Private Lines
8-1-9: Disconnection Of Abandoned Service Lines
8-1-10: Use For Specific Machinery Restricted
8-1-11: Timing Of Landscape Watering
8-1-12: Restriction Of Water Use
8-1-13: Waste Prohibited
8-1-14: Access To Premises
8-1-15: Dispute Resolution
8-1-16: Penalty
8-1-1: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE:
   A.   Information Required: Written application for water service shall be
made by the owner, or his or her duly authorized agent, of the property
receiving the water. The application shall list the address of the property
receiving water and the actual address of the owner if he or she does not
reside at the service address. The owner shall at all times be responsible for
keeping the City advised of his or her current address.
   B.   Occupant Or Tenant: Before granting service to an occupant or tenant,
the owner of the property shall be required to sign an agreement to be
responsible for the water bill in the event the occupant or tenant does not
pay. Failure to pay past due water bills will result in a denial of future
water service to that location. The owner may request that the bill be sent to
the occupant or tenant but this in no way absolves the landlord from making the
payment if defaulted.
   C.   Delinquency; Lien Against Property: In the event that any water bill
becomes six (6) months past due, the delinquency shall become a lien against
the real property receiving the water service. The City may file notice of the
lien with the Office of the County Recorder. The written application signed by
the owner of the premises shall state that such delinquency will become a lien
against the property. (Ord. 782, 10-19-2010, eff. 10-19-2010)
8-1-2: FEES, RATES AND CHARGES 1 :
   A.   Connection Fee:
      1.   The City shall charge a water connection fee for connecting to the
City waterworks system. The fees for water connection shall be prescribed by
resolution of the City Council.
      2.   The connection fees shall be paid into the City before a permit may
be issued and before any connection can be made to any public water main in the
City.
   B.   Water Rates:
      1.   The City shall charge for the use of its Municipal culinary water.
The rates for water use shall be set by resolution of the City Council.
      2.   The City shall not supply free water service to any person,
corporation, firm or public agency. All use shall be metered with a City water
meter or otherwise accounted for as directed by the Public Works Department.
      3.   A utility service fee waiver (water, sewer, garbage, recycle and
storm) is available to all residents on active military deployment who submit a
fee waiver form and provide a copy of their orders.
      4.   A billing adjustment of fifty percent (50%) of the leak amount for
underground water service lines is available to all residents and businesses
with verification that the water service line has been repaired within two (2)
weeks of notification of the leak.
A service line is the main service line from the water meter to the home or
business, which includes the connection for the sprinkler system from the stop
and waste valve to the main service line. (Ord. 834, 4-16-2013)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 1, chapter 12 of this Code for the consolidated fee
  schedule.
8-1-3: TERMINATION OF SERVICE; DELINQUENCY:
   A.   Payment Due: Payment for water bills shall be due fifteen (15) days
from the billing date. In the event payment is not received within thirty (30)
days from the billing date, the city shall send, by mail, a final notice to
both the owner and the occupant of the premises, advising them that water
service will be terminated in ten (10) days if the past due bill is not paid.
(Ord. 795, 10-4-2011)
   B.   Termination Of Service: Except as hereinafter provided, water service
shall be terminated if:
      1.   Payment is not received within ten (10) days of the final notice, or
      2.   Costs are incurred by the city to abate a nuisance on the property
for purposes of enforcing title 4, chapter 5, "Nuisances", of this code, and
required payments have not been made.
At the time service is terminated, the city will leave, on the door of the
service premises, a notice advising the occupant who to contact to restore
water service. Water service will not be turned off on any weekend or legal
holiday, nor after one o'clock (1:00) P.M. on the day preceding any weekend or
legal holiday.
The city water department may defer final water service termination in those
cases wherein the customer's outstanding balance is less than twenty five
dollars ($25.00). (Ord. 825, 11-20-2012)
   C.   Transfer Of Service: Water service terminated under subsection B of
this section, will not be transferred to any person, new owner, occupant,
tenant, etc., until all amounts owing on the account are paid in full. (Ord.
795, 10-4-2011)
   D.   Turning On Or Off; Authorized Personnel: It shall be a class B
misdemeanor for any person other than an authorized employee of the city to
turn on or off any water connection to serviced premises and upon conviction
such person shall be punished as is provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1985 Code § 18-1-15; amd. Ord. 795, 10-4-2011)
   E.   Restoration: Water service shall not be restored until the delinquent
bill is paid, together with a service fee established by resolution of the city
council. If the customer is unable to pay both the water bill and service fee,
the city may accept payment of the full delinquent amount and add the service
fee onto the customer's account.
   F.   Nonowner Delinquent: In the event that an owner who does not reside at
the service address becomes delinquent in his or her bill, the city shall not
terminate service without giving at least ten (10) days' notice to the occupant
of the impending termination. This notice shall be sent by mail. (Ord. 825, 11-
20-2012)
8-1-4: METERS:
   A.   Installation Requirements: All water meters and connections to the
culinary water system of the city shall be made according to the following
requirements: (1985 Code § 18-1-1)
      1.   All meters shall be of a type and manufacturer approved by the city.
      2.   All meters shall be installed per standard drawings and
specifications.
      3.   All meters shall be installed so that the top of the meter is
eighteen inches (18") below the meter box lid.
      4.   All meters two inches (2") and over must be provided with a bypass
line. The meter must be placed on the direct water line.
      5.   No meter larger in size than the tap on the water main will be
installed on any service.
      6.   All meters shall be set by an authorized representative of the city,
or under the direct supervision of such authorized representative of the city;
and shall be set, or the main opened, only after proper permit has been
obtained from said city after payment of the fees prescribed by resolution.
(1985 Code § 18-1-1; amd. 2001 Code)
   B.   Improper Installation; Penalty: Any installation made contrary to the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be unlawful, and any person
making such installation, or permitting such installation, shall be guilty of a
class B misdemeanor and upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code; and in addition, the City may refuse to permit the use of
such installation until the same is made in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. (1985 Code § 18-1-2; amd. 2001 Code)
8-1-5: EXTENSIONS; SERVICE AREA, PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   No person shall make any extension of any pipe or water fixture
attached to the City water system for any purpose whatever without first
obtaining a permit from the City. Within twenty four (24) hours after the
completion of any plumbing connection with the City water system, such work
must be reported to the City.
   B.   "Designated water service area" means the land area defined by the City
of Riverdale in accordance with the Utah Constitution, article XI, section 6,
as the City's area of water service provision. A water service customer is an
end user who receives culinary water directly from the City's waterworks
system; and whom the City bills for water service.
   C.   In order to allocate for annexations of land and control the delivery
costs of water; water provision outside Riverdale City limits to property not
contained within the City's designated water service area is not permitted.
(Ord. 908, 5-7-2019)
8-1-6: PRIVATE FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS; PERMIT, FEE:
For the purpose of this chapter, a private protection system is an automatic
sprinkler system or water spray system designed or intended to protect the
premises in case of fire. All private fire protection systems shall be subject
to the following regulations: (1985 Code § 18-1-5; amd. 2001 Code)
   A.   Permit Required; Application: No private fire protection systems will
be installed without a written permit from the Public Works Director.
Applications for such permits shall be accompanied by two (2) sets of plans for
the proposed system, including all service lines and the maximum estimated
flow. The plans must be approved by the City before a permit may be issued or
construction on the system commenced. Service lines for a fire protection
system shall be no larger than the main to which it is connected, and in no
case larger than ten inches (10") in diameter. Such fire protection systems
must conform with currently adopted codes and standards.
   B.   Requirements Of Applicant: The permit as approved by the Public Works
Director for this type of installation shall provide that the applicant will:
(1985 Code § 18-1-5; amd. 2001 Code; Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
      1.   Maintain and use the private fire protection system and service
solely for firefighting purposes.
      2.   Comply with all rules and regulations of the City.
      3.   Pay all damages of any nature which the City may sustain due to the
installation or operation of the private fire protection system.
      4.   Save the City and any officer, agent or employee thereof harmless
from any and all claims by any person whatsoever, including the applicant, for
damages suffered because of the installation, maintenance or operation of the
private fire protection system, or by reason of the inadequacy or failure of
the water supply.
      5.   Reimburse the City for all damage suffered by it because of any
violation of the rules and regulations of the City or because of improper use
of the fire protection service by the customer.
      6.   Maintain the private fire protection system in its entirety,
including service lines and related valves, free from leaking, improper
operation or improper connection.
      7.   Report to the City immediately any leakage, breakage, improper
connection, or improper use of the private fire protection system or service.
If, after ten (10) days' written notice from the City, the owner or occupant
fails to correct any leaks or terminate any improper use by himself or others,
the City may shut off water from the system until the owner or occupant
complies with the notice. The City may require the installation of detector
checks in a line in the event of frequent leakage or improper use.
   C.   Connection Fee: There shall be assessed a connection fee in the amount
set forth in the consolidated fee schedule set forth in title 1, chapter 12 of
this Code. (1985 Code § 18-1-5; amd. 2001 Code)
8-1-7: FIRE HYDRANT USE:
   A.   Authorized; Conditions: Water service may be supplied to a private
person through a public or private fire hydrant or through other connections
designed primarily for the use of the City only upon issuance of a special
written permit by the Public Works Director after a determination by him or her
that it is impractical to render the desired service through any other means.
Permits may be revoked for failure to comply with the rules and regulations of
the Water Department or this chapter. Such service may be rendered only through
facilities and connections approved and connected by the Water Department. Such
facilities and connections shall be so designed and installed as to permit the
use of the fire hydrant or other connection for public use for its primary
purpose with a minimum of delay in making required adjustments.
   B.   Private Fire Service Hydrants, Mains, And Water Tanks: Testing,
inspection, maintenance, and repair of private fire hydrants shall be the
responsibility of the property owner. Private fire hydrants shall be maintained
in an operable condition at all times. Testing, inspection, and maintenance of
private fire hydrants shall be conducted on an annual basis and after each use.
The annual maintenance shall include steps as outlined in National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA) standard 291 recommended practice for fire flow
testing and marking of hydrants. Property owners, their agents and tenants with
private hydrants shall immediately contact the Riverdale fire department at:
801-394-7481 in the event a private hydrant is damaged, malfunctions, or is
otherwise "out of order". The term "immediately" means not more than twenty
four (24) hours after a problem is noticed or should have been noticed in the
exercise of reasonable care. Hydrants that are inoperable must be clearly
marked or identified as "out of service". Repairs or other necessary efforts
must be made to render the hydrant fully operational within ten (10) working
days. All repair work shall be preapproved by the Riverdale City public works
department and inspected and approved by Riverdale City public works department
after repairs have been made. Additions, repairs, alterations and servicing
shall comply with the approved standards set forth in NFPA 25. If the property
owner fails to comply within the ten (10) working days, a fine of not more than
one hundred dollars ($100.00) will be levied against the property owner each
day the hydrant remains out of service.
Every five (5) years, a fire flow test of the fire service main piping shall be
conducted as outlined in National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) standard
291 recommended practice for fire flow testing and marking of hydrants. Fire
flow tests shall be conducted by a person trained in the procedures specified
in NFPA 291 and the conducting of the test shall be coordinated with Riverdale
City public works department.
Written documentation of each of the above mentioned annual testing,
inspection, and maintenance and the five (5) year fire flow tests shall be
provided to the fire department upon the completion.
Records of all system inspections, tests and maintenance required by the
referenced standards shall be maintained on the premises for a minimum of three
(3) years and shall be submitted to the Riverdale fire department in a manner
and format as prescribed by the fire code official within five (5) working days
after the inspections, tests, and maintenance are completed.
The barrel and bonnet of all fire hydrants, post indicator valves (PIVs), post
indicator valve assemblies (PIVAs) installed for future use, or existing
hydrants that are placed out of service shall be clearly marked as "OUT OF
SERVICE".
   C.   Application: Application for the use of water from fire hydrants or
other connections shall be made upon forms furnished by the city stating the
purpose for which the water is to be used and the justification for issuance of
a permit. All water shall be accounted for as directed by the public works
department. The amount of water used shall be paid for as set forth in the
consolidated fee schedule set forth in title 1, chapter 12 of this code. The
hydrant must be operated in accordance with the instructions and the rules and
regulations of the city. Only hydrant wrenches approved by the city shall be
used in operating the hydrant. Any damage to the fire hydrant or the equipment
of the city will be charged to the applicant. (Ord. 874, 12-15-2015)
8-1-8: REPAIR OF PRIVATE LINES:
Whenever it shall become necessary to repair or alter any private water line,
the size of the line, the size of the tap onto the city water system, and the
sizes, types and locations of meter boxes, angle stops and other facilities
must conform to standards established in this title and as may be set by the
public works director. If there is a water main of the city that is accessible
to the residents served by such private line, the users of such private line
may make connections directly to the city water system rather than repair the
private line and bring it into conformity with current standards. All repairs
or alterations made to such private water lines shall be made at the expense of
the property owner. (1985 Code § 18-1-8; amd. 2001 Code; Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
8-1-9: DISCONNECTION OF ABANDONED SERVICE LINES:
In the event any service line that is or has been delivering water to any
building, house or area is abandoned for any reason whatsoever, it shall be the
responsibility of the owner thereof to disconnect the service line from the
water main and to cap the corporation stop at expense of the said owner. The
disconnection must be inspected and approved by the public works department
before any permit for demolition is issued. (Ord. 618, 6-17-2003)
8-1-10: USE FOR SPECIFIC MACHINERY RESTRICTED:
No water shall be supplied from the pipes of the city water system for the
purpose of driving any motor, siphon, turbine or other wheels, or any hydraulic
engines or elevators, or for driving or propelling machinery of any kind
whatsoever, nor shall any license be granted or issued for any such purpose,
except by special permission of the city council. (1985 Code § 18-1-11)
8-1-11: TIMING OF LANDSCAPE WATERING:
   A.   Sprinkler irrigation of public and private landscapes is prohibited
between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. The
provisions of this section shall apply to all landscapes within Riverdale City
with the following exceptions:
      1.   New lawns or landscaping that require frequent irrigation for
establishment purposes within ninety (90) days of planting.
      2.   Short cycles required for testing, inspecting and maintaining
irrigation systems.
      3.   Where pressure problems exist in the water infrastructure requiring
an alternate watering time as approved by the public works department.
      4.   Use of culinary water for irrigation of commercial stock and
commercial gardens or plant nurseries that are licensed by the city, provided
that the licensee or a representative is personally on the premises at the time
the irrigation is taking place.
      5.   Special permit issued by the public works director.
   B.   Any person who continues to violate this schedule after written notice
may be subject to termination of water service. (Ord. 867, 5-28-2015)
8-1-12: RESTRICTION OF WATER USE:
   A.   Generally: Whenever the mayor, after investigating the various needs
for water in the city and the supply of water available to meet such needs,
determines that it is in the best interests of the city to place restrictions
on the use of water distributed in the city, he shall have the authority, by
administrative order, to place reasonable restrictions, as to time, manner and
place, on the use of water for any purpose whatsoever within the limits of the
city. All such orders shall take effect when filed with the city recorder and
published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.
   B.   Emergency: Whenever any immediate threat arises to the quantity or
quality of the city water supply, or any part thereof, that creates an
emergency necessitating immediate remedial action, the mayor shall have the
authority to promulgate such temporary rules as are reasonably necessary in
effect when published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city
or, if such publication is not immediately available, when such rules are
announced through other means of communication calculated to give the public
reasonable notice. (Ord. 867, 5-28-2015)
8-1-13: WASTE PROHIBITED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to wastefully use water from
hydrants, faucets, stops, through basins, toilets, urinals, sinks, other
appliances, sprinkler systems, leaky joints, pipes, or to use the water for
purposes other than for those which he/she has paid. All users of water service
shall be required to keep their sprinklers, faucets, valves, hoses and all
apparatus connected to the water system in good condition at their own expense
and all waterways closed when not in use. When it shall be found that any
fixture on the user's premises is broken or not in serviceable condition, the
user shall be notified. The use of water in violation of the rules and
regulations controlling the water supply is also prohibited, with the following
exceptions:
      1.   Water used for the operation and maintenance of the water system is
permitted.
      2.   Water for firefighting purposes and hydrant testing is permitted.
   B.   After notification of violation, the city may terminate any service
found in violation of this section if, within a reasonable time period, the
condition has not been remedied. (Ord. 867, 5-28-2015)
8-1-14: ACCESS TO PREMISES:
The city, by its agents, shall at all ordinary hours have free access to places
supplied with water from the city water system for the purpose of examining the
water meter and ascertaining the amount of water used and the manner of its
use. The city shall not be liable for any damage to a water user by reason of
stoppage or interruption of his or her water supply caused by fire, scarcity of
water, accidents to works or mains, alterations, additions, repairs or from any
other unavoidable cause. The city council may by resolution regulate, restrict
or limit the use of water during any water shortage periods and shall have the
power to take all necessary steps and make any necessary regulations as
circumstances may require to protect the users of the city water. (1985 Code §
18-1-12; amd. 2001 Code; Ord. 867, 5-28-2015)
8-1-15: DISPUTE RESOLUTION:
If a dispute arises concerning the amount or accuracy of an owner or occupant's
water bill, he or she is entitled to the protection of the following dispute
resolution procedures:
   A.   Inspection: If requested, an inspection of the premises and the water
meter will be undertaken by an employee of the city.
   B.   Informal Conference: Prior to the scheduled termination date, the
customer may request an informal conference with a supervisory employee of the
water department. At this conference, each party shall be permitted to present
any information regarding the disputed bill. The customer shall be notified in
writing of the city's decision within two (2) days. This notice of decision
shall inform the customer that he or she has seven (7) days in which to appeal
the decision to an impartial hearing officer to be designated by the city.
   C.   Hearing: In the event the customer requests a hearing before a hearing
officer, the city shall appoint someone who is not an employee of the water
department to act as hearing officer. A hearing shall be held at which the
customer and the city may present any evidence they have on the accuracy of the
bill. A decision shall be made solely on the evidence presented at the hearing
and both sides shall be notified in writing of the decision within ten (10)
days.
   D.   Service Not Terminated During Dispute: No water service shall be
terminated if the owner or occupant of the premises is pursuing his or her
rights under these dispute resolution procedures. (1985 Code § 18-1-16; amd.
Ord. 867, 5-28-2015)
8-1-16: PENALTY:
Any person or corporation who violates any provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a class B misdemeanor and upon conviction such person shall be
punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1985 Code § 18-1-13; amd. 2001 Code; Ord. 867, 5-28-2015)
CHAPTER 2
BACKFLOW AND CROSS-CONNECTIONS
SECTION:
8-2-1: Definitions
8-2-2: Notification Of Public
8-2-3: Protection Required
8-2-4: New Construction
8-2-5: Installation Required
8-2-6: Inspections
8-2-7: Testing By Certified Backflow Technician
8-2-8: Repair And Maintenance
8-2-9: Existing Equipment
8-2-10: Records Maintenance
8-2-11: Violations
8-2-12: Penalty
8-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
BACK PRESSURE: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances under
pressure into the feeding distribution pipes of a potable water supply system
from any source other than the intended source.
BACK SIPHONAGE: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into
the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source other
than the intended source, caused by the reduction of pressure in the potable
water supply system.
BACKFLOW: The reversal of the normal flow of water caused by either back
pressure or back siphonage.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY: An assembly or means designed to prevent
backflow.
CROSS-CONNECTION: Any connection, including, but not limited to, lawn
sprinkling system connections, which may allow nonpotable water or industrial
fluids or other material of questionable quality to come into contact with
potable water inside a distribution system, including any temporary
connections, swing connections, removable connections, four (4) way plug
valves, swivel change-over devices, or other similar plumbing arrangements.
(1985 Code § 18-1-17; amd. 2001 Code)
8-2-2: NOTIFICATION OF PUBLIC:
Although failure of a consumer to be aware of these provisions shall be no
defense to violation hereof, the water department shall use reasonable means to
notify its consumers of the hazards of cross-connection and the need for annual
inspection of backflow prevention assemblies. (1985 Code § 18-1-17)
8-2-3: PROTECTION REQUIRED:
No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by
the city, or any other water utility, unless the water supplying the premises
is protected as required herein. (1985 Code § 18-1-17)
8-2-4: NEW CONSTRUCTION:
The approved designee of the city will review all plans for new construction to
ensure that unprotected cross-connections are not an integral part of the
consumer's water system. If a cross- connection cannot be eliminated,
protection will be required by installation of an air gap or other approved
backflow prevention device. (1985 Code § 18-1-17; amd. 2001 Code)
8-2-5: INSTALLATION REQUIRED:
Whenever the city deems a service connection's water usage contributes a
sufficient hazard to the water supply, installation of an approved backflow
prevention assembly shall be required on the lateral service line of the
consumer's water system, at or near the property line, or immediately inside
the building being served, but before the first branch line leading off the
lateral service line in any event. The type of protective assembly required
shall depend upon the degree of hazard existing at the point of cross-
connection. The city shall require that a test be performed on all testable
backflow prevention assemblies after the initial installation in order to
determine their adequacy. (1985 Code § 18-1-17)
8-2-6: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Access For Inspection: A consumer system shall be open for inspection
at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the city in order to
determine if cross-connections or other hazards exist. Consumers shall be
responsible to provide access across their property for inspection purposes,
free from litter, overgrowth, threat of vicious animals or other hinderance
that may be detrimental to ease of access.
   B.   Duty To Inspect Annually: It shall be the responsibility of the water
consumer to purchase, install, test and maintain backflow prevention devices
where necessary to prevent cross- connections. The consumer shall have
certified inspections and operational tests made at least once a year upon
request by the city. Where the city deems a hazard to be great, the consumer
may be required to have such inspections and tests at a more frequent interval
as prescribed by the city. All such tests shall be made according to the
standards set forth by the Utah Department of Health. (1985 Code § 18-1-17)
8-2-7: TESTING BY CERTIFIED BACKFLOW TECHNICIAN:
All tests of mechanical devices shall be conducted by a certified backflow
technician. Such technician shall be responsible for the following:
   A.   Ensure that acceptable testing equipment and procedures are used for
the testing, repairing or overhauling of backflow prevention assemblies.
   B.   Make reports of such testing and/or repair to the consumer, the city
and the bureau of drinking water and sanitation. Reports shall be in accordance
with the bureau's requirements.
   C.   Include in all reports a list of any materials or replacement parts
used.
   D.   Ensure that replacement parts are equal in quality to original parts
and that any testing, repair or replacement does not change the design or
operational characteristics of the assembly.
   E.   Maintain license in current condition and testing equipment in proper
operating condition.
   F.   Be competent to use all necessary equipment to properly test and
maintain backflow prevention assemblies.
   G.   Tag each double-check valve, pressure-vacuum breakers; reduce pressure
backflow assembly and high hazard air gap; show the serial number, date tested
and by whom, including the technician's license number. (1985 Code § 18-1-17)
8-2-8: REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Required: The maintenance of all backflow prevention assemblies and
cross-connection control devices required by this chapter shall be the
responsibility of the consumer, and failure to adequately maintain the required
equipment shall be a violation hereof. All installations and repairs of such
equipment shall be effected by a certified backflow technician as provided in
section
8-2-7 of this chapter.
   B.   Plumbers Authorized: Should a backflow prevention assembly be in need
of repair, the only individuals authorized to repair an assembly are licensed
journeymen plumbers with backflow technician certification (Class II or III),
or an agent of the owner.
   C.   Agent Of The Owner Defined: An "agent of the owner" is defined as a
person working for the owner of the assembly/device and whose job description
or normal duties authorize that person to effect repairs within the customer's
plumbing system.  A commercially available certified backflow technician who
inspects and tests backflow prevention assemblies or devices under contract
with the owner is not considered to be an "agent of the owner". (1985 Code §
18-1-17)
8-2-9: EXISTING EQUIPMENT:
All backflow prevention assemblies existing at the time this ordinance is
adopted which do not meet the requirements hereof shall be excluded from the
requirements hereof, provided they were approved for the purposes described
herein at the time of installation and have been properly maintained. Such
previously- existing assemblies shall be subject to the periodic inspection and
testing required by subsection 8-2-6B of this chapter. Whenever an existing
assembly is moved to another location or requires more than minimum
maintenance, or where it is determined to constitute a hazard to health, the
unit shall be replaced by an approved backflow prevention assembly. (1985 Code
§ 18-1-17)
8-2-10: RECORDS MAINTENANCE:
The water department shall keep reasonable records of cross- connection hazards
and the condition of backflow assemblies, including those records required by
state and federal agencies.  (1985 Code § 18-1-17)
8-2-11: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Conditions Constituting Violation: Service of water to a consumer found
to be in violation of this chapter shall be discontinued by the city after
written notice of the violation, ten (10) days suspended for voluntary
compliance, and due process otherwise extended by the city before termination
of water service. A violation exists if:
      1.   A backflow prevention assembly required herein for control of cross-
connections is not installed, tested or maintained.
      2.   It if is found that a backflow prevention assembly is removed or has
been bypassed.
      3.   If an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises.
      4.   If the periodic system inspection has not been conducted.
   B.   Failure To Correct: Where written notification of a deficiency is
provided by the city to the consumer to take required corrective action within
ten (10) days after the date of mailing such notice, the city shall thereafter
discontinue service in accordance herewith. Water service will not be restored
until all such conditions or defects are corrected, and the appropriate fee
assessed, if any, for reconnection shall be paid by the consumer. (1985 Code §
18-1-17)
8-2-12: PENALTY:
In addition to any penalty provided herein, violation of this chapter shall be
a Class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1985 Code § 18-1-17; amd. 2001 Code)
CHAPTER 3
SEWER USE AND SERVICE
SECTION:
8-3-1: Use Mandatory; Fee
8-3-2: Sewer Lateral Connection And Disconnection Requirements
8-3-3: Wastewater Control
8-3-4: Penalty
8-3-1: USE MANDATORY; FEE:
   A.   Distance Requirement: Any person who owns property within the city on
which is located any building used for human occupancy shall hook up to the
city's sewer system when the sewer is available and within three hundred feet
(300') of any property line.
   B.   Fee 1 ; Billing: The city shall collect a reasonable fee for this sewer
service in order to defray the cost of construction, maintenance and operation
of the sewer system. The fee shall be set by resolution of the city council. At
the discretion of the chief administrative officer, the city may make one
charge for the combined use of water and the service of the sewer system. A
utility service fee waiver (water, sewer, garbage, recycle and storm) is
available to all residents on active military deployment who submit a fee
waiver form and provide a copy of their orders.
   C.   Failure To Comply: If any person fails to hook up to the sewer system
where it is available or if any applicant fails to pay for the sewer service
provided, the chief administrative officer shall cause the water to be shut off
from such premises until such person has hooked up to the sewer at his own
expense or has paid for all past due sewer service. (Ord. 834, 4-16-2013)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 1, chapter 12 of this code for sewer fees.
8-3-2: SEWER LATERAL CONNECTION AND DISCONNECTION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Defined: The term "sewer lateral connection", as used in this chapter,
shall mean any pipe from any building running to any public sewer, which pipe
is receiving, or intended to receive, the total discharge from any fixture or
set of fixtures in such building. (1985 Code § 18-2-1)
   B.   Requirements For Connections: All connections must be watertight. Where
connections are used between different types of pipe, special fittings using
rubber gaskets shall be used. No poured nor cement joints may be used. (1985
Code § 18-2-4)
   C.   Permit And Inspection Required: All sewer lateral connections shall be
laid so that the same are watertight and shall not be covered nor backfilled
until the installation has been inspected and approved by an inspector for the
city. It shall be unlawful for any person to commence installation of a sewer
lateral connection without first having secured a permit from the city. (1985
Code § 18-2-11)
   D.   Defective Work: Any installation of sewer lateral connections with a
permit but without inspection shall be deemed to be defective work; and all
defective work shall be condemned and uncovered, and if need be, shall be
reconstructed. (1985 Code § 18-2-12)
   E.   Permit Fee Required 1 : No permit for the installation of a sewer
lateral connection shall be issued by the city unless the proper fee has been
paid, as may from time to time be required by resolution of the city council.
No additional fee shall be required for the issuance of the sewer lateral
connection permit as herein required. (1985 Code § 18-2-15)
   F.   Application For Connection: Application for such lateral connection
shall be made in writing on forms to be provided by the city recorder, and such
application shall be made by the owner, his duly authorized agent, or by the
plumber intending to lay such sewer connection. Such application shall be
accompanied by a sketch plan showing the purpose and location of the said
connection, the depth thereof, and the location of any branch lines as may be
required by a city inspector. (1985 Code § 18-2-16)
   G.   Connection To Roof Or Ground Water Drain Prohibited: It shall be
unlawful to connect, or permit connection of, any roof drain or ground water
drain to any system which is served by sewer connection. (1985 Code § 18-2-16)
   H.   Sewer Manhole Not To Be Opened: It shall be a class B misdemeanor for
any person to open any sewer manhole without permission from the city. (1985
Code § 18-2-21.5; amd. 2001 Code)
   I.   Disconnection Of Abandoned Sewer Lateral Connections: In the event any
sewer lateral connection that is or has been receiving discharge from any
building, house or area is abandoned for any reason whatsoever, it shall be the
responsibility of the owner thereof to disconnect and plug the sewer lateral
connection at the property line at the expense of said owner. The disconnection
must be inspected and approved by the public works department before any permit
for building demolition is issued. (Ord. 618, 6-17-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 1, chapter 12 of this code for fee provisions.
8-3-3: WASTEWATER CONTROL:
The wastewater control rules and regulations for the Central Weber sewer
improvement district, dated June 1, 1991, together with any addendums or
attachments thereto, a copy of which rules and regulations is attached to the
ordinance codified herein and on file in the city office, are hereby adopted
and made part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. All prior
ordinances or rules and regulations previously adopted by the city council
which are in conflict with the wastewater control rules and regulations for the
Central Weber sewer improvement district adopted herein are hereby repealed.
(1985 Code § 18-2-23; amd. 2001 Code)
8-3-4: PENALTY:
Any person or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of a class B misdemeanor, and upon conviction such person shall be
punished as is provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1985 Code § 18-2-24)
CHAPTER 4
SURPLUS UTILITY SERVICES
SECTION:
8-4-1: Definitions
8-4-2: Policy Of City
8-4-3: Violation
8-4-4: Removal Of Connection
8-4-5: Penalty
8-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall mean:
CONNECTION: Any means (fixed or movable) utilized by any person, firm,
partnership, limited company or corporation for the purpose of employing,
utilizing, transporting, carrying or conveying any Riverdale City utility
service or services to, on, under or across any parcel of real property for the
beneficial use or enjoyment of said utility service or services on, under, by,
with or in conjunction with said parcel of real property or any appurtenances
thereto.
UTILITY SERVICES: Any Riverdale City operated or controlled waterworks, water
supply and derivatives thereof, sewer and/or storm sewer collection and
treatment systems for which Riverdale City does, will or may charge a fee for
the beneficial use or enjoyment thereof.
WATER, WATER SUPPLY AND WATERWORKS: Include, but are not limited to, any water
purchased from or offered for sale by Riverdale City both before and after said
water passes through any metering or measuring device. The designation of water
as a city utility service shall continue even after said water has passed
through a metering or measuring device or diversion of any kind or nature
whatsoever and continues to be a city utility service for purposes of this
chapter both before and after the possession of said water has been taken by
the purchaser or user thereof. (1985 Code § 18-4-1)
8-4-2: POLICY OF CITY:
   A.   Limited Services: The city hereby declares that, due to the ever
growing demands placed upon its utility services by its citizenry and the
commercial developments located within the city, the city does not have any
primary nor surplus utility services to sell or to provide in any manner
whatsoever, directly or indirectly, to nonresidents, commercial developments or
to parcels of real property located outside the city's corporate limits. The
city shall not sell, deliver, provide to, nor allow any person, firm,
partnership, limited company or corporation to purchase, take or divert from
the city any utility services of any kind or nature whatsoever.
   B.   Exception: Excepted from the purchase or sale prohibitions set forth in
this chapter, are such nonresidents and parcels of real property to which the
city has supplied utility services for a continuous period of not less than one
year prior to the enactment of the ordinance codified herein. (1985 Code § 18-
4-2)
8-4-3: VIOLATION:
Any person, firm, partnership, limited company or corporation who knowingly or
intentionally makes any utility service connection or diversion of any kind or
nature whatsoever, that purveys, directly or indirectly, any utility service to
or for the beneficial use or enjoyment of, on, under, across, with or in
conjunction with any real property and appurtenances thereto located outside
the city corporate limits, or who, upon notice from the city, allows any
connection or diversion of any kind or nature whatsoever, that purveys,
directly or indirectly, any utility service to or for the beneficial use or
enjoyment of, on, under, across, with or in conjunction with any real property
and appurtenances thereto located outside the city corporate limits to continue
for a period of more than ten (10) days, without the express written consent of
the city council, shall be in violation of this chapter, and shall be subject
to the penalty provisions of this chapter. Any violation of this chapter shall
be classified as theft of utility services. (1985 Code § 18-4-3)
8-4-4: REMOVAL OF CONNECTION:
Any person, firm, partnership, limited company or corporation violating any
provision of this chapter shall, within ten (10) days of notice given by the
city, remove and cap the connection or diversion which creates or created the
violation of this chapter. Said removal and cap shall be accomplished at the
expense of the party violating this chapter. In the event the party violating
this chapter does not remove and cap the connection or diversion, as directed
herein, the city may remove and cap, without further notice, the connection or
diversion and assess and collect the cost of said removal and cap from the
party violating this chapter. Any penalty imposed upon a party violating this
chapter pursuant to section
8-4-5 of this chapter, shall be in addition to the requirement of removal and
capping of the connection or diversion as set forth in this section. (1985 Code
§ 18-4-4)
8-4-5: PENALTY:
Any person, firm, partnership, limited company or corporation who violates any
provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor, and upon
conviction, such person, firm, partnership, limited company or corporation
shall be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1985 Code § 18-4-5)
CHAPTER 5
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND REGULATION PLAN
ARTICLE A.  STORM SEWER UTILITY
SECTION:
8-5A-1: Findings
8-5A-2: Purpose
8-5A-3: Definitions
8-5A-4: Storm Sewer Utility Creation And Operation
8-5A-5: Storm Sewer Utility Fee
8-5A-6: Billing
8-5A-1: FINDINGS:
The city council makes the following findings regarding stormwater runoff and
the city's storm sewer system:
   A.   The city's existing storm sewer system consists of a network of manmade
and natural facilities, structures and conduits, including groundwater and
aquifers, which collect and route stormwater runoff.
   B.   The city's existing storm sewer system does not adequately handle the
stormwater runoff generated in the city in some locations.
   C.   The city's anticipated growth may place increased demands on the
already inadequate storm sewer system.
   D.   Uncontrolled or inadequately controlled stormwater runoff may endanger
the city's groundwater supply.
   E.   Uncontrolled or inadequately controlled stormwater runoff may cause
erosion and property damage.
   F.   Uncontrolled or inadequately controlled stormwater runoff may hinder
the city's ability to provide emergency services to its residents.
   G.   Uncontrolled or inadequately controlled stormwater runoff may impede
the regular flow of traffic in the city.
   H.   Uncontrolled or inadequately controlled stormwater runoff may pose
health hazards to the citizens of the community.
   I.   Stormwater runoff carries concentrations of oil, grease, nutrients,
chemicals, heavy metals, toxic materials and other undesirable materials that
may jeopardize the integrity of groundwaters and receiving waters, including
the city's culinary water supply.
   J.   All developed properties in the city contribute to the need for the
storm sewer system in varying degrees by converting natural ground cover into
impervious surfaces.
   K.   All developed properties in the city make use of or benefit from the
city's operation and maintenance of the storm sewer system.
   L.   The state department of environmental quality (DEQ) has determined that
some of the city's stormwater sumps must be included on the prioritized
contamination sources for culinary wells.
   M.   The EPA and DEQ are developing additional stormwater permitting
requirements that will apply to cities.
   N.   Absent effective maintenance, operation, regulation and control,
existing stormwater drainage conditions in the city constitute a potential
hazard to the health, safety and general welfare of the city, its residents,
and its businesses.
   O.   A storm sewer utility is the most equitable and efficient method of
managing stormwater in the city and ensuring that each property in the city
pays its fair share of the amount that the property contributes to, benefits
from, and otherwise uses the storm sewer system. (Ord. 829, 12-18-2012)
8-5A-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
city and its inhabitants by improving the city's storm sewer system, managing
and controlling stormwater runoff, protecting property, preventing polluted
waters from entering the city's water supply and other receiving waters, and
establishing a viable and fair method of financing the construction, operation
and maintenance of the storm sewer system. (Ord. 829, 12-18-2012)
8-5A-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall be defined as follows:
DEVELOPED PARCEL: Any parcel that has been altered from its natural condition
by grading, filling, or the construction of improvements or other impervious
surfaces.
EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT (ERU): The average amount of impervious surface,
expressed in square feet, on developed single-family residential parcels in
Riverdale. One ERU equals two thousand six hundred (2,600) square feet of
impervious surface area.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: Any hard surface, other than the natural surface, that
prevents or retards the absorption of water into the soil, or that causes water
to run off the surface in greater quantities or at a greater rate of flow than
the natural surface. (Ord. 829, 12-18-2012)
8-5A-4: STORM SEWER UTILITY CREATION AND OPERATION:
   A.   Creation: The city council hereby creates and establishes a storm sewer
utility as part of the city's overall sewer system. The storm sewer utility
shall plan, design, construct, maintain, administer and operate the city's
storm sewer system.
   B.   Enterprise Fund: The city council hereby establishes a storm sewer
utility enterprise fund to handle all income, expenses and other financial
transactions related to the storm sewer utility. All storm sewer utility
service charges shall be deposited in the enterprise fund. Money in the storm
sewer utility enterprise fund shall not be commingled with or transferred to
other city funds. However, the storm sewer utility may pay other city funds for
services and expenses directly attributable to the storm sewer utility. The
enterprise fund shall be operated according to state law and city policy.
   C.   Facilities And Assets: The storm sewer utility shall operate
independently of city operations funded by the general fund. The storm sewer
utility shall have the same relationship to the city as other city utilities,
such as the water utility and the sanitary sewer (wastewater) utility. Upon
creation of the utility, all of the city's stormwater facilities and assets
(other than streets and other facilities and assets designated by the city
administrator) shall be transferred to the storm sewer utility in consideration
for the storm sewer utility's agreement to take primary responsibility for
planning, designing, constructing, maintaining, administering and operating the
city's storm sewer system.
   D.   Administration: The storm sewer utility shall be administered by the
city's public works director. (Ord. 829, 12-18-2012)
8-5A-5: STORM SEWER UTILITY FEE:
   A.   Imposed: Each developed parcel of real property in the city shall be
charged a storm sewer utility fee.
   B.   ERU: The fee shall be based on the number of equivalent residential
units (ERUs) contained in the parcel. The city council finds that the ERU is
the most accurate measurement for determining the amount that each parcel
contributes to, benefits from, and otherwise uses the storm sewer utility.
Based on a study completed by an independent engineer, the city council finds
and establishes that one ERU equals two thousand six hundred (2,600) square
feet of impervious surface area.
   C.   Calculation: The city council finds that each single-family residential
parcel contributes approximately the same amount of stormwater runoff;
therefore, each developed single-family residential parcel shall pay a base
rate of one ERU. All nonsingle-family residential parcels shall pay a multiple
of this base rate, expressed in ERUs, according to the measured impervious area
on the parcel. The city council may adopt separate rates for PRDs, condominiums
and other uses that are not easily handled under the standard rate schedule.
   D.   Charge Per ERU: The amount charged for each ERU shall be established by
resolution of the city council.
   E.   Exemptions And Credits: The city council may establish exemptions and
credits to the storm sewer utility fee by resolution.
   F.   Policies: The public works director may adopt policies, consistent with
this chapter and any other resolutions passed by the city council, to assist in
the application, administration and interpretation of this chapter and any
resolutions related to the storm sewer utility.
   G.   Appeals: Any person or entity that believes that this article, or any
storm sewer utility rate resolution, was interpreted or applied erroneously may
appeal to the public works director ("director"). The appeal shall be in
writing, shall state any facts supporting the appeal, and shall be made within
ten (10) days of the decision, action, or bill being appealed. The director may
elect to hold a hearing on the appeal. The director shall decide the appeal
within ten (10) days of when the appeal is filed. If the person or entity is
not satisfied with the director's decision, a further appeal may be made to the
city administrator (or his or her designee). The appeal to the city
administrator shall follow the same procedure as the appeal to the director.
The city administrator's decision shall be final and binding on all parties.
(Ord. 829, 12-18-2012)
8-5A-6: BILLING:
The city council finds that the city's storm sewer system, sanitary sewer
system, culinary water system, and solid waste collection system are
interrelated services that are part of a unified city plan to provide for the
health, safety and welfare of the city and its residents in an environmentally
responsible manner. Therefore, the storm sewer utility fee shall be included on
the city's regular monthly utility bill for any given property. If there is no
regular utility bill for the property, the storm sewer utility fee shall be
charged to the owner of the property. The fee shall be deemed a civil debt owed
to the city by the person or entity paying for the city utility services
provided to the property. All properties shall be charged the fee, regardless
of whether or not the owner or occupant of the property requests the storm
sewer utility service. Failure to pay any portion of the utility bill may
result in termination of water service. (Ord. 829, 12-18-2012)
ARTICLE B.  STORM DRAINAGE
SECTION:
8-5B-1: Definitions
8-5B-2: Prohibited Obstructions
8-5B-3: Prohibited Discharges
8-5B-4: Prohibited Storage And Littering
8-5B-5: Storm Sewer Connection Permit
8-5B-6: Best Management Practices
8-5B-7: Easements
8-5B-8: Proper Operation And Maintenance
8-5B-9: Authority To Inspect
8-5B-10: Requirement To Monitor And Analyze
8-5B-11: Notice Of Violation
8-5B-12: Damage To Storm Sewer System Or Irrigation Lines
8-5B-13: Manhole Covers
8-5B-14: Drinking Water Protection
8-5B-15: Violation And Penalty
8-5B-16: Compliance With Federal And State Law
8-5B-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall be defined as follows for the purpose of
this article and article C, "Stormwater Construction Activity Permit", of this
chapter:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): A wide range of management procedures,
schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and
other management practices which have been demonstrated to effectively control
the quality and/or quantity of stormwater runoff and which are compatible with
the planned land use. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal, or drainage from raw material storage.
CATCH BASIN: A drain inlet designed to keep out large or obstructive matter.
DEBRIS: Any dirt, rock, sand, vegetation, rubbish or litter.
DETENTION BASIN: A depression designed to detain stormwater runoff until
downstream storm sewer resources are less heavily taxed. A detention basin
contains an inlet and an outlet, allows debris to settle out, and regulates
water flow.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, but not
limited to, site preparation, filling, grading, paving, excavation, and
construction of buildings or other structures.
DIRECTOR: The public works director of Riverdale City or his/her duly appointed
designee, agent, or representative.
DISTURB: To alter the physical condition, natural terrain or vegetation of land
by clearing, grubbing, grading, excavating, filling, building or other
construction activity.
DRAIN INLET: A point of entry into a sump, detention basin, or storm drain
system.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL: Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to, a substantial presence or potential hazard to human health, safety,
property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of, or otherwise managed. Hazardous material includes, but is not
limited to: any hazardous substance designated under 40 CFR part 116 pursuant
to section 311 of the clean water act.
ILLICIT CONNECTION: Means either of the following:
   A.   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system. Examples include,
but are not limited to, any conveyances which allow nonstormwater discharge
such as sewage, process wastewater, or wash water to enter the storm drain
system, and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains or
sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously
allowed, permitted, or approved by a government agency; or
   B.   Any drain or conveyance connected to or discharging to the storm drain
system, which has not been: 1) documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records
submitted to the city; and 2) approved in writing by the city.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE: Any nonstormwater discharge to the storm sewer system.
Illicit discharges include both direct connections (e.g., wastewater piping
either mistakenly or deliberately connected to the storm sewer system) and
indirect connections (e.g., infiltration into the storm sewer system or spills
collected by drain inlets).
LAND DEVELOPMENT: Any development of a parcel, lot, subdivision plat, or site
plan. If there is more than one lot in the subdivision plat or site plan, all
lots in the subdivision plat or site plan shall jointly be considered to be
part of the land development.
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT: Land planning and engineering design approach to
managing stormwater runoff. LID emphasizes conservation and use of on site
natural resources to protect water quality. This approach implements engineered
small scale hydrologic controls to replicate the predevelopment hydrologic
regime of watersheds through infiltration, filtering, storing, evaporating and
retaining runoff close to its source.
NONSTORMWATER RUNOFF: Any runoff other than stormwater.
PERSON: Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, company or body
politic, including any agency of the state of Utah and the United States
government.
POLLUTANT: Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological
materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock,
sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal and agricultural waste, paints,
varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid
and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other
discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, that may cause or
contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers;
hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens;
dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residue that result
from constructing a building or structure (including, but not limited to,
sediments, slurries, and concrete resonates); and noxious or offensive matter
of any kind.
REDEVELOPMENT: Alterations of a property that change the footprint of a site or
building. Exterior building alterations of less than two thousand (2,000)
square feet, that have minimal impact on stormwater and all interior
alterations are not considered redevelopment for purposes of requiring a storm
sewer connection permit.
STORM DRAIN: A closed conduit for conducting collected stormwater.
STORM SEWER SYSTEM: The system of conveyance (including sidewalks, roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, detention basins, curbs,
gutters, ditches, manmade channels, sumps, storm drains, and groundwater) owned
and operated by the city, which is designed and used for collecting or
conveying stormwater. The storm sewer system is also referred to as a
"municipal separate storm sewer system" or "MS4".
STORMWATER: Any flow that occurs during or following any form of natural
precipitation. Stormwater includes only the portion of such flow that is
composed of precipitation.
STORMWATER RUNOFF: Water that is generated by stormwater flows over land.
SUMP: A formalized underground structure, surrounded by drain rock, which acts
as a detention basin to allow the slow release of water into the surrounding
subsoil. Sumps usually receive stormwater runoff from paved areas such as
streets, parking lots, building roofs, etc. (Ord. 829, 12-18-2012; amd. Ord.
884, 3-7-2017)
8-5B-2: PROHIBITED OBSTRUCTIONS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to:
      1.   Obstruct the flow of water in the storm sewer system.
      2.   Contribute to the obstruction of the flow of water in the storm
sewer system.
      3.   Cover or obstruct any drain inlet.
   B.   The following obstructions are exempt from the prohibitions of this
section:
      1.   Street and/or storm sewer improvement projects authorized by the
city.
      2.   Flood control and prevention activities performed by the city.
      3.   Obstructions approved by the city as part of a site's stormwater
drainage plan.
      4.   Obstructions occurring during cleanup periods established by the
city, provided that the materials are placed according to city directions and
do not obstruct drain inlets. (Ord. 829, 12-18-2012)
8-5B-3: PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to cause or allow an illicit discharge to
the storm sewer system.
   B.   It is unlawful to discharge spills, illicit connections, illegal
dumping, and sanitary sewer overflows into the stormwater system.
   C.   The following discharges to the storm sewer system are exempt from the
prohibitions of this section:
      1.   Discharges regulated under a valid national pollutant discharge
elimination system (NPDES) storm discharge permit, provided that the discharge
complies with the terms of the permit.
      2.   Discharges from water line flushing performed by the city.
      3.   Discharges from sprinkled landscape irrigation or sprinkled lawn
watering.
      4.   Discharges from individual residential car washing, provided that a
biodegradable detergent is used.
      5.   Discharges from natural riparian habitat or wetland flows.
      6.   Discharges from natural groundwater flows.
      7.   Discharges from air conditioning condensation.
      8.   Discharges from emergency firefighting or emergency management
activities.
      9.   Discharges from swimming pools constructed prior to April 10, 1990.
      10.   Discharges from foundation drains, footing drains, or crawl space
or basement pumps if the discharges have been approved in writing by the city.
      11.   Discharges allowed by a Riverdale City storm sewer connection
permit. (Ord. 829, 12-18-2012)
8-5B-4: PROHIBITED STORAGE AND LITTERING:
It is unlawful for any person to maintain, store, keep, deposit or leave any
pollutant or hazardous material, or any item containing a pollutant or
hazardous material, in a manner that is likely to result in the discharge of
the pollutant or hazardous material to the storm sewer system. (Ord. 829, 12-
18-2012)
8-5B-5: STORM SEWER CONNECTION PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall connect to the city's storm sewer
system, either directly or indirectly, without first obtaining a storm sewer
connection permit from the city.
   B.   When Permit Required: Any person beginning new construction
(development of an undeveloped parcel) or "redevelopment" (as defined in this
article) in the city shall obtain a storm sewer connection permit before
commencing construction.
   C.   Application: The applicant for a storm sewer connection permit shall
submit the following to the city:
      1.   Application Form: A completed application form. Application forms
will be available at the Riverdale community development department.
      2.   BMP Plan: A plan incorporating stormwater BMPs that meet the
requirements of section
8-5B-6 of this article.
      3.   Maintenance Plan: A plan outlining how the applicant will maintain
the stormwater improvements listed in the application. The design and planning
of all stormwater management facilities shall include detailed maintenance and
repair procedures to ensure their continued performance. The plans will
identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility that need
to be maintained and the equipment and skills or training necessary. Provisions
for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance
program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall
be included in the plan. An inspection schedule shall be included, providing
the recommended inspection intervals for all major components of the stormwater
management facility. Inspections shall be conducted at least annually. A
permanent elevation bench mark shall be identified in the plans to assist in
the periodic inspection of the facility.
      4.   Maintenance Easement: The applicant must ensure access to the site
for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance
easements needed. These easements must be binding on the current property owner
and all subsequent owners of the property and must be properly recorded in the
land record.
      5.   Maintenance Agreement: The owner of the property to be served by an
on site stormwater management facility must execute an inspection and
maintenance agreement that shall operate as a deed restriction binding on the
current property owner and all subsequent property owners. The maintenance
agreement shall:
         a.   Assign responsibility for the maintenance and repair of the
stormwater facility to the owner of the property upon which the facility is
located and be recorded as such on the plat for the property by appropriate
notation.
         b.   Provide for a periodic inspection by the property owner for the
purpose of documenting maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with
the purpose and requirements of this chapter. The property owner will arrange
for this inspection to be conducted by a registered professional engineer
licensed to practice in the state of Utah who will submit a sealed report of
the inspection to the public works department. It shall also grant permission
to the city to enter the property at reasonable times and to inspect the
stormwater facility to ensure that it is being properly maintained.
         c.   Provide that the minimum maintenance and repair needs include,
but are not limited to, the removal of silt, litter and other debris, the
cutting of grass, grass cutting and vegetation removal, and the replacement of
landscape vegetation, in detention and retention basins, and inlets, and
drainage pipes and any other stormwater facilities. It shall also provide that
the owner shall be responsible for additional maintenance and repair needs
consistent with the needs and standards outlined in the maintenance plan.
         d.   Provide that the maintenance needs must be addressed in a timely
manner, on a schedule to be determined by the public works department.
         e.   Provide that if the property is not maintained or repaired within
the prescribed schedule, the public works department shall have the maintenance
and repair done at its expense and bill the same to the property owner. The
maintenance agreement shall also provide that the public works department cost
of performing the maintenance shall be a lien against the property.
         f.   The municipality shall have the discretion to accept the
dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility, provided
such facility meets the requirements of this chapter, and includes adequate and
perpetual access and sufficient areas, by easements or otherwise, for
inspection and regular maintenance. Any stormwater facility accepted by the
municipality must also meet the municipality's construction standards and any
other standards and specifications that apply to the particular stormwater
facility in question.
      6.   Stormwater Management Plan: A stormwater management plan providing
for stormwater management during the land disturbing activity and after the
activity has been completed.
      7.   Fee: A fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council.
   D.   Application: The application shall be submitted to the city's community
development department.
   E.   Review: The storm sewer connection permit application shall be reviewed
by the storm sewer utility manager and either approved, approved with
conditions, or denied. Either the permit applicant or the city may appeal the
storm sewer utility manager's decision to the public works director. The appeal
shall be made according to procedures established by the public works
department.
   F.   Factors: When deciding whether to approve, conditionally approve, or
deny a storm sewer connection permit application, the following factors shall
be considered:
      1.   Whether the application complies with applicable city ordinances and
policies.
      2.   Whether the application complies with the Riverdale City storm
drainage master plan.
      3.   Whether the proposed connection incorporates best management
practices.
      4.   Whether the proposed connection introduces pollutants into the storm
drain system.
      5.   Whether the proposed connection creates a safety hazard.
      6.   Whether the proposed connection affects the integrity of the storm
sewer system infrastructure.
      7.   Whether the proposed connection endangers the city's drinking water.
      8.   Whether the applicant has submitted a maintenance plan ensuring the
proper maintenance and upkeep of the applicant's connection and on site
stormwater improvements.
   G.   Failure: Failure to construct or maintain stormwater improvements in
accordance with an approved storm sewer connection permit shall be a violation
of this article.
   H.   As Builts: Any person connecting to the storm sewer system shall
provide the city's storm sewer utility with "as built" plans showing the
details and the location of the connection. The plans shall be in a format that
is acceptable to the city.
   I.   Rate: Connections to the storm sewer system shall be designed so that
the discharge to the storm sewer system does not exceed two-tenths (0.2) cubic
foot per second per acre.
   J.   Exempt Connections: The following connections to the storm sewer system
are exempt from the permitting requirements of this section:
      1.   Connections from single-family residences provided that the runoff
from the residences is handled according to a plat or site plan approved by the
city. However, any person desiring to use a basement pump, foundation drain, or
other related fixture directly or indirectly connecting to the storm sewer
system must obtain a storm sewer connection permit.
      2.   Connections made by the city. (Ord. 829, 12-18-2012)
8-5B-6: BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES:
Any person connecting to the storm sewer system or developing a commercial or
industrial site shall employ best management practices (BMPs) approved by the
city. Consideration should be given to LIDs. The city shall adopt a policy
establishing a menu of BMPs that may be used to satisfy this requirement. The
BMPs may be structural and/or nonstructural, depending on the needs of the
site. The BMPs shall be designed to ensure that the quality and quantity of
stormwater released to the city's storm sewer system meets the requirements of
federal, state and local laws and regulations and the city's NPDES permit, and
will not exceed the designed capacity of the storm sewer system or jeopardize
the integrity of the storm sewer system. BMPs shall include documentation for
the selected long term BMP for the anticipated performance levels, sizing,
installation requirements, operation, and maintenance. (Ord. 829, 12-18-2012)
8-5B-7: EASEMENTS:
The director may enter all private properties through which the city holds an
easement for the purposes of inspecting, observing, measuring, sampling,
repairing or maintaining any portion of the storm sewer facilities lying within
the easement, or the performance of any other duties pertinent to the operation
of the storm sewer system. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on an
easement, shall be completed according to any special terms of the easement.
(Ord. 829, 12-18-2012)
8-5B-8: PROPER OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   All long term structural BMPs shall be properly installed and
maintained. The owner of the BMP shall be required to enter into a maintenance
agreement with the city to establish the minimum operating and maintenance
requirements for the given BMP. As a minimum, this agreement will require that
annual inspections of the BMP be conducted and that the BMP be maintained to
ensure that the BMP can effectively perform its function, in accordance with
the manufacturer's specifications, and good engineering practices. All
inspection and maintenance requirements shall be recorded with the property and
shall be transferred with the property to any new owners and/or lessees.
   B.   Should the owner of the property fail to meet the requirements of
proper operation and maintenance of the BMP, the city shall notify the owner in
writing of the deficiencies. If the property owner fails to correct the
deficiencies within the specified time frame, the city may enter the premises
at all reasonable times to perform the required maintenance. All costs and
expenditures needed to perform this maintenance shall be the sole
responsibility of the owner. (Ord. 829, 12-18-2012)
8-5B-9: AUTHORITY TO INSPECT:
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provision of this
article, or whenever the city has cause to believe that there exists, or
potentially exists, a condition which constitutes a violation of this article,
the city may enter the premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same and
to inspect and copy records related to stormwater compliance. In the event the
owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter and inspect has been
made, the city is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of
competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. (Ord. 829, 12-18-2012)
8-5B-10: REQUIREMENT TO MONITOR AND ANALYZE:
If city tests or inspections indicate that a site is causing or contributing to
stormwater pollution, illegal discharges, and/or nonstormwater discharges to
the storm sewer system or waters of the United States, and if the violations
continue after notice from the city, the city may require any person engaged in
the illicit activity and/or the owner or operator of the site to provide, at
their own expense, monitoring and analyses required by the city to determine
compliance with this article. (Ord. 829, 12-18-2012)
8-5B-11: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
   A.   Whenever the city finds that a person has violated a prohibition or
failed to comply with a requirement of this article, the city will order
compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such
notice may require without limitation:
      1.   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
      2.   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
      3.   That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
      4.   The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
      5.   Payment to cover administrative, remediation, monitoring, analyses,
and reporting costs; and
      6.   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
   B.   The city may skip the notice requirements set forth in this section and
immediately proceed with criminal and/or civil action against the violator if:
1) the violator has committed the same violation in the past; or 2) the
violation, in the opinion of the city, creates a serious risk to persons, the
environment or property; or 3) the city deems the violation to constitute an
emergency. (Ord. 829, 12-18-2012)
8-5B-12: DAMAGE TO STORM SEWER SYSTEM OR IRRIGATION LINES:
Any person who damages any portion of the storm sewer system, a city owned
irrigation line, or a city maintained irrigation line shall be responsible for
repairing the damages. The damages shall be repaired by a licensed contractor
bonded to do work in the city and shall be repaired in accordance with the
city's construction standards and specifications. It is unlawful to remove or
alter any portion of the storm sewer system without permission from the
director. (Ord. 829, 12-18-2012)
8-5B-13: MANHOLE COVERS:
It shall be unlawful to open any storm sewer manhole or other storm sewer
fixture (such as grates, lids or inlets) without permission from the director.
(Ord. 829, 12-18-2012)
8-5B-14: DRINKING WATER PROTECTION:
All stormwater and nonstormwater discharges shall comply with the city's
drinking water source protection ordinance. (Ord. 829, 12-18-2012)
8-5B-15: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
   A.   Enforcement Authority: The public works director or his designees shall
have the authority to issue notices of violation, stop work orders, and
citations, and to impose the civil penalties provided in this section.
      1.   With the issuances of a stormwater permit, the public works director
or his designees shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to
this chapter at all reasonable times and as often as necessary to determine
compliance. Failure to comply with terms of this chapter may result in punitive
actions by Riverdale City ordinance enforcement, Weber County health
department, or by other means identified in permits or terms set forth in
development applications.
   B.   Notice Of Violation: The violation of any provision of this article is
a class C misdemeanor. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a
separate offense.
      1.   Written Notice: Whenever the inspector finds that any permittee or
any other person discharging stormwater has violated or is violating this
chapter, permit, or order issued hereunder, the inspector may serve upon such
person written notice of the violation. Within ten (10) days of this notice, an
explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and
prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted to
the director. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the discharger of
liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of
violation.
      2.   Consent Orders: The public works director is empowered to enter into
consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents
establishing an agreement with the person responsible for the noncompliance.
Such orders will include specific action to be taken.
      3.   Show Cause Hearing: The director may order any person who violates
this chapter or permit or order issued hereunder, to show cause why a proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the person
specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action,
and the reason for such action, and a request that the violator show cause why
this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting
shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail at least ten (10)
days prior to the hearing.
      4.   Compliance Order: When the director finds that any person has
violated or continues to violate this chapter or a permit or order issued
thereunder, he/she may issue an order to the violator directing that, following
a specific time period, adequate structures or devices be installed or
procedures implemented and properly operated to fix the violation. Orders may
also contain other requirements as might be reasonably necessary and
appropriate to address the noncompliance, including the construction of
appropriate structures, installation of devices, self-monitoring, and
management practices.
      5.   Cease And Desist Orders: When the public works director finds that
any person has violated or continues to violate this chapter or any permit or
order issue hereunder, the director may issue an order to cease and desist all
such violations and direct those persons in noncompliance to comply forthwith
or take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to
properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting
operations and terminating discharge.
      6.   Conflicting Standards: Whenever there is conflict between any
standard contained in this chapter and in the BMP manual adopted by the
municipality under this chapter, the strictest standard shall prevail.
   C.   Violations: Any person who shall commit any act declared unlawful under
this chapter, who violates any provision of this chapter, who violates the
provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or who fails or
refuses to comply with any lawful communication or notice to abate or take
corrective action by the public works director, shall be guilty of a class C
misdemeanor.
   D.   Penalties: Under the authority provided in Utah Code Annotated
4-2-1, the municipality declares that any person violating the provisions of
this chapter may be assessed a class C misdemeanor by the city of not less than
fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per
day for each day of violation.
   E.   Measuring Civil Penalties: In assessing a civil penalty, the public
works director may consider:
      1.   The harm done to the public health or the environment.
      2.   Whether the civil penalty imposed will be a substantial economic
deterrent to the illegal activity.
      3.   The economic benefit gained by the violator.
      4.   The amount of effort put forth by the violator to remedy this
violation.
      5.   Any unusual or extraordinary enforcement costs incurred by the
municipality.
      6.   The amount of penalty established by ordinance or resolution for
specific categories of violations.
      7.   Any equities of the situation which outweigh the benefit of imposing
any penalty or damage assessment.
   F.   Recovery Of Damages And Costs: In addition to the civil penalty in
subsection E2 of this section, the municipality may recover all damages
proximately caused by the violator to the municipality, which may include
reasonable expenses incurred in investigating violations of, and enforcing
compliance with, this chapter, or any other actual damages caused by the
violation. The cost of the municipality's maintenance of the stormwater
facilities when the user of such facilities fails to maintain them as required
by this chapter.
   G.   Other Remedies: The municipality may bring legal action to enjoin the
continuing violation of this chapter, and the existence of any other remedy, at
law or equity, shall be no defense to any such actions.
   H.   Remedies Cumulative: The remedies set forth in this section shall be
cumulative, not exclusive, and shall not be defense to any action, civil or
criminal, that one or more of the remedies set forth herein has been sought or
granted.
   I.   Repair Of Damages: If, as the result of the violation of any provision
of this article, the city or any other party suffers damages and is required to
make repairs and/or replacement shall be borne by the violating party and shall
be in addition to any criminal or civil fines and/or penalties.
   J.   Subject To Prosecution By State And EPA: Violators of this article may
also be subject to prosecution, fines and penalties from the state of Utah and
the United States EPA. (Ord. 829, 12-18-2012)
8-5B-16: COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL AND STATE LAW:
Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to relieve any person from an
obligation to comply with an applicable federal, state or local law relating to
stormwater discharges or drinking water protection. (Ord. 829, 12-18-2012)
ARTICLE C.  STORMWATER CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY PERMIT
SECTION:
8-5C-1: Purpose And Intent
8-5C-2: When Required
8-5C-3: Application
8-5C-4: Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan
8-5C-5: Proper Operation And Maintenance
8-5C-6: Inspection And Entry
8-5C-7: Revocation Or Suspension
8-5C-8: Violations And Enforcement
8-5C-9: Exemptions
8-5C-10: Appeal
8-5C-11: Compliance With Federal And State Law
8-5C-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this article is to prevent the discharge of sediment and other
construction related pollutants from construction sites. Sediment and debris
from construction sites are a major source of pollution to waterways and water
systems located within the city and surrounding areas. Each year, stormwater
runoff carries tons of sediment from construction sites into local drainage
systems, irrigation systems, canals, rivers, and lakes. Sediment from
stormwater runoff also clogs and obstructs storm drains, culverts, and canals
and causes damage to private property, wildlife habitat and water quality.
(Ord. 829, 12-18-2012)
8-5C-2: WHEN REQUIRED:
   A.   A Riverdale City stormwater construction activity permit is required
before any person or entity may excavate, grub and clear, grade, or perform any
type of construction activity that will disrupt or cause a change in the
natural landscape upon any of the following types of property located within
the city:
      1.   One Acre Or More: Any parcel, lot or land development which is equal
to or greater than one acre (43,560 square feet) in size. A subdivision
development greater than or equal to one acre in size qualifies under this
subsection even if each of the individual lots in the subdivision is smaller
than one acre.
      2.   Common Plan Of Development: Any parcel, lot, or land development
smaller than one acre in size if it is part of a larger common plan of
development that is equal to or greater than one acre in size.
      3.   Less Than One Acre: Any parcel, lot or land development smaller than
one acre in size, if any portion of the parcel, lot or land development lies
within the area known as Hillside special use district, or areas known to be
erosion sensitive areas.
      4.   Special Concern Areas: Any parcel, lot or land development for which
the city determines that because of the nature or type of the parcel, lot or
development, disturbance of the land is likely to result in erosion or the
transport of sediment off of the site by stormwater to a degree substantially
greater than that which would occur under natural landscape conditions. (Ord.
829, 12-18-2012)
8-5C-3: APPLICATION:
Any person or entity desiring a stormwater construction activity permit must
first file an application with the community development department. The
application may be submitted independently, or as part of an application for a
preliminary site plan approval, site plan approval, or building permit.
   A.   Content: The application shall include a stormwater pollution
prevention plan which meets the criteria set forth in section
8-5C-4 of this article.
   B.   Timing: The applicant shall file the application on or before the
following dates:
      1.   Subdivision: The date that the applicant submits the preliminary
subdivision plat application if the applicant proposes to develop a
subdivision.
      2.   Site Plan: The date that the applicant submits a site plan
application if the applicant proposes to develop a site plan or amended site
plan.
      3.   Building Permit: The date that the applicant submits a building
permit application if the applicant proposes to construct a building on an
existing lot or parcel.
      4.   Other: At least two (2) weeks before the developer intends to
perform any type of work not listed above that would require a stormwater
construction activity permit pursuant to this article.
   C.   Compliance: If an applicant's development comes under more than one of
the categories listed above, then the applicant shall submit the stormwater
construction activity permit application on the earliest of the listed dates.
Failure to comply with the application dates set forth above is not a criminal
offense, but may delay the applicant's project. Failure to acquire a required
stormwater construction activity permit is grounds for denying a related
subdivision application, site plan application, conditional use permit
application, or building permit application. It is unlawful to commence work
(move dirt) on a development site before obtaining a required stormwater
construction activity permit.
   D.   Fee: The applicant for a stormwater construction activity permit shall
pay a fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council.
   E.   Application Approval: The storm sewer utility manager or designee shall
approve the application and grant the permit if the application is complete and
meets the criteria set forth in section
8-5C-4 of this article. The storm sewer utility manager shall deny the
application or approve the application with conditions if he or she determines
that the measures proposed in the plan fail to meet the criteria set forth in
section
8-5C-4 of this article. Conditions the storm sewer utility manager may impose
in connection with the approval of a permit include, but are not limited to,
the establishment of specific measures and controls to prevent erosion and the
discharge of sediment, debris and other construction related pollutants from
the site by stormwater.
   F.   Term: Unless otherwise revoked or suspended, a stormwater construction
activity permit shall be in effect for the full period of the construction
activity. The construction activity will not be considered to be completed
until the following events occur:
      1.   Subdivisions: For permits associated with a subdivision plat
approval:
         a.   The permittee must complete all required subdivision
improvements; and
         b.   One of the following events must occur:
            (1)   The city issues a final certificate of occupancy for each lot
in the subdivision, or
            (2)   Individual stormwater construction activity permits have been
issued for each lot in the subdivision not having a final occupancy permit, or
            (3)   The property has been stabilized as defined in the Utah
pollutant discharge elimination system (UPDES) stormwater general permit for
construction activities.
      2.   Site Plans: For permits associated with a site plan approval, the
date that the permittee has completed all required landscaping and all outside
construction work associated with the site plan.
      3.   Building Permits: For permits associated with a building permit
application, the date that the city issues a final occupancy permit for the
structure covered by the building permit.
      4.   Other: For permits issued that are not tied to other approvals from
the city, the date that the permittee has completed all work associated with
the permit and takes steps required by the permit to prevent further erosion
and runoff from the site.
   G.   Termination: No stormwater construction activity permit shall be
considered terminated until the permittee submits a notice of termination of
construction activity permit ("notice") to the city and the notice is accepted
by the city. The city shall accept the notice if the permittee has met the
requirements of the permit and this article. The permittee shall keep and
maintain all permit required improvements on the site until the city accepts
the notice.
   H.   Amendments: In the event that the proposed construction activity for a
site to which a permit pertains to is materially altered from that described in
an original plan in a way that may have a significant impact upon the
effectiveness of the measures and controls described in the original plan, the
permittee shall file an amended stormwater pollution prevention plan which
meets the criteria set forth in section
8-5C-4 of this article. (Ord. 829, 12-18-2012)
8-5C-4: STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN:
   A.   Required Information: The stormwater pollution prevention plan (the
"plan") shall comply with all the requirements outlined in the latest update
for the Utah stormwater general permit for construction activities and shall
contain the following information:
      1.   Site Description: A site description (including a map with spot
elevations and contour lines) which includes a description of the nature and
location of the construction activity, a description of the intended sequence
of major activities which will disturb soils for major portions of the site
(e.g., grubbing, excavation, grading, utilities, and infrastructure
installation, etc.) and estimates of the total area of the site and the total
area of the site that is expected to be disturbed by excavation, grading, or
other activities.
      2.   Control Description: A description of the proposed measures and
controls that will be implemented during construction activity and/or while the
site is not stable. The plan must clearly describe the times during the
construction process that the measures will be implemented for each major
activity identified pursuant to this subsection A. The plan shall also state
the name and phone number of the person or entity responsible for
implementation of each control measure.
   B.   Goals And Criteria: The proposed measures and controls described in the
plan shall be designed to meet the following goals and criteria:
      1.   Prevention Or Minimize Discharge: The proposed measures and controls
shall be designed to prevent or minimize, to the maximum extent practicable,
the discharge of sediment, debris and other construction related pollutants
from the construction site by stormwater runoff into the storm drainage system.
      2.   Prevent Or Minimize Construction Debris: The proposed measures and
controls shall be designed to prevent or minimize, to the maximum extent
practicable, the deposit, discharge, tracking by construction vehicles, or
dropping of mud, sediment, debris or other potential pollutants onto public
streets and rights of way. Any such discharge shall be cleaned up and removed
immediately upon notification to the permittee or when it otherwise comes to
the attention of the permittee. At a minimum, the deposit or discharge shall be
cleaned and removed at the end of the work shift in which the deposit occurred,
or at the end of the workday, whichever comes first.
      3.   BMPs: The proposed measures and controls shall consist of best
management practices (BMPs) available at the time that the plan is submitted.
BMPs may include, but shall not be limited to, temporary silt or sediment
fences, sediment traps and detention ponds, gravel construction entrances and
wash down pads to reduce or eliminate off site tracking, establishment of
temporary grasses and permanent vegetative cover, erosion control blankets,
temporary inceptor dikes and swales, storm drain inlet protection, check dams,
subsurface drains, pipe slope drains, level spreaders, rock outlet protection,
reinforced soil retaining systems, and gabions.
      4.   Stabilization: The proposed measures and controls shall be designed
to preserve existing vegetation, where possible. Disturbed portions of the site
shall be stabilized. Stabilization practices may include temporary seeding,
permanent seeding, mulching, geotextiles, sod stabilization, vegetative buffer
strips, protection of trees, preservation of mature vegetation, and other
appropriate measures. Use of impervious surfaces for stabilization should be
avoided. Stabilization measures shall be initiated as soon as practicable in
disturbed portions of the site where construction activities have temporarily
or permanently ceased, but in no case more than fourteen (14) days after the
construction activity in that portion of the site has temporarily or
permanently ceased, except under the following circumstances:
         a.   If the initiation of stabilization measures by the fourteenth day
after construction activity temporarily or permanently ceases is precluded by
snow cover or frozen ground conditions, stabilization measures shall be
initiated as soon as practicable; or
         b.   If construction activity on a portion of the site is temporarily
ceased, and earth disturbing will resume within twenty one (21) days, temporary
stabilization measures need not be initiated on that portion of the site.
      5.   Minimize Risk Of Discharge Of Other Materials: The proposed measures
and controls shall be employed to minimize the risk of discharge of
construction related pollutants (such as paint, thinners, solvents and other
chemicals) from the construction site. Such measures may include implementation
of storage practices to minimize exposure of the material to stormwater as well
as spill prevention and response. (Ord. 829, 12-18-2012)
8-5C-5: PROPER OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE:
The recipient of a stormwater construction activity permit (the permittee)
shall install the erosion and sediment control measures required by the
approved stormwater pollution prevention plan before commencing any
construction activity on the site to which the plan applies or at such times
indicated in the plan. The erosion and sediment control measures shall be
properly installed and maintained in accordance with the permit, the
manufacturer's specifications, and good engineering practices. The permittee
shall maintain such measures on the site until the city accepts the termination
of the permit pursuant to subsection 8-5C-3G of this article. (Ord. 829, 12-18-
2012)
8-5C-6: INSPECTION AND ENTRY:
The permittee shall allow any authorized employees and representatives of the
city, representatives of the state of Utah division of water quality, and
representatives of the EPA, to enter the site to which a permit applies at any
time and to inspect the erosion and sediment control measures maintained by the
permittee. The permittee shall also allow inspection of any records pertaining
to the conditions of the permit. (Ord. 829, 12-18-2012)
8-5C-7: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION:
   A.   Causes: A stormwater construction activity permit may be revoked or
suspended by the director upon the occurrence of any one of the following
events:
      1.   Failure of a permittee to comply with the plan or any condition of
the permit; or
      2.   Failure of a permittee to comply with any provision of this article
or any other applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation related to
stormwater; or
      3.   A determination by the director that the erosion and sediment
control measures implemented by a permittee pursuant to the plan are inadequate
to prevent or minimize, to the maximum extent practicable, the discharge of
sediment, debris or other pollutants from the construction site by stormwater.
   B.   Notice: The city shall mail a permittee written notice of noncompliance
before revoking or suspending a permit. The notice shall state the location and
nature of the noncompliance and shall also specify what action is required for
the permittee to avoid revocation or suspension of the permit. The notice shall
allow the permittee a reasonable time to take the necessary corrective action
to avoid revocation or suspension of the permit which time, in the absence of
exceptional circumstances, shall not be less than ten (10) nor more than thirty
(30) days. The notice shall be mailed to the address listed for the permittee
in the application. If the permittee fails to correct the problems identified
in the notice during the time specified in the notice, the director may suspend
or revoke the permit by mailing or delivering written notice of the suspension
or revocation to the permittee. The permittee may appeal a suspension or
revocation of the permit pursuant to the appeal procedure set forth in section
8-5C-10 of this article.
   C.   Exceptional Circumstances: For purposes of this section, "exceptional
circumstances" include, but are not limited to, situations which involve a risk
of injury to persons, damage to storm drain facilities, or damage to other
property or the environment. The city may take any steps the city deems
necessary to alleviate any such "exceptional circumstances" as defined above,
and may bill the owner, developer, or contractor responsible for creating the
exceptional circumstances for the cost of alleviating said circumstances.
   D.   Stop Work Order: A stop work order may be issued upon the revocation or
suspension of a permit, or upon the discovery of work being conducted without a
required permit. The stop work order may be issued by inspectors in the public
works department or the community development department. No construction
activity may be commenced or continued on any site for which a permit has been
revoked or suspended until the permit has been reinstated or reissued.
   E.   Reinstatement: A stormwater construction activity permit may be
reinstated or reissued upon compliance with all provisions of this article and
all permit conditions, or in the case of a suspension for reasons provided in
subsection A3 of this section, upon the filing of an amended stormwater
pollution prevention plan which is designed to correct the deficiencies of the
original plan. (Ord. 829, 12-18-2012)
8-5C-8: VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   The violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be a class
C misdemeanor. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate
offense.
   B.   Violators of this article are also subject to any penalties that may be
imposed by the state of Utah, under the authority of the Utah water quality
act, title 19, chapter 5 of the Utah code.
   C.   In addition to any criminal fines and/or penalties which may be
assessed for a violation of this article, the city shall have the right to
issue a stop work order or to install and/or maintain appropriate erosion and
sediment control measures on any site which is required to have such measures
in the event that construction activity is commenced or continued without such
measures having been installed as required by this article. The city shall have
the right to have such measures installed or maintained by city personnel or to
hire a private contractor to perform such work and the contractor and/or the
property owner shall be liable for any and all expenses related to performing
such work plus a twenty five percent (25%) penalty charge. The city may assess
said charges against the bond posted by the contractor and/or property owner.
   D.   Violators of this article may also be subject to prosecution, fines and
penalties from the state of Utah and the United States EPA. (Ord. 829, 12-18-
2012)
8-5C-9: EXEMPTIONS:
The following activities are exempt from the requirements of this article:
   A.   Actions by a public utility, the city, or any other governmental entity
to remove or alleviate an emergency condition, restore utility service, or
reopen a public thoroughfare to traffic;
   B.   Actions by any other person when the city determines, and documents in
writing, that the actions are necessary to remove or alleviate an emergency
condition, restore utility service, or reopen a public thoroughfare to traffic;
   C.   Construction activities which disturb less than five hundred (500)
square feet of land surface area, or which consist of the excavation and/or
fill of less than twenty (20) cubic yards of material;
   D.   Landscape maintenance activities on fully developed properties,
necessary to maintain the existing developed landscape; and
   E.   Bona fide agricultural and farming operations which constitute the
principal use of any lot or tract of ground located within the city and which
meet the requirements of the zoning code of the city. (Ord. 829, 12-18-2012)
8-5C-10: APPEAL:
   A.   An applicant for a stormwater construction activity permit or a
permittee of a stormwater construction activity permit may appeal any decision
or directive made by the city or its representatives pursuant to this article.
The party desiring to appeal shall file a notice of appeal with the city
recorder within ten (10) days of the decision or directive being appealed. The
notice of appeal shall contain the following information:
      1.   The appellant's name, address and daytime telephone number;
      2.   A short statement describing the basis for the appeal; and
      3.   The relief sought by the appellant.
   B.   Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the city recorder shall set a
date for an informal hearing to consider the appeal. The informal hearing shall
be conducted before the city hearing officer in accordance with policies
established by the city administrator. The city hearing officer shall uphold
the decision or directive being appealed unless the city's hearing officer
finds that there has been an error in the interpretation or implementation of
this article. The city hearing officer shall render a decision on the appeal
within ten (10) days of the informal hearing with the appellant. The city
hearing officer shall have authority to affirm, reverse or modify any decision
or directive appealed pursuant to this section. (Ord. 829, 12-18-2012)
8-5C-11: COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL AND STATE LAW:
Nothing contained in this article is intended to relieve any person or entity
from any obligation to comply with applicable federal and state laws and
regulations pertaining to clean water and/or stormwater runoff. (Ord. 829, 12-
18-2012)
CHAPTER 6
TRANSFER OF WATER RIGHT
SECTION:
8-6-1: Purpose And Definition
8-6-2: General Provisions
8-6-3: Required
8-6-4: Exceptions
8-6-5: Form Of Transfer Of Water Right
8-6-1: PURPOSE AND DEFINITION:
The purpose of this chapter is to obtain water rights to support development
within the City's growth area, inside and outside of the water provision
service area. This purpose shall be achieved through the transfer of water
rights to the City as a condition of connection to the City's Municipal water
system. The purpose for requiring a transfer of water rights is to enhance the
public health, safety, and welfare through a provision designed to enable the
City to meet the growth of future culinary water needs within the City. (Ord.
904, 9-18-2018)
8-6-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
Any and all shares or rights to be delivered to the City, as required by this
chapter, shall be recognized by the State Water Engineer and acceptable to the
City. The City may, at its discretion, accept cash in an amount set by the City
Council; the cash amount shall be established upon the then current share price
of Davis and Weber Canal water in lieu of conveying tangible water shares or
rights. Water shares or rights shall be submitted to the City Administrator or
his/her designee. All water shares or rights transferred to and accepted by the
City shall be held in the sole ownership of the City upon transfer of the same.
The City Administrator or his/her designee shall have the right to vote its
water shares in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations governing
the same and shall coordinate contacts and actions of the City with the
respective canal or irrigation companies in which the shares are owned. (Ord.
904, 9-18-2018)
8-6-3: REQUIRED:
In the City, each acre of irrigable property requires roughly four (4) acre
feet of water annually during normal water years as published by Utah State
Engineers Office in the Consumptive Use of Irrigated Crops in Utah, Research
Report 145, Utah State University, 1994. As such, water required to be conveyed
to the City as part of a request for approval of an annexation, subdivision,
large scale development, or site plan, is established by the State Engineers
Office as sufficient to meet the water use requirements of the proposed use.
Three (3) acre feet per acre developed shall be required due to water loss via
evaporation, waste, and impervious service areas in comparison to irrigated
crop lands.
   A.   Applicable To All Development: The City Council does hereby establish
the preferred type of water acceptable to the City shall be shares or stock
within an irrigation or water company or an approved water right in good
standing by the State of Utah Engineers Office and capable of delivering water
through the City's water distribution system via Weber Basin Water Conservancy
District treatment.
   B.   Residential Subdivisions: A developer shall convey to the City water
rights that have been customarily used on the property to be developed that are
usable by and acceptable to the City to provide three (3) acre feet for each
acre or part thereof within a residential subdivision. In the event there are
no owner water shares or rights on property to be developed, the developer
shall obtain and convey water shares or rights acceptable and usable by the
City as determined by the City Public Works Director. If no water shares are
available or acceptable to the City the applicant can meet the water
requirement via cash in lieu of shares as reasonably designated by the City
Council. Funds will be held by the City in the Water Fund and restricted for
future surface water right(s) acquisition at the City's discretion if available
or discovered.
   C.   Nonresidential Subdivisions: A developer shall convey to the City water
shares or rights that have been customarily used on the property to be
developed that are usable by and acceptable to the City to provide three (3)
acre feet for each irrigable acre or part thereof within a nonresidential
subdivision. In the event there are no owner water rights on property to be
developed, the developer shall obtain and convey water rights acceptable and
usable by Riverdale City as determined by the Public Works Director. The
developer is not required to convey water rights for acreage of asphalt or
other non-permeable surfaces. If no water shares are available or acceptable to
the City the applicant can meet the water requirement via cash in lieu of
shares as reasonably designated by the City Council. Funds will be held by the
City in the Water Fund and restricted for future surface water right(s)
acquisition at the City's discretion if available or discovered. (Ord. 904, 9-
18-2018)
8-6-4: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Exceptions For Redevelopment Of Property: Notwithstanding subsections
8-6-3B and C of this chapter, if the proposed subdivision is on one or more
currently landscaped lots, the Public Works Director will waive conveyance of
water rights if the developer establishes by clear and convincing evidence
that:
      1.   Water rights acceptable and usable by the City were previously
conveyed as a condition of a prior subdivision approval which included that
property.
   B.   Governmental Or Quasi-Governmental Entities: Conveyance of water will
not be required of governmental or quasi-governmental entities proposing
development that will improve the public benefit, welfare, health, or safety.
   C.   Conveyances To Cease Upon Excess Supply: Every five (5) years, if
necessary, the City Public Works Director shall determine whether the City's
existing available water interests exceed the water interests needed to meet
the amount of water needed in the next forty (40) years by the persons within
the City's projected service area based on projected population growth and
other water use demand ("reasonable future water requirements"). Should the
Director conclude that available water interests exceed the reasonable future
water requirements of the public, the Public Works Director shall notify the
City Council and the City Council shall act to cease conveyance of water shares
according to this section until existing available water interests no longer
exceed the reasonable future water requirement. (Ord. 904, 9-18-2018)
8-6-5: FORM OF TRANSFER OF WATER RIGHT:
The transfer of water rights pursuant to this chapter shall be in such forms as
may be approved by the City Administrator or his/her designee. The applicant
may also be required to execute applications for conveyance. Those forms or
documents may include, but are not limited to, change in point of diversion,
change in place of use, change in purpose of use, and any other documents or
forms. The City will diligently pursue approval of the water right transfer. In
order for a water right transfer to be completed, the water right transfer must
be changed to a Municipal water right. The applicant must convey the water
right to the City by statutory warranty deed or other appropriate conveyance
instrument, as determined by the City Administrator or his/her designee, upon
completion of the water right transfer; provided, however, that the actual
conveyance may be delayed to coincide with the City's approval of the petition
for annexation or application for development, or as otherwise set forth in an
agreement between the applicant and the City. (Ord. 904, 9-18-2018)
TITLE 9
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODE AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Building Codes Adopted
9-1-2: Plan Review Fees; Reduction
9-1-3: Appeals
9-1-1: BUILDING CODES ADOPTED:
Those certain documents, two (2) copies of which are on file in the Office of
the Community Development Director, being marked and designated as the
International Building Code, 2015 edition (including appendix J); International
Residential Code, 2015 edition (including appendix E); International Energy
Conservation Code, 2015 edition; International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition;
International Existing Building Code, 2015 edition (including all appendixes);
and NFPA 225 Model Manufactured Home Installation Standard, 2005 edition; and
Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 edition; are hereby
adopted as the Building Codes of the City for regulating the erection,
construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition,
conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all
buildings and structures in the City; providing for issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; providing penalties for violation of such codes,
declaring and establishing fire zones, and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said codes published by the
International Conference of Building Officials, on file in the Office of the
Community Development Director, are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a
part of this chapter as if fully set out in this chapter; provided, however,
that the penalty for any violation of the above cited codes is a Class B
misdemeanor, punishable as is provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 902, 9-4-2018)
9-1-2: PLAN REVIEW FEES; REDUCTION:
In those cases where the building official finds that plans submitted for
review pursuant to the requirements of any of the codes adopted in this title
are substantially identical to plans reviewed by the building official any time
within one year prior to the date of submission of such substantially identical
plans, then in that event, the "plan review fees" set forth in said codes shall
be reduced to be twenty five percent (25%) of the building permit fee. (1985
Code §
6-5-1; amd. 2001 Code)
9-1-3: APPEALS:
   A.   Scope: Any person who deems himself or herself aggrieved by a decision
of the building official in administering or interpreting the codes adopted in
this title may appeal from such decision by filing a written notice of appeal
with the building official requesting an appeal hearing before the State
Building Code Board of Appeals. The notice of appeal shall be filed within ten
(10) days after such person has actual notice of the decision appealed from, or
within ten (10) days after notice of such decision is mailed to such person by
certified mail, postage prepaid, whichever is earlier. The Building Code Board
of Appeals shall hold a hearing within seven (7) calendar days from the receipt
of the appeal notice, and after consideration of the matter shall uphold,
modify or revoke the decision of the building official appealed from. (1985
Code §
6-6-3; amd. 2001 Code)
   B.   Vote Necessary For Reversal: The concurring opinion of three (3) or
more members of the Board in favor of the appellant shall be required to
overrule the decision of the building official. (1985 Code §
6-6-4)
   C.   Judicial Review Of Board's Decision; Time Limitation: After appeal to
the Building Code Board of Appeals, any person who deems himself or herself
aggrieved by the decision of the Board may appeal to a court of competent
jurisdiction within thirty (30) days after notice of the Board's decision is
mailed to such person by certified mail, postage prepaid. (1985 Code §
6-6-5)
   D.   Compensation: Each appointed member of the Building Code Board of
Appeals shall be compensated by an amount established by the City Council for
each meeting of the Board which he or she shall attend. (1985 Code §
6-6-7)
CHAPTER 2
ELECTRICAL CODE
SECTION:
9-2-1: Electrical Code Adopted
9-2-2: Penalty
9-2-1: ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED:
The National Electrical Code (NEC), 2017 including the appendices thereto,
establishing rules and regulations for the conduct of the business or trade of
electricians and the installation, alteration, or repair of electric systems
and other matters relating thereto, which has been printed as a code in book
form, and copies of which have been filed for use and examination by the public
in the Office of the Community Development Director (also available on the NFPA
website), and the whole thereof, is hereby referred to, adopted, and made a
part of this chapter as if fully set out herein. (Ord. 902, 9-4-2018)
9-2-2: PENALTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct,
enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use,
occupy or maintain any building or structure in the City, or cause the same to
be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be deemed guilty of a Class B misdemeanor, and each such person shall be
deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof
during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is
committed, continued or permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation,
such person shall be punished as provided for in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1985 Code §
6-2-3)
CHAPTER 3
PLUMBING CODE
SECTION:
9-3-1: Plumbing Code Adopted
9-3-2: Inspections; Right Of Entry
9-3-3: Penalty
9-3-1: PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED:
The international plumbing code, 2015 edition, including the appendices
thereto, establishing rules and regulations for the conduct of the business or
trade of plumbing and the installation, alteration, or repair of plumbing and
drainage systems and other matters relating thereto, which has been printed as
a code in book form, and two (2) copies of which have been filed for use and
examination by the public in the office of the community development director
and the whole thereof, is hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part of this
chapter as if fully set out herein. (Ord. 880, 7-28-2016)
9-3-2: INSPECTIONS; RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The building inspector shall have right of entry within reasonable hours to any
building or premises for the purpose of inspection or investigation of any work
or conditions governed by this chapter and he is hereby empowered to condemn
and order repaired, removed, replaced or changed, any plumbing found in an
unsanitary condition or not in accordance with this chapter. (1985 Code §
6-3-3; amd. 2001 Code)
9-3-3: PENALTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct,
enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use,
occupy or maintain any building or structure in the city, or cause the same to
be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be deemed guilty of a class B misdemeanor, and each such person shall be
deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof
during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is
committed, continued or permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation,
such person shall be punished as provided for in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1985 Code §
6-3-2)
CHAPTER 4
MECHANICAL CODE
SECTION:
9-4-1: Mechanical Code Adopted
9-4-2: Penalty
9-4-1: MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED:
The international mechanical code, 2015 edition, including the appendices
thereto, establishing rules and regulations for the purpose of providing
minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public
welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, installation,
quality of materials, location, operation and maintenance or use of heating,
ventilating, cooling, refrigeration systems, incinerators and other
miscellaneous heat producing appliances within this city, three (3) copies of
which are on file in the office of the community development director, is
hereby adopted as the mechanical code of this city the same as if set out fully
in this chapter. The provisions of this code shall apply to the erection,
installation, alteration, repair, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or
maintenance of any heating, ventilating, cooling, refrigeration systems,
incinerators or other miscellaneous heat producing appliances within this city.
(Ord. 880, 7-28-2016)
9-4-2: PENALTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct,
enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use or
maintain any mechanical systems or equipment or cause or permit the same to be
done in violation of this chapter. Any person, firm or corporation violating
any provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a class B misdemeanor,
and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and
every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted and upon
conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punished as provided for
in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1985 Code §
6-4-2)
CHAPTER 5
NUMBERING OF RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS AND COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS 1
SECTION:
9-5-1: Required
9-5-2: Application
9-5-3: Assignment Of Numbers
9-5-4: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 10-21-7C4 of this code.
9-5-1: REQUIRED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, neglect or refuse to place
a proper and conspicuous number, easily seen and deciphered from the sidewalk
or street, on any residential dwelling or commercial building owned, occupied
or controlled by such person within the corporate limits of the city.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, maintain or continue any
number on any residential dwelling or commercial building in the city other
than the number assigned for such residential dwelling or commercial building
as appears of record in the office of the community development director. (Ord.
854, 5-6-2014)
9-5-2: APPLICATION:
Numbers shall be assigned for any residential dwelling or commercial building
within the corporate limits of the city upon application made to the office of
the community development director, such application being made by the person
owning, occupying or controlling such residential dwelling or commercial
building. (Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
9-5-3: ASSIGNMENT OF NUMBERS:
Residential dwelling and commercial building numbers shall be assigned by the
community development director in accordance with the following: (Ord. 854, 5-
6-2014)
   A.   One hundred (100) numbers, or the necessary part thereof, shall be
allowed and allotted to each block designated on the uniform street numbering
plan for the city and the county.
   B.   One number shall be assigned consecutively and alternately, as to odd
and even, to each proper interval of linear feet of frontage.
   C.   Even numbers shall be assigned to the north and east sides of streets,
avenues and highways.
   D.   Odd or uneven numbers shall be assigned to the south and west sides of
streets, avenues and highways.
   E.   All residential dwelling and commercial building numbers shall conform
to the county uniform street numbering system as adopted by the city and in
accordance with baselines as follows:
      1.   Running east, the number 100 shall begin at the east side of Wall
Avenue.
      2.   Running west, the number 100 west shall begin at the west side of
Wall Avenue.
      3.   Running south, the number 100 shall begin at the south side of First
Street in Ogden City.
      4.   Running north, the number 100 north shall begin on the north side of
First Street in Ogden City. (1985 Code § 16-3-4)
9-5-4: PENALTY:
Any person failing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter, or
violating any of such provisions, shall be guilty of an infraction, and upon
conviction shall be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1985 Code § 16-3-5; amd. 2001 Code)
CHAPTER 6
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL GUIDELINES
SECTION:
9-6-1: Architectural Configuration
9-6-1: ARCHITECTURAL CONFIGURATION:
   A.   Any new building proposed to be constructed in Riverdale City shall be
submitted to the city's design review committee for review and approval of,
exterior architectural configuration (elevations) and materials and color
palette with sample of actual material. All existing buildings prior to
changing the color of building (if exterior painting is allowed) shall submit a
color elevation drawing for design review committee review and approval.
   B.   Upon the adoption of this section, if the colors of existing buildings
are deemed unsightly or inappropriate by a majority of the design review
committee, said committee may make recommendations to the city council to
require the owner of such building or buildings to change the existing color
scheme. This section does not apply to single- and two-family dwellings,
residential accessory buildings or agricultural buildings. (Ord. 611, 10-1-
2002)
   C.   The city's design review committee shall consist of the mayor or his/
her designee, the city administrator, the planning commission chair or his/her
designee, the public works director, and the community development director.
(Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
   D.   In the event the city council requires an owner of an existing building
to change the existing color scheme pursuant to the recommendation of the
design review committee, said owner may request, and the council may authorize
financial assistance for said change. (Ord. 611, 10-1-2002)
TITLE 10
ZONING AND SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Short Title
10-1-2: Purpose
10-1-3: General Plan Compliance
10-1-4: Interpretation And Conflict
10-1-5: Changes And Amendments
10-1-6: Administration And Enforcement
10-1-7: Fees
10-1-8: Building Permits
10-1-9: Certificate Of Occupancy Required
10-1-10: Issuance Of Licenses And Permits
10-1-11: Territory Annexed To City
10-1-12: Vacating Utility Easements
10-1-13: Building Over Private Property Utility Easement
10-1-14: Violation Deemed Nuisance
10-1-15: Penalty
10-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known as THE UNIFORM ZONING ORDINANCE OF RIVERDALE, UTAH.
(1985 Code § 19-1-1)
10-1-2: PURPOSE:
This title is designed and enacted for the purpose of promoting the health,
safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and welfare of the present and
future inhabitants of the city, including, amongst other things, lessening
congestion on the streets or roads, securing safety from fire and other danger,
providing adequate light and air, the classifying of land uses and distribution
of land development and utilization, protecting the tax base, securing economy
in governmental expenditures, fostering commercial, industrial and agricultural
growth, protecting the environment, and protecting both urban and nonurban
development of the city. (1985 Code § 19-1-2; amd. 2001 Code)
10-1-3: GENERAL PLAN COMPLIANCE:
   A.   Required: No application for new development shall be allowed or
permitted until a conceptual plan for such development shall have been prepared
by the petitioner and reviewed and approved by the planning commission which
addresses in detail how the proposed development meets and/or satisfies the
development guidelines of the city's general plan, including narrative sections
and the land use planning map, and any RDA project area plan development
requirements, if applicable. Any such conceptual plan may be submitted
concurrently with a preliminary site plan at the discretion of the petitioner.
   B.   Petition For Amendment: In the event the petitioner for a development
and/or subdivision cannot meet and/or satisfy the guidelines of the city's
general plan and/or the requirements of an RDA project area plan, the party
presenting the conceptual plan may petition the planning commission for its
determination to recommend an amendment to such plan(s). Should the planning
commission determine that an amendment to such plan(s) is warranted, the
statutory requirements for pursuing such an amendment shall be followed by the
planning commission, city council and/or RDA board of directors.
   C.   Consideration For Amendments: Amendments to the general plan and/or the
requirements of an RDA project area plan, pursuant to this section, may be
considered upon a showing of undue hardship and/or adverse extenuating
circumstances.
   D.   Land Use Master Plan Map: The land use master plan map should
appropriately reflect use types that exist or have been amended through the
public process in this section. (Ord. 793, 10-4-2011)
10-1-4: INTERPRETATION AND CONFLICT:
   A.   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, the
requirements contained herein are declared to be the minimum requirements for
the purpose set forth.
   B.   This title shall not nullify the more restrictive provisions of
covenants, agreements, other ordinances or laws, but shall prevail
notwithstanding such provisions which are less restrictive. (1985 Code § 19-1-
3)
10-1-5: CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS:
This title, including the maps, may be amended from time to time by the city
council after holding a public meeting. All proposed amendments shall be first
proposed by the planning commission or shall be submitted to the planning
commission. A public hearing shall then be held by the planning commission. At
least ten (10) days' notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in Riverdale City. The planning
commission's recommendation shall be returned to the city council for its
consideration within thirty (30) days. The city council may accept, reject or
modify the planning commission's recommendation by a majority vote of its
members. (Ord. 698, 2-19-2008)
10-1-6: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   The community development director is hereby charged with the
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this title.
   B.   The community development director shall not grant a permit for the
construction or alteration of any building or structure, nor issue any
certificate of occupancy for a change in the use of land, if such construction
or alteration or change would be in violation or would involve a violation of
any of the provisions of this title or any other ordinance of the city or of
any law of the state.
   C.   The community development director shall enforce all of the provisions
of this title. He shall inspect or cause to be inspected all of the buildings
in the course of construction, alteration or repair, and any change in the use
of land. If, in the course of such inspection, or otherwise, it shall come to
his attention that any such construction, alteration or repair, or that any use
or contemplated use of land is in violation of the provisions of this title, he
shall issue his written order to the person responsible therefor, ordering and
directing such person to cease and desist such construction, alteration or
repair, or use. He shall report violations of this title to the city attorney
for prosecution and make complaint thereof before the court or courts having
jurisdiction of such violation. Upon the recommendation of the city council,
the legal department shall bring a civil action for the abatement of any
nuisance existing in violation of this title.
   D.   The community development director may call for the assistance of law
enforcement personnel whenever in his opinion such assistance is necessary in
the investigation of a suspected violation of this title.
   E.   The community development director may establish reasonable rules and
regulations necessary or desirable in the administration of this title. Three
(3) copies of such rules and regulations shall be filed with the city recorder
and such rules and regulations shall become effective when so filed. (Ord. 854,
5-6-2014)
   F.   The city council may, by resolution, prescribe an exact payment of
reasonable fees to cover the expense of examining or reexamining plot plans or
development plans or proposed improvements, issuing building permits,
inspecting uses and issuing certificates of occupancy, and may determine the
method of collecting such fees. (1985 Code § 19-1-5; amd. 2001 Code)
10-1-7: FEES 1 :
   A.   Collection: At the time of filing a petition or request to change the
zoning of any property, the petitioners shall pay to the city recorder and the
city recorder shall collect for the city such fee as may be set by resolution
of the city council. (1985 Code § 19-27-1)
   B.   Nonrefundable: The fee assessed by this chapter shall not be refundable
regardless of the eventual disposition of the rezoning request and shall be in
addition to all other fees presently in effect and payable to the city. (1985
Code § 19-27-2)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section 1-12-5 of this code for specific fees.
10-1-8: BUILDING PERMITS:
The construction, alteration, repair, removal or occupancy of any structure, or
of any part thereof, or substantial alteration or modification of terrain, or
any action which would substantially alter water drainage or water passage, or
which would likely require sewage disposal, water, roads, curbs, gutters or
sidewalks in the reasonably foreseeable future, or any other changes which
would reasonably be expected to have a substantial effect on the environment,
including, but not limited to, air, water, noise and land appearance, shall not
be commenced or proceeded with, except after the issuance of a written permit
for the same by the community development director or his agent; provided, that
no permit shall be necessary where the erection, construction, reconstruction
or alteration is minor in character as determined by the community development
director or his agent. (1985 Code § 19-1-6; amd. 2001 Code; Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
10-1-9: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED:
No land shall be used or occupied and no building hereafter structurally
altered or erected shall be used or changed in use until a certificate of
occupancy shall have been issued by the community development director or his
agent stating that the building or structure or the proposed use thereof, or
the use of land, complies with the provisions of this title. A certificate of
occupancy shall be issued as it may be required for any nonconforming use
hereunder. A certificate of occupancy either for the whole or a part of a
building or structure shall be applied for coincidentally with the application
for a building permit and shall be issued within ten (10) days after the
erection or structural alteration of such building or structure, or part
thereof, shall have been completed in conformity with the provisions of this
title, and requirements of the city council and planning commission. (Ord. 854,
5-6-2014)
10-1-10: ISSUANCE OF LICENSES AND PERMITS:
All departments, officials and public employees of the city which are vested
with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall conform to the
provisions of this title and shall issue no such permit or license for uses,
buildings or purposes where the same would be in conflict with the provisions
of this title, and any such permit or license, if issued in conflict with the
provisions of this title, shall be null and void. (1985 Code § 19-1-8)
10-1-11: TERRITORY ANNEXED TO CITY:
At the time of the annexation of new territory to the city, the city council,
after reviewing the recommendation of the planning commission, shall classify
such territory for zoning purposes according to the zones established by this
title. (1985 Code § 19-1-11)
10-1-12: VACATING UTILITY EASEMENTS:
Any person owning property within the city may apply to the city council to
vacate a utility easement located on his property. The property owner shall do
so by submitting a written application to the community development director.
   A.   The application shall be accompanied by written permission from all
interested utilities agreeing to the vacation of the easement.
   B.   The community development director shall submit the application to the
city council as soon as practical after he receives it, along with his
recommendation as to whether or not the easement should be vacated. The city
council shall consider the application at its next meeting.
   C.   It is the policy of the city to vacate such utility easements when so
doing appears to be in the best interest of all concerned parties. (Ord. 854,
5-6-2014)
10-1-13: BUILDING OVER PRIVATE PROPERTY UTILITY EASEMENT:
Any person owning property within the city may apply, in writing, to the
community development director for a permit to build over a utility easement
located on the owner's property. The community development director may issue
said permit upon the following terms and conditions:
   A.   The owner of the property shall furnish to the community development
director a letter addressed to the city wherein the owners of the property do
hold harmless and indemnify the city and indicating that said owners will pay
for and be responsible for any costs associated with the building or structure
constructed on the easement, and, if required, its removal, should the easement
become active and a use of the easement is required by the city or any
legitimate utility company; and
   B.   The owner has satisfied the public works director that the easement
does not contain any utility lines or pipes, and that the installation of any
lines or pipes is not currently contemplated by the city or any legitimate
utility company. The public works director shall communicate, in writing, said
satisfaction to the community development director before any permit may be
granted.
      1.   Compliance with this section may be done in lieu of vacating of a
utility easement, as set forth in section
10-1-12 of this chapter.
      2.   In the event a permit is not granted pursuant to this section, the
property owner may appeal, in writing, the decision of the community
development director to the city council within ten (10) days from the date of
the permit denial. The city council may uphold, reverse or modify the decision
of the community development director. (Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
10-1-14: VIOLATION DEEMED NUISANCE:
Any structure made or existing, and any use of land, in violation of any
provision of this title is a public nuisance and may be abated by appropriate
proceedings. (1985 Code § 19-1-9)
10-1-15: PENALTY:
Any person or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise,
who fails to comply with the requirements of this title or of a lawful order of
the community development director or his agent shall be guilty of a class C
misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Such person, firm or corporation shall be deemed guilty of
a separate offense for each and every day during which any portion of any
violation of this title is committed, maintained, continued or permitted by
such person, firm or corporation, and shall be punishable as herein provided.
(Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-2-1: Applicability
10-2-2: Definitions
10-2-1: APPLICABILITY:
The words and terms defined in this chapter shall have the meanings indicated.
Words used in the present tense include the future and words in the singular
number include the plural and words in the plural include the singular. Words
not included herein but defined elsewhere in the city ordinances shall be
construed as termed therein. The word "shall" is mandatory. (1985 Code § 19-2-
1)
10-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this title, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
ACCESS STRIP: A strip of land which is part of a lot and provides access to the
part thereof used or to be used for buildings or structures.
ADULT DAYCARE CENTER: A nonmedical facility for the daytime care of adults who,
due to advanced age, handicap or impairment, require assistance and/or
supervision during the day by staff.
AGRICULTURE: The tilling of the soil, the raising of crops, horticulture and
gardening, but not including keeping or raising of domestic animals and fowl,
except household pets, and not including any agricultural industry or business,
such as fruit packing plants, fur farms, animal hospitals or similar uses.
AIRPORT: The Ogden municipal airport and/or Hill air force base.
AIRPORT APPROACH AREA: The specified area at each end of the airport landing
area required for the safe flight of aircraft in landing, taking off or
maneuvering at or in the vicinity of the airport.
AIRPORT ELEVATION: The elevation in feet above mean sea level of the highest
point of the landing area of an airport.
AIRPORT HAZARD: Any structure or natural growth or use of land which obstructs
or restricts the air space required for the safe flight of aircraft in landing,
taking off or maneuvering at or in the vicinity of the airport.
AIRPORT INSTRUMENT LANDING AREA: A landing area equipped with precision
electronic air navigation aids adequate to permit the landing of aircraft by an
instrument approach under restricted visibility conditions.
AIRPORT LANDING AREA: The runway, or the specially prepared surface within the
boundaries of an airport designed for aircraft landing and taking off
operations.
AIRPORT NONINSTRUMENT LANDING AREA: Any landing areas other than an instrument
landing area.
AIRPORT REFERENCE POINT: The point established as the approximate geographic
center of the airport landing areas and so designated.
AIRPORT RUNWAY: The paved surface of an airport landing area.
AIRPORT TRANSITION AREA: An area extending outward from the outside edge of the
airport turning area.
AIRPORT TURNING AREA: The area within a specified horizontal distance of the
airport reference point necessary for the safe flight and maneuvering of
aircraft.
ALLEY: A public thoroughfare less than twenty six feet (26') wide.
AMBULANCE: A privately owned vehicle that is especially designed, constructed
or modified and equipped and is intended to be used for and is maintained or
operated for transportation of individuals who are sick, injured, wounded or
otherwise incapacitated or helpless.
AMBULANCE BASE STATION: A lot or portion thereof used as a station for one or
more ambulances where any one or more of the following activities are
conducted:
   A.   Cleaning, maintenance or repair of ambulances.
   B.   Storage of cleaning, maintenance or repair equipment or supplies.
   C.   Storage of fuels or lubricants.
   D.   Storage of medical equipment or supplies except within an ambulance
located on the premises.
   E.   Maintenance of eating, washroom or sleeping facilities for more than
three (3) persons.
   F.   Parking of more than one ambulance on the premises for a period of time
in excess of one hour.
AMBULANCE SUBSTATION: A lot or portion thereof where one ambulance and its crew
of not to exceed three (3) persons is on the premises for a period of time in
excess of one hour.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL: Structure or building used to provide medical attention for
animals; may include temporary boarding of animals.
ANIMAL SHELTER: Building or structure designed to accommodate the boarding and
care of lost and stray animals, and to conduct humane treatment thereof.
ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTION: Any projection which is not intended for occupancy
and which extends beyond the face of an exterior wall of a building, but shall
not include signs.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY: A facility licensed by the state of Utah that
provides a combination of housing and personalized healthcare designed to
respond to the needs of individuals who require help with the activities of
daily living, such as meal preparation, personal grooming, housekeeping,
medication, etc. Care is provided in a professionally managed group living
environment in a way that promotes maximum independence and dignity for each
resident.
BASEMENT: A story partly underground and having at least one-half (1/2) its
height above the average level of the adjoining ground. A basement shall be
counted as a story, for purposes of height measurement.
BLANKETING: The term blanketing or blanket, when applied to signs or sign
structure, shall mean the partial or complete shutting off of the face of one
sign by another sign.
BOARDING HOUSE: A building with not more than five (5) guestrooms where, for
compensation, meals are provided for at least five (5) but not more than
fifteen (15) persons.
BUILDING: Any structure other than a boundary wall or fence.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY: A subordinate building or a portion of the main building
on a lot, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the main or
principal building.
BUILDING, DETACHED: A building surrounded by open space on the same lot.
BUILDING FACADE: That portion of an exterior elevation of a building extended
from grade to the top of the parapet wall or eaves and the entire width of the
building elevation.
BUILDING FACADE FACING: A resurfacing of an existing facade with approved
material illuminated or nonilluminated.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance from the grade elevation to the
highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or to the deck line of a mansard
roof, or to a point midway between the lowest part of the eaves or cornice, and
ridge of a pitch or hip roof.
BUILDING, MAIN: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot
on which it is located.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: Building official is the official or other person charged
with the administration and enforcement of this title or his duly authorized
deputy.
BUILDING, PUBLIC: A building owned and operated, or owned and intended to be
operated by a public agency of the United States of America, of the state of
Utah, or any of its political subdivisions.
CAR WASH, LAUNDRY-TYPE: A structure or portion thereof containing facilities
for washing passenger automobiles, using production-line methods such as, but
not limited to, chain conveyor, movable or revolving cleaning brushes, blower,
steam cleaning, or similar mechanical devices.
CAR WASH, MANUAL SPRAY: A structure or portion thereof containing facilities
for washing passenger automobiles, limited to using only hand-operated manual
spray cleaning equipment and techniques.
CELLAR: A story having more than one-half (1/2) its height below the average
level of the adjoining ground. A cellar shall not be counted as a story for the
purpose of height measurement.
CHANGEABLE COPY PANEL: A panel which is characterized by changeable copy,
regardless of method of attachment.
CLUSTER SUBDIVISION: A subdivision of land in which the areas and widths of
residential lots are reduced below the minimum lot areas and lot width
requirements of the zone in which the subdivision is located and where
equivalent common open space areas are provided to compensate for such lot
reduction.
COMMON OPEN SPACE: The land area in a planned residential unit development
(PRUD) reserved and set aside for recreational uses, landscaping, open green
areas, parking and driveway areas for the common use and enjoyment of the
residents of the PRUD.
COMMON OPEN SPACE EASEMENT: A required right of use granted to the city of
Riverdale by the owner of a planned residential unit development, on and over
land in a planned residential unit development designated as common open space,
which easement guarantees to the city of Riverdale that the designated common
open space and recreation land is permanently reserved for access, parking and
recreation, and open green space, purposes in accordance with the plans and
specifications approved by the planning commission and city council at the time
of approval of the PRUD or as such plans are amended from time to time.
CONDOMINIUM PROJECT: A real estate condominium project where ownership of a
single unit in a multi-unit project, together with an undivided interest in
common in the common areas and facilities of the property, is transferred; a
plan or project whereby four (4) or more apartments or commercial or industrial
buildings or structures are separately offered or proposed to be offered for
sale and meeting all requirements of the Condominium Ownership Act of the state
of Utah. Structures shall conform with all area, yard, frontage and height
regulations of the zone district in which they are located.
CORRAL: A space, other than a building, less than ten thousand (10,000) square
feet in area, and less than one hundred feet (100') in width, used for the
confinement of animals.
COURT: An unoccupied open space, other than yard, on the same lot with a
building or buildings, which is bounded on two (2) or more sides by the walls
of such building or buildings.
COVERAGE, LOT: The percent of the lot area covered by the main and accessory
buildings.
DAIRY: A commercial establishment for the manufacture, processing or sale of
dairy products.
DAYCARE/PRESCHOOL CENTER: A. Any building or structure, other than an occupied
residence, wherein care, supervision and guidance for three (3) or more
children unaccompanied by parent or guardian is furnished for periods less than
twenty four (24) hours per day, or, an occupied residence wherein care,
supervision and guidance for six (6) or more children unaccompanied by parent
or guardian is furnished for periods of less than twenty four (24) hours per
day.
   B.   "Occupied residence" shall refer to a building or structure being used
as a residence by a family. The term "daycare/preschool center" is inclusive of
kindergartens, preschools, nursery schools and all other similar facilities
specializing in the education and/or care of children prior to their entrance
into the first grade, other than facilities owned and/or operated by the public
school system.
DRY CLEANER: An establishment which has as its sole purpose the cleansing of
fabrics with substantially nonaqueous organic solvents. Laundry establishments
with self-service, coin operated dry cleaning machines shall not be classified
as a dry cleaner.
DWELLING: A building or portion thereof designed or used as the living quarters
for one or more families.
DWELLING (DUPLEX TYPE), ALTERNATE SIDE LOT LINE: The placement of adjacent
houses on alternate or common side lot lines, with space between each pair of
houses.
DWELLING, GROUP: Two (2) or more dwellings placed upon a single lot.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A building arranged or designed to be occupied by
three (3) or more families.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building arranged or designed to be occupied by one
family, the structure having only one dwelling unit.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ROW HOUSE: A building built directly against an
adjoining building without an open space between, and containing a one-family
dwelling unit extending from basement to roof. Each such single-family attached
dwelling unit shall have a front and rear entrance. Each group of single-family
attached dwellings shall be considered one structure, for purposes of front,
rear and side yard requirements.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building arranged or designated to be occupied by two
(2) families, the structure having only two (2) dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms in a dwelling, apartment, hotel or apartment
hotel designed for or occupied by one family for living, sleeping and eating
purposes. A dwelling unit may contain more than one set of kitchen facilities,
whether temporary or permanent, provided they are used only by members of the
family occupying the dwelling unit or their nonpaying guests. A dwelling unit
may include up to two (2) persons per unit to whom rooms are rented in addition
to a family related by blood, marriage or adoption, but if the number of such
additional persons exceeds two (2) or if they use or are furnished separate
cooking facilities, whether temporary or permanent, such additional persons
shall be considered a separate dwelling unit.
DWELLING UNIT BACHELOR OR BACHELORETTE: A dwelling unit designed or used to
accommodate unrelated persons exclusively.
DWELLING, ZERO LOT LINE: A single-family home that has, in effect, a zero foot
(0') setback from one of the lot lines. For the purpose of this title, that
line is a side line.
DWELLINGS, PARALLEL SIDE LOT LINE: Zero side yard setback housing with even
spacing between each house.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION: A public or elementary or secondary school, seminary,
parochial school or private educational institution having a curriculum similar
to that ordinarily given in grades one through twelve (12) in the public school
system. The term "educational institution", for the purpose of this title, does
not include posthigh school educational facilities.
FAMILY: A. One or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption, or legal
guardianship, including foster children, living together as a single
housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit; or
   B.   A group of not more than four (4) persons not related by blood,
marriage, adoption, or legal guardianship living together as a single
housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit; or
   C.   Two (2) unrelated persons and their children living together as a
single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.
The term "family" shall not be construed to mean a club, group home,
transitional victim home, substance abuse home, transitional home (all types),
a lodge or a fraternity/sorority house.
FENCE: A tangible barrier or obstruction of any material, with the purpose or
intent or having the effect of preventing passage or view across the fence
line. It includes hedges and walls.
FLOODPLAIN: Land adjacent to a body of water which has been or may be hereafter
covered by floodwater as delineated by the U.S. army corps of engineers.
FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONE: Boundaries of the intermediate regional flood as
defined by the U.S. army corps of engineers. The floodplain zone is designed to
overlay or be superimposed over existing zoning within the defined floodplain.
Such an overlay zone can be interchangeably referred to as a floating zone
because the existing zone remains effective except for the conditions
superimposed by the floodplain zone.
FLOOR AREA: The sum of the gross horizontal area of the several floors of a
building and its accessory buildings on the same lot, excluding cellar and
basement floor areas not devoted to residential use, but including the area of
roofed terraces. All dimensions shall be measured from the exterior faces of
the exterior walls.
FLOOR-LOT AREA RATIO: The total floor area of a building divided by the area of
the lot on which it is located.
FRATERNITY OR SORORITY HOUSE: A building occupied by and maintained exclusively
for students affiliated with an academic or professional college or university
or other recognized institution of higher learning and acknowledged by such
institution.
FRONTAGE: All the property fronting on one side of the street between
intersecting or intercepting streets, or between a street and a right of way,
waterway, end of dead end street, or political subdivision boundary, measured
along the street line. An intercepting street shall determine only the boundary
of the frontage of the side of the street which it intercepts.
GARAGE, CARPORT: A private garage not completely enclosed by walls or doors.
For the purpose of this title, a carport shall be subject to all the
regulations prescribed for a private garage.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An enclosed space of accessory building for the storage of one
or more motor vehicles; provided, that no business, occupation or service is
conducted for profit therein nor space therein for more than one car is leased
to a nonresident of the premises. A garage shall be considered part of a
dwelling if the garage and dwelling have a roof or wall in common, or are
connected structurally by a physical connection such as a wall, trellis or
solid fence. A private garage shall not contain parking space for more than
four (4) standard size passenger vehicles.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building or portion thereof, other than a private garage,
designed or used for servicing, repairing, equipping, hiring, selling or
storing motor-driven vehicles.
GUEST HOUSE: A separate dwelling structure located on a lot with one or more
main dwelling structures and used for housing of guests or servants and not
rented, leased or sold separate from the rental, lease or sale of the main
dwelling.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any income-producing use of property zoned for residential
purposes.
HOTEL: A building designed for or occupied as the more or less temporary
abiding place of sixteen (16) or more individuals who are, for compensation,
lodged with or without meals.
HOUSEHOLD PETS: Animals or fowl ordinarily permitted in the house and kept for
company or pleasure, such as dogs, cats or canaries, but not including a
sufficient number of dogs or cats to constitute a "kennel", as defined in this
section.
INCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL: Incombustible material is any material which will not
ignite at or below a temperature of one thousand two hundred degrees Fahrenheit
(1,200°F) during an exposure of five (5) minutes, and will not continue to burn
or glow at that temperature. Tests shall be made as specified in the Uniform
Building Code.
JUNKYARD: The use of any lot, portion of a lot or tract of land for the
storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, including scrap metals or other scrap
materials, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles, or
other vehicles, or machinery or parts thereof; provided, that this definition
shall not be deemed to include such uses which are clearly accessory and
incidental to any agricultural use permitted in the district.
KENNEL: An establishment having three (3) or more dogs for the purpose of
boarding, breeding, buying, grooming, letting for hire, training for fee, or
selling, except where such establishment shall be licensed as having
sportsman's privileges as provided in subsection 5-4-5B of this code.
KINDERGARTEN: A school or class for children of the four (4) to six (6) age
group.
LAUNDROMAT OR LAUNDERETTE: A self-service laundry establishment where clothes
are cleansed in a coin-operated machine. Laundromats or launderettes may
include self-service, coin-operated dry-cleaning machines.
LODGING HOUSE: A building where lodging only is provided for compensation to
five (5) or more, but not exceeding fifteen (15) persons, in contrast to
hotels.
LOT: A parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by a main building or group of
buildings (main or accessory), together with such yards, open spaces, lot width
and lot area as are required by this title and having frontage upon a public or
private street. Except for group dwellings and a guest house, not more than one
dwelling structure shall occupy any one lot.
LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting on two (2) intersecting streets where the interior
angle of intersection or interception does not exceed one hundred thirty five
degrees (135°).
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
MAINTAIN: Includes, but is not limited to, the following: service, repair,
alter, remodel, reletter, redecorate, repaint, move or remove. It does not
include the removal of signs by a licensed wrecking contractor. Owner or lessee
of sign may repaint, redecorate and/or change letters or panels on his own
sign.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A. A transportable factory built housing unit constructed on
or after June 15, 1976, according to the federal home construction and safety
standards act of 1974 (HUD code), in one or more sections which, in the
traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet
or more in length, or when erected on site, is four hundred (400) or more
square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used
as dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and
electrical systems. All manufactured homes constructed on or after June 15,
1976, shall be identifiable by the manufacturer's data plate bearing the date
the unit was manufactured and a HUD label attached to the exterior of the home
certifying the home as manufactured to HUD standards.
   B.   A "manufactured home", as defined in the preceding paragraph, which
meets HUD standards and which is placed on a permanent foundation is controlled
by this title and other applicable titles the same as dwelling units
constructed in the conventional manner.
MANUFACTURING, LIGHT: The assembly, fabrication or processing of goods and
materials using processes that ordinarily do not create noise, smoke, fumes,
odors, glare or health or safety hazards outside of the building or lot where
such assembly, fabrication or processing takes place or where such assembly,
fabrication or processes are housed entirely within a building. Light
manufacturing generally includes processing and fabrication of finished
products, predominantly from previously prepared materials and includes
processes, which do not require extensive floor area or land area.
MAP, OFFICIAL: Any map adopted by the city council under the provisions of Utah
Code Annotated section 10-9-402, as amended, for cities.
MOBILE HOME: A transportable factory built housing unit built prior to June 15,
1976, in accordance with a state mobile home code which existed prior to the
federal manufactured housing and safety standards act (HUD code).
MOBILE HOME PARK: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2)
or more manufactured home or recreation coach vehicle lots for rent.
Manufactured homes and recreation coach vehicles located in a mobile home park
are collectively referred to as "mobile homes".
MOTEL: Any building or group of buildings containing sleeping rooms, designed
for temporary use by automobile tourists or transients, with garage attached or
parking space conveniently located to each unit.
NATURAL WATERWAYS: Those areas, varying in width, along streams, creeks,
gullies, springs or washes which are natural drainage channels as determined by
the community development director and in which areas no building shall be
constructed.
NIGHTCLUB: A place of entertainment open at night usually serving food and
liquor, having a floor show, and providing music and space for dancing.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING: A building or structure or portion thereof lawfully
existing at the time any applicable zoning regulations became effective, the
design, erection, use, height, area or yard dimensions of which do not conform
to the provisions of such regulation or regulations.
NONCONFORMING USE: The prior lawful use of land or of a building or structure
which subsequently is prohibited by zoning regulations pertaining to the zone
in which the building or land is situated.
NURSERY FOR CHILDREN: See definition of Daycare/Preschool Center.
OPEN GREEN SPACE: An open space suitable for relaxation or landscaping. It
shall be unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings and/or hard surfaces such as
asphalt, cement and packed gravel, except that such open green space may be
traversed by necessary sidewalks.
PARCEL OF LAND: A contiguous quantity of land, in the possession of or owned
by, or recorded as the property of the same claimant or person.
PARKING LOT: An open area, other than a street, used for parking of more than
four (4) automobiles and available for public use, whether free, for
compensation, or as an accommodation for clients or customers.
PARKING SPACE: Space within a building or parking lot for parking or storage of
one automobile.
PAYING GUEST: Any person hiring a room in a dwelling unit for living, eating or
sleeping purposes.
PERSON: One or more persons, an association, a copartnership, or a corporation
or firm, either by themselves or by an agent, employee, guardian or trustee.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PRUD): A development in which the
regulations of the zone in which the development is situated are waived to
allow flexibility and initiative in site and building design and location in
accordance with an approved plan and imposed general requirements.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The planning commission of the city of Riverdale, Utah.
PRIVATE DRIVE: Nondedicated thoroughfare or road used exclusively for private
access to and from private land and/or developments.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle such as a recreational trailer, tent, camper
trailer, truck camper, travel trailer, camp car, other vehicle with or without
motive power, designed and/or constructed to travel on the public thoroughfare
in accordance with the provisions of the Utah vehicle code, designed for the
use of human habitation.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK: Any area or tract of land or a separate designated
section within a mobile home park where lots are rented or held out for rent to
one or more owners or users of recreational coaches for a temporary time not to
exceed two (2) weeks.
RETAIL GOODS ESTABLISHMENT: A building, property or activity, the principal use
or purpose of which is the sale of physical goods, products or merchandise
directly to the consumer. Retail goods establishments shall not include any use
or other type of establishment which is otherwise specifically listed.
RETAIL SERVICES ESTABLISHMENT: A building, property or activity, the principal
use or purpose of which is the provision of personal services directly to the
consumer. The term retail services establishment shall include, but not be
limited to, barbershops, beauty shops, laundry and dry cleaning establishments,
tailoring shops, shoe repair and the like. Retail services establishment shall
not include any use or other type of establishment which is otherwise
specifically listed.
SHOPPING CENTER: Multi-entity commercial complex under single ownership which
leases space to various commercial establishments.
SIGN: A presentation or representation of words, letters, figures, designs,
pictures or colors, publicly displayed so as to give notice relative to a
person, a business, an article of merchandise, a service, an assemblage, a
solicitation, or a request for aid; also the structure or framework or any
natural object on which any sign is erected or is intended to be erected or
exhibited or which is being used or is intended to be used for sign purposes.
SIGN, ADVERTISING: An off premises sign of less than twenty (20) square feet.
SIGN, ANIMATED: A sign which involves motion or rotation of any part, created
by artificial means or displays flashing or intermittent lights. Electronic
digital display LED and LCD signs are not considered animated.
SIGN, BACKGROUND AREA: The entire background area of a sign upon which copy is
placed. In computing area of sign background, only the face or faces which can
be seen from any one direction at one time shall be counted.
SIGN, BILLBOARD: See definition of Sign, Off Premises.
SIGN, BUSINESS: An on premises sign which directs attention to a use conducted,
a commodity sold, or a service performed on the premises. A maximum of ten
percent (10%) of copy area may also advertise a product not manufactured on the
premises.
SIGN, CLOTH: Any sign executed upon or composed of any flexible fabric.
SIGN, COMBINATION: A sign incorporating any combination of the features of
projecting, roof or freestanding signs.
SIGN, COPY AREA: The area of a sign that is used for display purposes,
including the minimum frame and supports. In relation to signs that do not have
a frame or separate background, sign area shall be computed on the basis of the
least rectangle, triangle or circle large enough to frame the display.
SIGN, DEVELOPMENT: An on-premises sign identifying a construction project or
subdivision development. The sign may contain the name of the project, name and
address of the construction firm, architect and developer.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL: On-premises incidental signs designed to guide or direct
pedestrians or vehicular traffic.
SIGN, FLAT: Any sign attached to a building or other structure that projects
less than eighteen inches (18") beyond the building, but extends parallel or
substantially parallel thereto.
SIGN, FLOODLIGHTED: Any sign illuminated in the absence of daylight only by
devices which reflect or project light upon it.
SIGN, FREESTANDING: A sign which is supported by one or more columns, uprights
or braces in or upon the ground.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION AND INFORMATION: An on-premises sign displayed to indicate
the name or nature of a building or use, including all professional and
business buildings, home occupations, apartment complexes and public and semi-
public buildings. Temporary and development signs are classified in this
category only.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED: A sign in which a source of light is used in order to make
the message readable. This definition shall include internally and externally
lighted signs.
SIGN, INCOMBUSTIBLE: A sign which is constructed entirely of incombustible
material.
SIGN, MARQUEE: Any sign attached to or made an integral part of a marquee.
SIGN, MULTIPLE COPY: A sign which advertises other than the name of the
business and the principal product or service.
SIGN, NAMEPLATE: A sign indicating the name of a person or persons residing on
the premises.
SIGN, OFF-PREMISES: A sign which directs attention to a use, product, commodity
or service not related to the premises on which it is located.
SIGN, ON-PREMISES: See definition of Sign, Business.
SIGN, POLITICAL OR CAMPAIGN: A sign soliciting support for a person running for
public office or a sign defending or approving an issue or proposal being
placed before the public.
SIGN, PROJECTING: Any attached sign extending in whole or in part more than
eighteen inches (18") beyond the building line.
SIGN, ROOF: Any sign erected upon or supported by the roof or parapet of a
building.
SIGN, STRUCTURE: Any structure which supports any "sign", as defined in this
section. A sign structure may be a single pole or poles or an integral part of
the building.
SIGN, TEMPORARY: An on-premises sign which is intended to advertise community
or civic projects, real estate for sale or lease on a temporary basis. Such
sign shall not be erected earlier than thirty (30) days prior to the date of
beginning of event and shall be removed within thirty (30) days after event is
concluded.
SIGN, TIME AND/OR TEMPERATURE: A display containing illuminated numerals to
show the time and/or temperature.
SIGN, WALL: A sign which is affixed to an exterior wall of a building or
structure and which projects not more than eighteen inches (18") from the
building or structure wall and which does not extend more than four feet (4')
above the parapet, eaves or building facade of the building on which it is
located.
SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS: Established regulations concerning lot areas, yard
setbacks, building height, lot coverage, open green space and any other special
regulations deemed necessary to accomplish the purpose of this title.
STABLE, PRIVATE: A detached, accessory building for the keeping of horses owned
by the occupants of the premises, and not kept for remuneration, hire or sale.
STABLE, PUBLIC: A stable other than a private stable.
STORY: The space within a building, other than a cellar, included between the
surface of any floor and the surface of the ceiling next above.
STORY, HALF: A story with at least two (2) of its sides situated in a sloping
roof, the floor area of which does not exceed two-thirds (2/3) of the floor
immediately below it.
STREET, PUBLIC: A thoroughfare which has been dedicated or abandoned to the
public and accepted by proper public authority, or a thoroughfare, not less
than twenty six feet (26') wide, which has been made public by right of use and
which affords the principal means of access to abutting property.
STREET, PRIVATE: A thoroughfare which has been dedicated to the abutting
landowners for joint private access to private property and accepted and
approved by the city council.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change in supporting members of a building, such as
bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location
on the ground, or attachment to something having location on the ground.
SWIMMING POOL: Any artificial or semi-artificial container, whether outdoor or
indoor, and whether above or below the surface of the ground, or both, used or
intended to be used to contain a body of water for swimming by any person or
persons, together with all permanent structures, equipment, appliances and
other facilities used or intended for use in and about the operation,
maintenance and use of such pool.
SWIMMING POOL, FAMILY: A swimming pool used and intended to be used solely by
the owner, operator or lessee thereof and his family and by friends invited to
use it without payment of any fee or consideration.
TAVERN: Any business establishment operating under a Class C beer license. Such
establishments shall be limited in number to two (2) per lineal block 1 .
THEATER, INDOOR PICTURE: A building or part of a building devoted to the
showing of moving pictures on a paid admission basis.
THEATER, OUTDOOR DRIVE-IN: An open lot or part thereof with its appurtenant
facilities devoted primarily to the showing of moving pictures, on a paid
admission basis, to patrons seated in automobiles.
TRIM, NONSTRUCTURAL: Nonstructural trim is the molding, battens, caps, nailing
strips, latticing, cutouts or letters and walkways which are attached to the
sign structure.
USE: The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed, arranged,
intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
USE, ACCESSORY: A subordinate use customarily incidental to and located upon
the same lot occupied by the main use and devoted exclusively to the main use
of the premises.
USE, CONDITIONAL: A use or occupancy of a building, or use of land, permitted
only when authorized upon issuance of a conditional use permit and subject to
the limitations and conditions specified therein as provided in chapter 19 of
this title intended to allow compatible integration of uses which may be
suitable only in certain locations within a particular zone, or only upon
certain conditions and/or design criteria being achieved.
USE, PERMITTED: Any use lawfully occupying land or buildings as authorized in
the zone regulations and for which no conditional use permit is required.
WIDTH OF LOT: The distance between the side lot lines at the distance back from
the front lot line required for the depth of the front yard.
YARD: An open space on a lot, other than a court, unoccupied and unobstructed
from the ground upward by buildings, except as otherwise provided herein.
YARD, FRONT: An open space on the same lot with a building between the front
line of the building (exclusive of steps) and the front lot line and extending
across the full width of the lot. The "depth" of the front yard is the minimum
distance between the front lot line and the front line of the building.
YARD, REAR: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building between
the rear line of the building (exclusive of steps) and the rear lot line and
extending the full width of the lot. The "depth" of the rear yard is the
minimum distance between the rear lot line and the rear line of the main
building.
YARD, SIDE: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building, between
the side line of the building (exclusive of steps) and the side lot line and
extending from the front yard to the rear yard.
ZONE: The geographical area of the city within which the zoning regulations are
uniform.
ZONING ORDINANCE: Title 10 of this code, as set forth and as amended from time
to time. (1985 Code § 19-2; amd. Ord. 645, 6-9-2005; Ord. 647, 7-19-2005; Ord.
722, 12-2-2008; Ord. 802, 4-3-2012; Ord. 812, 8-21-2012; Ord. 847, 11-6-2013;
Ord. 851, 2-4-2014; Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
 
Notes
1 1. See also definition of "license" at section
  3-2-1 of this code.
CHAPTER 3
RESERVED
(Ord. 697, 2-19-2008)
CHAPTER 4
RESERVED
(Ord. 696, 2-19-2008)
CHAPTER 5
REZONE REQUESTS
SECTION:
10-5-1: Procedure
10-5-2: Application For Rezone
10-5-3: Notice Of Request; Posting; Public Hearing
10-5-4: Appeal From Planning Commission
10-5-1: PROCEDURE:
The following shall be the procedures followed for a proposed amendment to the
zoning map. Said proposed zoning map amendment shall be classified as a "rezone
request".
   A.   Initiation: A rezone request may be initiated by the planning
commission, the city council, or by any person, firm or corporation or agent of
said person, firm or corporation owning the real property in the city which is
the subject of the rezone request.
   B.   Notice, Publication Requirements: All rezone requests shall satisfy the
notice and publication requirements established by the laws of this state, and
shall first be presented to the planning commission for its recommendations,
which shall be returned to the city council for its consideration within thirty
(30) days, as set forth at section
10-1-5 of this title.
   C.   Form: The form (hereinafter the "application") used to request a rezone
shall be adopted by resolution of the city council. (1985 Code § 19-1a-1)
10-5-2: APPLICATION FOR REZONE:
Prior to the consideration of any rezone request by the planning commission,
all persons, firms or corporations or agents of said persons, firms or
corporations owning real property in the city, which is the subject of a rezone
request shall:
   A.   Submission: Submit a completed application requesting a change in the
zoning ordinance or map to the city recorder. All requirements, attachments and
fees set forth on the application shall be satisfied and submitted with the
application before the application shall be deemed completed. No application
for rezone request shall be considered by the planning commission until it is
completed.
   B.   Fee 1 : The applicant shall have paid to the city a rezone request
application fee prior to consideration of the rezone request by the planning
commission. Said application fee shall be set by resolution of the city council
as prescribed in section
10-1-7 of this title. (1985 Code § 19-1a-2)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  1-12-5 of this code for specific fees.
10-5-3: NOTICE OF REQUEST; POSTING; PUBLIC HEARING:
Whenever any rezone request is made, before acting on said request, the
planning commission shall hold a public hearing as required in section
10-1-5 of this title. Notice of publication and of public hearing shall be
provided as follows:
   A.   Riverdale City department of community development shall, at least ten
(10) days prior to the date of the public hearing, and after the party
requesting the rezone has paid the applicable rezone request fee, place a sign
in a visible location in the general area of the proposed zone change. The sign
shall state the following:
RIVERDALE CITY NOTICE OF REZONE REQUEST. FOR INFORMATION CONTACT RIVERDALE CITY
AT 801-394-5542 X 1215.
   B.   Each notice of a public hearing concerning a rezone must be mailed to
each affected entity at least ten (10) calendar days before the public hearing,
posted in at least three (3) public locations within the city or on the city's
official website, and published in a newspaper of general circulation in the
area at least ten (10) calendar days before the public hearing.
   C.   The cost of placing the sign or signs shall be borne by the party
requesting the rezone. In the case of the publication and mailing costs, the
same shall be paid by the city from the rezone request application fee (except
where the request is initiated by the planning commission or the city council,
for which request no fee shall be assessed). (Ord. 731, 3-17-2009)
10-5-4: APPEAL FROM PLANNING COMMISSION:
In the event a negative recommendation is received from the planning
commission, the applicant for the rezone request may appeal that decision to
the city council by filing a written appeal with the city recorder within ten
(10) days of the planning commission's final decision. (1985 Code § 19-1a-5)
CHAPTER 6
ZONES ESTABLISHED
SECTION:
10-6-1: Establishment Of Zones
10-6-2: Boundaries Of Zones
10-6-3: Rules Applicable Where Boundaries Uncertain
10-6-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES:
For the purpose of this title, the City is divided into the following zones in
which land uses shall be limited as specified in this title. Classification
will be determined on the basis of location, topographic features and other
reasonable considerations to guide the orderly physical growth, neighborhood
compatibility and overall stability of the City.
Open Space Zone (O-1)
Agricultural Zone (A-1)
Agricultural Zone (A-2)
Residential Estate Zone (RE-15)
Residential Estate Zone (RE-20)
Single-Family Residential Zone (R-1-10)
Single-Family Residential Zone (R-1-8)
Single-Family Residential Zone (R-1-6)
Single-Family Residential Zone (R-1-4.5)
Single-Family and Single-Family With Rental Unit Residential Zone (R-2)
Multiple-Family Residential Zone (R-3)
Multiple-Family Residential Zone (R-4)
Multiple-Family Residential Zone (R-5)
Mobile Home Park-Recreational Vehicle Park Zone (Rmh-1)
Neighborhood Commercial Zone (C-1)
Community Commercial Zone (C-2)
Regional Commercial Zone (C-3)
Planned Neighborhood Commercial Zone (CP-1)
Planned Community Commercial Zone (CP-2)
Planned Regional Commercial Zone (CP-3)
Light Manufacturing Use Zone (M-1)
Heavy Manufacturing Use Zone (M-2)
Light Planned Manufacturing Zones (MP-1)
Heavy Planned Manufacturing Zones (MP-2)
Sexually Oriented Businesses Overlay Zone (CP-4)
Retail/Commercial Park Overlay Zone (RCP)
Office Park Zone (OP)
Low Impact Transition Overlay Zone (C-L)
Landmark Development Zone (LM)
Mixed Use Zone (MU)
Multiple-Family Residential Overlay Zone (MFROZ)
(1985 Code § 19-13-1; amd. 2001 Code; Ord. 592, 8-1-2001; Ord. 596, 12-5-2001;
Ord. 616, 3-4-2003; Ord. 647, 7-19-2005; Ord. 713, 8-19-2008; Ord. 762, 7-6-
2010; Ord. 797, 1-17-2012)
10-6-2: BOUNDARIES OF ZONES:
The boundaries of each of the said zones are hereby established as described
herein or as shown on the map entitled zoning map of Riverdale City, or as
hereafter amended, and all boundaries, notations and other data shown on said
maps are made by this reference as much a part of this title as if fully
described and detailed herein. Said maps shall be filed in the custody of the
city recorder and may be examined by the public subject to any reasonable
regulations established by the city recorder. (1985 Code § 19-13-4; amd. 2001
Code)
10-6-3: RULES APPLICABLE WHERE BOUNDARIES UNCERTAIN:
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any zone, the following rules
shall apply:
   A.   Wherever the zone boundary is indicated as being approximately upon the
centerline of the street, alley or block, or along a property line, then unless
otherwise definitively indicated on the map, the centerline of such street,
alley or block or such property line, shall be construed to be the boundary of
such zone.
   B.   Wherever the zone boundary is indicated as being approximately at the
centerline of any river, irrigation canal or other waterway, or railroad right
of way, or public park or other public land, or any section line, then in such
case the center of such stream, canal or waterway, or of such railroad right of
way, or the boundary line of such public land or such section line, shall be
deemed to be the boundary of such zone.
   C.   Where such zone boundary lines cannot be determined by the above rules,
their location may be found by the use of the scale appearing upon the map.
   D.   Where the application of the above rules does not clarify the zone
boundary location, the board of adjustment shall interpret the map. (1985 Code
§ 19-13-5)
CHAPTER 7
OPEN SPACE ZONE (O-1)
SECTION:
10-7-1: Purpose And Intent
10-7-2: Conditional Uses
10-7-3: Site Development Standards
10-7-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The Open Space Zone O-1 is specifically intended to encourage the preservation
of a natural environment in an otherwise urban setting; to hold for future
generations open space in which plants and animals can be protected and
studied; to inhibit erection of unnecessary buildings on a flood plain, on
areas of severe slope and areas of fault line and rock slides; to provide
suitable areas for recreation and relaxation; and to alleviate stream
pollution. (1985 Code § 19-14-1)
10-7-2: CONDITIONAL USES:
Accessory building and uses customarily incidental to any permitted use.
Agricultural.
Botanical or zoological garden.
Cemetery.
Conservation areas: botanical or zoological.
Fishing ponds: private or public.
Golf course.
Horse raising, provided conducted in a pasture of at least one acre size and
with a maximum density of two (2) horses per acre.
Public park, public recreation grounds and associated buildings, but not
including privately-owned commercial amusement business.
Public service buildings.
Wildlife sanctuaries. (1985 Code § 19-14-2; amd. 2001 Code)
10-7-3: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Minimum lot area, one acre.
   B.   Minimum lot width, one hundred fifty feet (150').
   C.   Minimum yard setbacks for structures:
      1.   Front, thirty feet (30').
      2.   Side, twenty feet (20').
      3.   Rear, thirty feet (30').
   D.   Building height:
      1.   Minimum, one story.
      2.   Maximum, two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty five feet (35').
(1985 Code § 19-14-4)
CHAPTER 8
AGRICULTURAL ZONES (A-1, A-2)
SECTION:
10-8-1: Purpose And Intent
10-8-2: Permitted Uses In The A-1 Zone
10-8-3: A-2 Zone Permitted Uses Requiring Two Acres Minimum Lot Area
10-8-4: Conditional Uses Only In The A-2 Zone
10-8-5: Site Development Standards
10-8-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of the agricultural zones is to designate land areas that are
currently used for farming or as a temporary holding zone that may undergo the
possibility of a more intensive urban type of development and to set up
guidelines to continue agricultural pursuits, including the keeping of farm
animals, and to direct orderly low density residential development in a
continuing rural environment. (Ord. 762, 7-6-2010)
10-8-2: PERMITTED USES IN THE A-1 ZONE:
Accessory building for nonconforming lots and lots having less than two (2)
acres shall comply with subsection 10-14-5B of this title. For all lots with
more than two (2) acres: Accessory buildings that are greater than one thousand
(1,000) square feet and higher than twenty feet (20') but shall not occupy more
than twenty five percent (25%) of the total lot area.
Agriculture.
Animals or fowl kept for family food production.
Cemetery.
Church, synagogue or similar permanent building used for regular religious
worship.
Cluster subdivision in accordance with chapter 23 of this title.
Corral, stable or building for keeping animals or fowl, provided such use shall
be located not less than one hundred feet (100') from a public street and any
such building shall be located not less than twenty five feet (25') from any
side or rear lot line.
Educational institution.
Fruit or vegetable stand for fruit or vegetables produced only on the premises.
Golf course, except miniature golf course.
Home occupation.
Horses for private use only; and provided, that not more than two (2) horses
may be kept for each one acre within any lot.
Household pets. If any individual property owner or renter requests more than
two (2) dogs, a regulatory permit provided by animal control services must be
obtained.
Parking lot accessory to uses permitted in this zone.
Private park, playground or recreation area, but not including privately owned
commercial amusement business.
Public building, public park, recreation grounds and associated buildings.
Single-family dwellings and guest homes.
Temporary buildings or use incidental to construction work. Such building shall
be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work. (Ord. 762,
7-6-2010)
10-8-3: A-2 ZONE PERMITTED USES REQUIRING TWO ACRES MINIMUM LOT AREA:
All permitted uses allowed in the A-1 zone are allowed in the A-2 zone.
Animal hospital or clinic, dog breeding, dog kennels and dog training school
that require a regulatory permit provided by animal control services and if
approved such use shall be located not less than one hundred feet (100') from a
public street and any building or enclosure for animals is located not less
than fifty feet (50') from any side or rear property line.
Dairy farm with no milk processing and sales.
Hog/pig keeping and raising of not more than ten (10) hogs/pigs which are more
than sixteen (16) weeks old; provided, that no person shall feed any such hog/
pig any market refuse, house refuse, garbage or offal other than that produced
on the premises. This use requires a minimum five (5) acre contiguous lot.
Raising and grazing of horses, cows, bulls, steers, sheep, mules, donkeys,
llamas, or goats not exceeding a density of fifteen (15) head per acre of used
land, and including the supplementary or full feeding of such animals as part
of a farming operation; provided, that such raising and grazing when conducted
by a farmer in conjunction with any livestock feed yard, livestock sales yard
or slaughterhouse shall not be closer than three hundred feet (300') to any
dwelling, or public or semipublic building, shall not include the erection of
any permanent fences, corrals, chutes or other structures normally associated
with commercial feedlots, and shall be carried on during the period September
15 through April 15 only.
Two-family dwelling. (Ord. 762, 7-6-2010)
10-8-4: CONDITIONAL USES ONLY IN THE A-2 ZONE:
The following uses shall be permitted only when authorized by a conditional use
permit obtained as provided in chapter 19 of this title:
Corralling, feeding, exercising and maintenance of horses for persons other
than the owner of the A-2 property. Traffic and adjacent properties shall not
be impacted by this type of use. Prior to allowing this use a site plan must be
submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation to the city
council. A business license is required for the operation of this use.
Farms devoted to the hatching, raising and fattening of chickens, turkeys or
other fowl, rabbits, fish or frogs, chinchilla and beaver.
Greenhouse and nursery allowing the sale of materials produced on the premises
or imported materials associated with the greenhouse or nursery operation.
Planned residential unit development in accordance with chapter 22 of this
title.
Private park, playground or recreation areas not open to the general public and
to which no admission charge is made.
Public utility substation or water storage reservoir developed by a public
agency.
Radio or television station or tower.
Sod farm.
Swap meets at a drive-in theater.
Wastewater treatment or disposal facilities meeting the requirements of the
Utah state division of health code waste regulations. (Ord. 762, 7-6-2010)
10-8-5: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
 
  Permitted Permitted And Conditional
  Uses      Uses Requiring
            2 Acres Minimum
Minimum lot area         40,000 square feet      2 acres
Minimum lot width        150 feet                150 feet
Minimum yard setbacks:
 Front                   30 feet                 30 feet
 Side dwelling           10 feet with total width of 2 side yards not less than
                         24 feet
 Other main building     20 feet each side       20 feet each side
                         10 feet from side property line except 1 foot if
 Accessory building side located at least 6 feet in rear of main building and
 setback                 shall be at least 20 feet from main building on
                         adjacent lots
 Side; facing street     20 feet                 20 feet
 on corner lot
 Rear main building      30 feet                 30 feet
                         10 feet where accessory building rears on side yard of
 Accessory building rear adjacent corner lot or 1 foot from rear property line
 setback                 if located 6 feet from rear of main building provided
                         that the structure be at least 20 feet from main
                         building on adjacent lot
                         If a dwelling has an existing detached accessory
                         building in the rear yard, and the property owner
                         wants to add on to the dwelling (after fire department
                         review); the new addition must be a minimum of 8 feet
                         from the accessory building, and the new addition
                         shall meet the minimum rear yard requirements. The
                         opposing side yard must meet minimum side yard
                         requirements and be open at all times to rear yard
                         access
Building height:
 Minimum                 1 story                 1 story
 Maximum                 21/2 stories or 35 feet 21/2 stories or 35 feet
 
(Ord. 762, 7-6-2010)
CHAPTER 9
RESIDENTIAL ZONES
ARTICLE A.  RESIDENTIAL ESTATE ZONES (RE-15, RE-20)
SECTION:
10-9A-1: Purpose And Intent
10-9A-2: Permitted Uses
10-9A-3: Permitted Uses Requiring Forty Thousand Square Feet Minimum Lot Area
10-9A-4: Conditional Uses
10-9A-5: Site Development Standards
10-9A-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The major purpose of the RE-15 and RE-20 zones is to provide and protect
residential development at a low density in a semiagricultural or rural
environment. It is also to provide for certain rural amenities, on larger
minimum lots, in conjunction with the primary residential nature of the zone.
(1985 Code § 19-16-1)
10-9A-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory building and use that is incidental to a dwelling on the same lot or
property and in compliance with all Riverdale City ordinances that regulate the
use of accessory buildings.
Agriculture.
Church, synagogue or similar building used for regular religious worship.
Cluster subdivision, in accordance with chapter 23 of this title.
Educational institution.
Golf course, except miniature golf.
Greenhouse and nursery, limited to sale of material produced on premises and
with no retail shop operation.
Household pets.
Parking lot accessory to use permitted in this zone.
Public building, public park, recreation grounds and associated buildings.
Single-family dwelling.
Temporary building or use incidental to construction work. Such building shall
be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work. (1985
Code § 19-16-2; amd. 2001 Code; Ord. 784, 4-19-2011)
10-9A-3: PERMITTED USES REQUIRING FORTY THOUSAND SQUARE FEET MINIMUM LOT AREA:
Animals and fowl kept for family food production.
Private stables; horses for private use only; and provided, that no more than
two (2) horses may be kept for each one acre within any lot. (1985 Code § 19-
16-3; amd. 2001 Code)
10-9A-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses shall be permitted only when authorized by a conditional use
permit as provided in chapter 19 of this title:
Home occupations.
Planned residential unit development in accordance with chapter 22 of this
title.
Private park, playground or recreation area not open to the general public and
to which no admission is made, and not including privately owned commercial
amusement business.
Public utility substation or water storage reservoir developed by a public
agency. (1985 Code § 19-16-4)
10-9A-5: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
 
  RE-15 RE-20
                       15,000 square feet except 20,000 square feet except for
Minimum lot area       for uses which require    uses which require 40,000
                       40,000 square feet        square feet
Minimum lot width      100 feet                  115 feet
Minimum yard setbacks:
 Front                 30 feet                   30 feet
 Side dwelling         10 feet with total width of 2 side yards not less than
                       24 feet
 Other main building   20 feet each side
 Accessory building    10 feet except 1 foot if located at least 6 feet in
                       rear of main building
 Zero side yards       In accordance with subsection 10-14-4J of this title
 Side; facing street   20 feet                   20 feet
 on corner lot
 Rear:
   Main building      25 feet                   25 feet
                       1 foot except 10 feet where accessory building rears on
                       side yard of adjacent corner lot. If a dwelling has an
                       existing detached accessory building in the rear yard,
                       and the property owner wants to add on to the dwelling
   Accessory building (after fire department review); the new addition must
                       be a minimum of 8 feet from the accessory building, and
                       the new addition shall meet the minimum rear yard
                       requirements. The opposing side yard must meet minimum
                       side yard requirements and be open at all times to rear
                       yard access
Building height:
 Minimum               1 story                   1 story
 Maximum               21/2 stories or 35 feet   21/2 stories or 35 feet
 
(Ord. 615, 2-18-2003)
ARTICLE B.  SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONES (R-1-10, R-1-8, R-1-6, R-1-4.5)
SECTION:
10-9B-1: Purpose And Intent
10-9B-2: Permitted Uses
10-9B-3: Conditional Uses
10-9B-4: Site Development Standards
10-9B-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of the R-1-10, R-1-8 and R-1-6 zone classifications is to provide
regulated areas for single-family residential use at three (3) different low
density levels. The purpose of the R-1-4.5 zone classification is to provide
regulated areas for single-family residential use at a moderate density and to
encourage a wider choice of single-family residential housing styles and prices
than is now available, as well as opportunities for significant savings in both
site development and space heating, while maintaining the advantages of
individual home ownership. (1985 Code § 19-17-1)
10-9B-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory building and use that is incidental to a dwelling on the same lot or
property and in compliance with all Riverdale City ordinances that regulate the
use of accessory buildings.
Agriculture, nurseries and greenhouses, provided the sale of goods is limited
to material produced on the premises.
Church, synagogue or similar permanent building used for regular religious
worship.
Cluster subdivision, in accordance with chapter 23 of this title.
Educational institution, public schools, private with similar curriculum,
daycare/preschool centers.
Golf course, except miniature golf.
Household pets.
Parking lot accessory to uses permitted in this zone.
Planned residential unit development, in accordance with chapter 22 of this
title.
Public building, public park, public recreation grounds and associated
buildings.
Single-family dwellings.
Temporary building for use incidental to construction work. Such building shall
be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work. (1985
Code § 19-17-2; amd. Ord. 784, 4-19-2011; Ord. 802, 4-3-2012)
10-9B-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses shall be permitted only when authorized by a conditional use
permit as provided in chapter 19 of this title:
Home occupation.
Private park, playground or recreation area, but not including privately owned
commercial amusement business.
Public utility substation or water storage reservoir developed by a public
agency.
Zero lot line single-family dwelling. (1985 Code § 19-17-3)
10-9B-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
 
Residential Zones R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-6 R-1-4.5
                                                             4,500 for
Minimum lot areas     10,000       8,000        6,000        dwelling; 7,500
(in square feet)                                             for other main
                                                             building
Minimum lot width:    80 feet      70 feet      60 feet      45 feet
 Alternate side zero
 lot line (duplex                                            35 feet
 type)
Minimum yard
setbacks:
 Front:               30 feet      30 feet      25 feet      20 feet
 Exception: Where 50
 percent is developed                                        15 feet
 but not less than
 20 feet
 Side:
  Dwelling            10 feet      8 feet       8 feet       6 feet
    With total width
  not                 24 feet      18 feet      18 feet      16 feet
    less than
  Other main building 20 feet      20 feet      20 feet      20 feet
  each side
 Side yard:
  Accessory building  10 feet      8 feet       8 feet       6 feet
  Exception: When an accessory building is detached from the main building, and
  the accessory building is located at least 6 feet behind the main building,
  then the side yard setback for the accessory building may be no less than 1
  foot from any other structure (or property line)
  Zero side yard      In all 4 zones in accordance with subsection 10-14-4J of
                      this title
 Side; facing street
 on                   20 feet      20 feet      20 feet      15 feet
 corner lot
 Exception: Where 50
 percent
 frontage is          15 feet      15 feet      15 feet      10 feet
 developed but
 not less than
 Rear:
  Main building       25 feet      25 feet      25 feet      20 feet
                      When the accessory building is attached to the main
                      building, in any manner whatsoever, then the minimum rear
                      yard setback is 20 feet from the property line. When an
                      accessory building is detached from the main building,
                      and the accessory building is located at least 6 feet
                      behind the main building, then the rear yard setback for
                      the accessory building may be no less than 1 foot from
  Accessory building  the property line. If a dwelling has an existing detached
                      accessory building in the rear yard, and the property
                      owner wants to add on to the dwelling (after fire
                      department review); the new addition must be a minimum of
                      8 feet from the accessory building, and the new addition
                      shall meet the minimum rear yard requirements. The
                      opposing side yard must meet minimum side yard
                      requirements and be open at all times to rear yard access
 Building height:
  Minimum             1 story      1 story      1 story      1 story
  Maximum             21/2 stories 21/2 stories 21/2 stories 21/2 stories
                      or 35 feet   or 35 feet   or 35 feet   or 35 feet
 
(Ord. 832, 4-16-2013)
ARTICLE C.  SINGLE-FAMILY AND SINGLE-FAMILY WITH RENTAL UNIT RESIDENTIAL ZONE
(R-2)
SECTION:
10-9C-1: Purpose And Intent
10-9C-2: Permitted Uses
10-9C-3: Conditional Uses
10-9C-4: Site Development Standards
10-9C-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of the R-2 zone classification is to accommodate a need for low
density residential districts incorporating both single-family dwelling units
and single-family dwelling units with a residential rental unit. (1985 Code §
19-18-1; amd. 2001 Code)
10-9C-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory building and use that is incidental to a dwelling on the same lot or
property and in compliance with all Riverdale City ordinances that regulate the
use of accessory buildings.
Agriculture.
Church, synagogue or similar permanent building used for regular religious
worship.
Educational institution.
Golf course, except miniature golf course.
Greenhouse, noncommercial only.
Household pets.
Parking lot accessory to uses permitted in this zone.
Public building, public park, public recreation grounds and associated
buildings.
Single-family dwelling.
Temporary building and use incidental to construction work. Such building shall
be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work. (1985
Code § 19-18-2; amd. Ord. 784, 4-19-2011)
10-9C-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses shall be permitted only when authorized by a conditional use
permit as provided in chapter 19 of this title:
Cemetery with customary incidental uses, including, but not limited to,
mortuary, mausoleum, crematory, staff housing, service shops and chapel.
Home occupation.
Private park, playground or recreation area, but not including privately owned
commercial amusement business.
Public utility substation or water storage reservoir developed by a public
agency.
Single rental unit created only by owner occupied homes, located within,
underneath or above the primary single-family dwelling unit. Any conditionally
permitted rental unit shall be incidental to the primary residential use and
shall meet the following minimum standards:
The square footage of the rental unit shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of
the overall square footage of the dwelling structure;
The rental unit shall be designed with a secondary entrance in a manner that
the primary dwelling appears visually and functionally as if it were a single-
family dwelling without a rental unit;
The rental unit shall have its own off street parking provided on the primary
dwelling premises. Exiting units will be grandfathered until the property is
sold and the new owner must be a residence of one of the units. (Ord. 655, 4-4-
2006)
10-9C-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
 
Minimum lot area:
 One-family dwelling           8,000 square feet
 One-family dwelling           10,000 square feet
 with rental unit
Minimum lot width:
 One-family dwelling           70 feet
 One-family dwelling           80 feet
 with rental unit
Minimum yard setbacks:
                               25 feet except average of existing dwellings
 Front                         where 50 percent frontage is developed but not
                               less than 20 feet
 Side:
                               8 feet, with total width of 2 side yards of not
  Main building                less than 18 feet and 20 feet each side for
                               other main buildings
                               8 feet, except 1 foot if located at least 6 feet
  Accessory building           in rear of main building; but not closer than 9
                               feet to dwelling on adjacent lot
  Zero side yards              In accordance with subsection 10-14-4J of this
                               title
 Side; facing street on corner 20 feet, except average where 50 percent
                               frontage is developed, but not less than 15 feet
 Rear:
  Main building                25 feet
                               When the accessory building is attached to the
                               main building, in any manner whatsoever, then
                               the minimum rear setback is 20 feet from the
                               property line. When an accessory building is
                               detached from the main building, and the
                               accessory building is located at least 6 feet
                               behind the main building, then the rear setback
                               for the accessory building may be no less than 1
  Accessory building           foot from the property line. If a dwelling has
                               an existing detached accessory building in the
                               rear yard, and the property owner wants to add
                               on to the dwelling (after fire department
                               review); the new addition must be a minimum of 8
                               feet from the accessory building, and the new
                               addition shall meet the minimum rear yard
                               requirements. The opposing side yard must meet
                               minimum side yard requirements and be open at
                               all times to rear yard access
Building height:
 Minimum                       1 story
 Maximum                       21/2 stories or 35 feet
 
(Ord. 615, 2-18-2003)
ARTICLE D.  MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE (R-3)
SECTION:
10-9D-1: Purpose And Intent
10-9D-2: Permitted Uses
10-9D-3: Conditional Uses
10-9D-4: Site Development Standards
10-9D-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of the R-3 zone classification is to provide residential areas that
will accommodate the development of dwelling types from single-family through
multiple-family units with their associated necessary public services and
activities. It is also to provide an orderly transition from less intensive,
lower density uses to more intensive, higher density uses. (1985 Code § 19-19-
1)
10-9D-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory building and use that is incidental to a dwelling on the same lot or
property and in compliance with all Riverdale City ordinances that regulate the
use of accessory buildings.
Agricultural.
Bachelor and/or bachelorette dwelling with twenty four (24) or less dwelling
units.
Church, synagogue or similar permanent building used for regular religious
worship.
Educational institution.
Golf course, except miniature golf course.
Greenhouse, noncommercial only.
Group dwelling with twenty four (24) or less dwelling units in accordance with
chapter 24 of this title.
Household pets.
Library or museum, public or nonprofit.
Multiple-family dwelling with twenty four (24) or less dwelling units.
Parking lot accessory to uses permitted in this zone.
Planned residential unit development, in accordance with chapter 22 of this
title.
Public building, public park, public recreation grounds and associated
buildings.
Single-family dwelling.
Temporary building for use incidental to construction work. Such building shall
be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work.
Two-family dwelling. (1985 Code § 19-19-2; amd. Ord. 784, 4-19-2011)
10-9D-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses shall be permitted only when authorized by a conditional use
permit as provided in chapter 19 of this title:
Bachelor and/or bachelorette dwelling with twenty five (25) or more dwelling
units.
Cemetery with customary incidental uses, including, but not limited to,
mortuary, mausoleum, crematory, staff housing, service shops and chapel.
Group dwellings with twenty five (25) or more dwelling units in accordance with
chapter 24 of this title.
Home occupation.
Multiple-family dwelling with twenty five (25) or more dwelling units.
Nursing home.
Private park, playground, or recreation area, but not including privately owned
commercial amusement business.
Public utility substation or water storage reservoir developed by a public
agency. (1985 Code § 19-19-3)
10-9D-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
 
Minimum lot area:
 One-building dwelling:
  Single-family                    6,000 square feet
  Two-family                       7,500 square feet
  Multiple-family                  7,500 square feet plus 2,000 square feet for
                                   each dwelling in excess of 2
                                   Same as above plus 1,000 square feet for
  Bachelor or bachelorette         each occupant in excess of 4 in each
                                   dwelling unit
                                   7,500 square feet for each building plus
                                   2,000 square feet for each dwelling unit in
  Group dwelling                   excess of 2 in each building; bachelor or
                                   bachelorette same as above plus 1,000 square
                                   feet for each occupant in excess of 4 in
                                   each dwelling unit
                                   7,500 square feet for nursing home and
  Other main building              additional 750 square feet for each guest or
                                   patient accommodations in excess of 4
Minimum lot width:                 60 feet
Minimum yard setbacks:
                                   25 feet, except average of existing
 Front                             dwellings where 50 percent frontage is
                                   developed, but not less than 20 feet
 Side:
  Main building:
                                   8 feet with total width of 2 required yards
      One-building dwelling      of not less than 18 feet plus 1 foot each
      and group dwelling         side for each 1 foot main building is over
                                   35 feet high
      Other main building        20 feet each side plus 1 foot each side for
                                   each 1 foot building is over 35 feet high
                                   8 feet, except 1 foot if located at least 6
  Accessory building               feet from rear of main building, but not
                                   closer than 8 feet to dwelling on adjacent
                                   lot
  Zero side yard                   In accordance with subsection 10-14-4J of
                                   this title
                                   20 feet, except average where 50 percent
 Side; facing street on corner lot frontage is developed, but not less than 15
                                   feet
 Rear:
  Main building                    30 feet
                                   1 foot, except 8 feet where an accessory
  Accessory building               building located on a corner lot rears on
                                   side yards of adjacent lots
                                   If a dwelling has an existing detached
                                   accessory building in the rear yard, and the
                                   property owner wants to add on to the
                                   dwelling (after fire department review); the
                                   new addition must be a minimum of 8 feet
                                   from the accessory building, and the new
                                   addition shall meet the minimum rear yard
                                   requirements. The opposing side yard must
                                   meet minimum side yard requirements and be
                                   open at all times to rear yard access
Building height:
 Minimum                           1 story
 Maximum                           Nursing home 21/2 stories or 35 feet, none
                                   for other buildings
                                   No building or group of buildings with their
Lot coverage                       accessory buildings shall cover more than 40
                                   percent of the lot area
Open green space                   At least 40 percent
                                   In no case shall the ratio of total floor
Special regulations                area in the building to the total lot area
                                   exceed one to one (1:1)
 
(Ord. 582, 11-15-2000)
ARTICLE E.  MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE (R-4)
SECTION:
10-9E-1: Purpose And Intent
10-9E-2: Permitted Uses
10-9E-3: Conditional Uses
10-9E-4: Site Development Standards
10-9E-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of the R-4 zone is to provide higher density residential areas with
their associated necessary public services and activities. It is also to
provide an orderly transition from less intensive, lower density uses to more
intensive, higher density uses. (1985 Code § 19-20-1)
10-9E-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory building and use that is incidental to a dwelling on the same lot or
property and in compliance with all Riverdale City ordinances that regulate the
use of accessory buildings.
Agriculture.
Bachelor and/or bachelorette dwelling with twenty four (24) or less dwelling
units.
Boarding and lodging house.
Church, synagogue or similar permanent building used for regular religious
worship.
College or university.
Educational institution.
Golf course, except miniature golf course.
Greenhouse, noncommercial only.
Group dwellings with twenty four (24) or less dwelling units in accordance with
chapter 24 of this title.
Household pets.
Library, museum, public or nonprofit.
Multiple-family dwelling with twenty four (24) or less dwelling units.
Parking lots accessory to uses permitted in this zone.
Planned residential unit development in accordance with chapter 22 of this
title.
Public building, public park, public recreation grounds and associated
buildings.
Single-family dwellings.
Temporary building for use incidental to construction work. Such building shall
be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work.
Two-family dwelling. (1985 Code § 19-20-2; amd. Ord. 784, 4-19-2011)
10-9E-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses shall be permitted only when authorized by a conditional use
permit as provided in chapter 19 of this title:
Bachelor and/or bachelorette dwelling with twenty five (25) or more dwelling
units.
Cemetery with customary incidental uses, including, but not limited to,
mortuary, mausoleum, crematory, staff housing, service shops and chapel.
Daycare/preschool center.
Fraternal and beneficial societies, orders and social clubs of nonprofit
nature.
Fraternity or sorority house.
Group dwelling with twenty five (25) or more dwelling units in accordance with
chapter 24 of this title.
Home occupation.
Hospital, sanatorium, clinic.
Multiple-family dwelling with twenty five (25) or more dwelling units.
Nursing home, nursery for children.
Private park, playground or recreation area, but not including privately owned
commercial amusement business.
Professional and business offices in which goods or merchandise are not
commercially created, exchanged or sold.
Public utility substation.
Studio for professional work, teaching, performances or exhibitions of the fine
arts; provided, that such performances or exhibitions are limited to the work
product of the studio involved.
Wedding chapel; provided, that light refreshment only shall be served and the
service or consumption of food or refreshment shall be strictly incidental to
the principal use. (1985 Code § 19-20-3; amd. Ord. 802, 4-3-2012)
10-9E-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
 
Minimum lot area:
 One-building dwelling:
                                   6,000 square feet plus 1,500 square feet for
                                   each additional dwelling unit; for bachelor
  Single-family                    and bachelorette dwelling same as above plus
                                   1,000 square feet for each occupant in
                                   excess of 4 in each unit
                                   6,000 square feet for first building plus
                                   2,000 square feet for each additional
                                   building plus 1,500 square feet for each
  Group dwelling                   building; for bachelor and bachelorette
                                   dwelling, same as above plus 1,000 square
                                   feet for each occupant in excess of 4 in
                                   each unit
                                   7,500 square feet for nursing home, an
                                   additional 500 square feet for each guest or
  Other main building              patient in excess of 4; and 20,000 square
                                   feet for hospital, fraternal, or beneficial
                                   society or wedding chapel
Minimum lot width                  60 feet
Minimum yard setbacks:
                                   20 feet except average of existing dwellings
 Front                             where 50 percent is developed but not less
                                   than 15 feet
 Side:
  For any dwelling, nursery        6 feet with total of 2 side yards not less
  school, office, clinic,          than 16 feet, plus 1 foot each side for each
  fraternity, sorority,            1 foot any main building is over 35 feet
  boarding house, or lodging       high
  house
                                   8 feet except 1 foot if located at least 6
  Accessory building               feet from rear of main building, but not
                                   closer than 8 feet to dwelling on adjacent
                                   lot
  Zero side yard                   In accordance with subsection 10-14-4J of
                                   this title
                                   15 feet except average where 50 percent
 Side; facing street on corner lot frontage is developed but not less than 10
                                   feet
 Rear:
  Main building                    30 feet
                                   1 foot except 6 feet where an accessory
  Accessory building               building located on a corner lot rears on
                                   side yards of adjacent lots
                                   If a dwelling has an existing detached
                                   accessory building in the rear yard, and the
                                   property owner wants to add on to the
                                   dwelling (after fire department review); the
                                   new addition must be a minimum of 8 feet
                                   from the accessory building, and the new
                                   addition shall meet the minimum rear yard
                                   requirements. The opposing side yard must
                                   meet minimum side yard requirements and be
                                   open at all times to rear yard access
Building height:
 Minimum                           1 story
 Maximum                           None
                                   No building or group of buildings with their
Lot coverage                       accessory building shall cover more than 50
                                   percent of the lot area
Open green space                   At least 30 percent of the lot area
                                   In no case shall the ratio of the total
Special regulation                 floor area in the building to the total lot
                                   area exceed 2:1
 
(Ord. 582, 11-15-2000)
ARTICLE F.  MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE (R-5)
SECTION:
10-9F-1: Purpose And Intent
10-9F-2: Permitted Uses
10-9F-3: Conditional Uses
10-9F-4: Site Development Standards
10-9F-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of the R-5 zone classification is to permit development of high
density residential areas with their associated necessary public services and
activities. (1985 Code § 19-21-2)
10-9F-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory building and use that is incidental to a dwelling on the same lot or
property and in compliance with all Riverdale City ordinances that regulate the
use of accessory buildings.
Agriculture.
Bachelor and/or bachelorette dwelling with forty nine (49) or less dwelling
units.
Boarding and lodging house.
Church, synagogue or similar permanent building used for regular religious
worship.
College or university.
Daycare/preschool center.
Educational institution.
Fraternal and beneficial societies, orders and social clubs.
Golf course, except miniature golf course.
Greenhouse, noncommercial only.
Group dwellings with forty nine (49) or less dwelling units in accordance with
chapter 24 of this title.
Household pets.
Library, museum, public or nonprofit.
Multiple-family dwelling with forty nine (49) or less dwelling units.
Parking lots accessory to uses permitted in this zone.
Photo studio.
Planned residential unit development in accordance with chapter 22 of this
title.
Private park, playground and recreation area, but not including privately owned
commercial amusement business.
Professional and business offices in which goods or merchandise are not
commercially created, exchanged or sold.
Public building, public park, public recreation grounds and associated
buildings.
Single-family dwellings.
Studio for professional work, teaching, performances or exhibitions of the fine
arts; provided, that such performances or exhibitions are limited to the work
product of the studio involved.
Temporary building for use incidental to construction work. Such building shall
be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work.
Two-family dwelling.
Wedding chapel; provided, that light refreshments only shall be served and the
service or consumption of food or refreshments shall be directly incidental to
the principal use. (1985 Code § 19-21-2; amd. Ord. 784, 4-19-2011; Ord. 802, 4-
3-2012)
10-9F-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses shall be permitted only when authorized by a conditional use
permit as provided in chapter 19 of this title:
Ambulance substation.
Apartment hotels.
Bachelor or bachelorette dwelling with fifty (50) or more dwelling units.
Cemetery with customary incidental uses, including, but not limited to,
mortuary, mausoleum, crematory, staff housing, service shops and chapel.
Fraternity and sorority house.
Group dwelling with fifty (50) or more dwelling units in accordance with
chapter 24 of this title.
Home occupation.
Hospital, sanatorium, clinic, including clinic for household pets for
outpatient treatment only.
Laboratories.
Multiple-family dwelling with fifty (50) or more dwelling units.
Nursing home, nursery for children.
Public utility substation. (1985 Code § 19-21-3)
10-9F-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
 
Minimum lot area:
 One-building dwelling:
  Single-family                    5,000 square feet plus 750 square feet for
                                   each additional dwelling
                                   Same as above plus 1,000 square feet for
  Bachelor or bachelorette         each occupant in excess of 4 in each
                                   dwelling unit
 Group dwelling:
                                   5,000 square feet for first building plus
  Multiple-family                  2,000 square feet for each additional
                                   building plus 750 square feet for each
                                   dwelling in excess of 1 in each building
                                   Same as above plus 1,000 square feet for
  Bachelor or bachelorette         each occupant in excess of 4 in each
                                   dwelling unit
Other main building:
 Nursing home                      7,500 square feet plus 500 square feet for
                                   each guest or patient in excess of 4
 Hospital, fraternal and
 beneficial society,               20,000 square feet
 mortuary, or wedding chapel
Minimum lot width                  50 feet
Minimum yard setbacks:
                                   20 feet except average of existing dwelling
 Front                             where 50 percent frontage is developed but
                                   not less than 15 feet
 Side:
  Any dwelling, nursery school,    6 feet with total of 2 side yards not less
  office, clinic, fraternity,      than 16 feet, plus 1 foot each side for each
  sorority, boarding house,        2 feet the main building is over 35 feet
  or lodging house                 high
                                   20 feet each side, plus 1 foot each side for
  Other main building              each 2 feet main building is over 35 feet
                                   high
                                   8 feet except 1 foot if located at least 6
  Accessory building               feet from rear of main building, but not
                                   closer than 8 feet to dwelling on adjacent
                                   lot
  Zero side yards                  In accordance with subsection 10-14-4J of
                                   this title
                                   15 feet except average when 50 percent
 Side; facing street on corner lot frontage is developed but not less than 10
                                   feet
 Rear:
                                   30 feet if rear property line is adjacent to
                                   a residential zone; 10 feet if rear property
                                   line is adjacent to a commercial zone. Any
  Main building                    structure located closer than 30 feet to the
                                   rear property line shall meet all
                                   requirements of the current building and
                                   fire codes and receive construction approval
                                   from the Riverdale City fire chief
                                   1 foot except 6 feet where an accessory
  Accessory building               building located on a corner lot rears on
                                   side yards of adjacent lots
                                   If a dwelling has an existing detached
                                   accessory building in the rear yard, and the
                                   property owner wants to add on to the
                                   dwelling (after fire department review); the
                                   new addition must be a minimum of 8 feet
                                   from the accessory building, and the new
                                   addition shall meet the minimum rear yard
                                   requirements. The opposing side yard must
                                   meet minimum side yard requirements and be
                                   open at all times to rear yard access
Building height:
 Minimum                           1 story
 Maximum                           None
                                   No building or group of buildings with their
Lot coverage                       accessory building shall cover more than 60
                                   percent of the lot area
Open green space                   At least 20 percent of the lot area
                                   In no case shall the ratio of floor area in
Special regulations                the main building to total lot area exceed
                                   3:1
 
(Ord. 881, 7-20-2016)
ARTICLE G.  MOBILE HOME PARK-RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK ZONE (Rmh-1)
SECTION:
10-9G-1: Purpose And Intent
10-9G-2: Definitions
10-9G-3: Permitted Uses
10-9G-4: Site Development Standards
10-9G-5: Park Permit And Application To Construct, Improve
10-9G-6: Fee For Permit
10-9G-7: Planning Commission Action
10-9G-8: Building Permits
10-9G-9: Certificate Of Occupancy
10-9G-10: License Requirements And Application
10-9G-11: General Requirements
10-9G-12: Special Limitations And Provisions
10-9G-13: Sanitation Requirements
10-9G-14: Location And General Layout Of Park
10-9G-15: Electric Service, Wiring, Fuel And Fire Protection
10-9G-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of the Rmh-1 zone is to provide appropriate areas for suitable
development of mobile home (manufactured home/recreation vehicle) parks. It is
also to ensure that such facilities receive adequate services and blend
harmoniously with surrounding residential neighborhoods. (1985 Code § 19-22-1;
amd. 2001 Code)
10-9G-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this article:
MANUFACTURED HOME AND/OR RECREATION VEHICLE: Shall be referred to collectively
as "mobile home".
PARK: Shall refer to manufactured home/recreation vehicle park and shall be
referred to herein collectively as "mobile home park". (1985 Code §§ 19-22-1,
19-22-3; amd. 2001 Code)
10-9G-3: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory building and use customarily incidental to any permitted use,
including single-family dwelling permanent structures for resident manager.
Household pets.
Mobile home park, provided such park meets the requirements and standards
prescribed by this article.
Temporary building for use incidental to construction work. Such building shall
be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work. (1985 Code
§ 19-22-2)
10-9G-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Area Regulations: The minimum area for a park shall be five (5) acres.
(1985 Code § 19-22-4)
   B.   Width Regulations: The minimum width for a mobile home park shall be
three hundred feet (300'). (1985 Code § 19-22-5)
   C.   Height Regulations: The maximum height of any structure within a park
shall be two (2) stories or thirty feet (30'). (1985 Code § 19-22-6)
10-9G-5: PARK PERMIT AND APPLICATION TO CONSTRUCT, IMPROVE:
   A.   Permit Required: It is unlawful for any person to construct, enlarge,
alter, improve or convert any park or to improve any lands for use as a park,
or to cause the same to be done, unless such person holds a valid permit issued
for the performance of such work by the community development director. (Ord.
854, 5-6-2014)
   B.   Code Compliance: The procedures prescribed by the international
building code, international plumbing code, international mechanical code,
national electrical code and manufactured home installation standards as
adopted by the city and as amended, insofar as applicable and appropriate, are
applicable to and shall be followed in applying for permits for the
construction, alteration, enlargement, improvement, etc., of parks, except as
specifically otherwise provided.
   C.   Investigation, Review And Inspection: Upon receipt of an application
for approval to establish or enlarge a park, the planning commission shall make
the necessary investigation, review and inspection of the application, site
plan, site and proposed facilities to determine whether the establishment or
enlargement of the park will meet the requirements of this title.
      1.   Plans And Specifications: Before an application for a park permit
can be filed, plans and specifications shall be submitted to the building
inspector. Eight (8) black and white blueprint plans of the proposed park shall
be filed with the application on paper not smaller than seventeen inches by
twenty two inches (17" x 22") and a scale not smaller than one inch equals one
hundred feet (1" = 100'), and shall include the following:
         a.   Name, address and telephone number of the owner and of the
operator.
         b.   Location and legal description of the park.
         c.   North point, scale and date of drawing.
         d.   Acreage of the proposed park.
         e.   Accurate finished contours of land at intervals of not more than
two feet (2'), and the approximate location of all areas subject to flood water
overflow or inundation, and the location, width and direction of flow of all
watercourses.
         f.   Location of all existing public streets within two hundred feet
(200') of the proposed park.
         g.   Number, size, location and type of all mobile home or
recreational vehicle spaces.
         h.   Location, size and specifications for construction of roadways
and walkways.
         i.   Plans and specifications of all buildings, improvements and
facilities to be constructed within the park.
         j.   Locations, sizes and elevation drawing of all signs.
         k.   Location and size of all public utility lines within the park.
         l.   Landscaping plan and plant list.
         m.   Location and method of enclosing rubbish and garbage disposal
areas.
         n.   Location and common storage areas for recreational vehicles and
guest parking.
         o.   Location of car slab, cabana, landscaping, etc., for one typical
mobile home or recreational vehicle space, scale one-fourth inch equals one
foot (1/4" = 1').
         p.   Drainage plan of park showing method of carrying surface drainage
to an adequate point of disposition.
         q.   Such further information as required by this article or that may
be required by the planning commission to enable it to determine if the
proposed park will comply with legal requirements.
      2.   Review: The planning commission shall transmit a copy of the park
plan to such agencies for review and comment as they determine is appropriate.
(1985 Code § 19-22-8; amd. 2001 Code)
10-9G-6: FEE FOR PERMIT 1 :
A fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city council for a
mobile home park construction permit shall be paid to the city treasurer at the
time of the filing of the application therefor. The said fee shall be in
addition to all other building, electrical, plumbing and other fees required
for work included in the construction. (1985 Code § 19-22-9; amd. 2001 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 1-12-5A4 of this code.
10-9G-7: PLANNING COMMISSION ACTION:
The planning commission shall review the application, maps and plans of the
proposed park. It shall consider all appropriate reports, together with the
provisions of this title and shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove
the application as submitted.
   A.   Reports: City departments receiving the plans for review shall transmit
comments or recommendations to the planning commission in writing within
fourteen (14) days after receiving the plans. (1985 Code § 19-22-10; amd. 2001
Code)
   B.   Notification To Owner Or Operator: After consideration and action of
the planning commission in accordance with the requirements of this title, the
community development director shall notify the owner or operator in writing of
the action of the planning commission. (1985 Code § 19-22-10; amd. 2001 Code;
Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
   C.   Expiration Of Approval: Approval of the planning commission shall
expire one year after the date of approval if building permits have not been
issued and construction of the park has not been commenced and pursued
diligently. The planning commission, however, may grant an extension of up to
six (6) months under exceptional circumstances, as determined by the planning
commission. Application for extension shall be made in writing not less than
thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the original approval. (1985 Code §
19-22-10; amd. 2001 Code)
10-9G-8: BUILDING PERMITS:
   A.   Approval Required: The community development director shall not issue
any land use or building permit prior to the approval of the final site
development plan by the planning commission and city council.
   B.   Appeal: Any person, firm or corporation whose application for a permit
under the provisions of this section has been denied by the community
development director may have said denial reviewed by the city council upon
filing with the community development director a written request therefor,
within ten (10) days after notice of such denial. Such written request shall
specify the grounds on which the applicant relies for a reversal of the
community development director's denial of the permit. The city council may
from time to time establish, promulgate, alter and amend administrative rules
and regulations providing the procedure for the conduct upon the hearing of
such review. (Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
   C.   Variation In Plans Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to do any
construction, alteration, repair, improvement or enlargement of any park or any
structure thereon for which a permit is required which varies from the approved
plans and specifications submitted with the application for such permit. (1985
Code § 19-22-11; amd. 2001 Code)
10-9G-9: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
The building inspector shall issue a certificate of occupancy upon the
successful completion of the park and prior to the issuance of a city business
license. (1985 Code § 19-22-12)
10-9G-10: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS AND APPLICATION:
   A.   License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to operate, maintain or offer for use any park without first making
application to the license assessor and obtaining a license to do so.
   B.   Approval Required: No new application for a license shall be considered
until the plans for such use shall have first been approved by the planning
commission and city council, and certificate of occupancy has been issued as
required by this article, and no license shall be issued until such approval
has been obtained. Any license issued without such approval shall be null and
void. Each applicant, in making application for license, shall specify the
exact number of mobile home and recreational vehicle spaces which shall be
offered for use. Any enlargements, increase in capacity or modification of an
existing use shall be construed to be a new application for the purpose of this
article, and no existing license shall be modified and no building permit for
such enlargement, increase in capacity or modification shall be issued until
the application for the same shall be approved by the planning commission.
(1985 Code § 19-22-13)
10-9G-11: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Violations: It shall be the duty of the operator and/or caretaker to
call to the attention of the proper law enforcement officers any violation or
suspected violation of all laws, ordinances and regulations relating to fire,
safety and health.
   B.   Register Of Tenants: Every licensee of a park shall keep a register of
all tenants of such premises and that register shall be available at all times
and for one year after the tenant leaves the park for inspection by any
authorized person of the city. Such register shall contain:
      1.   Name and address of each tenant;
      2.   Space to which assigned; and
      3.   Mobile home or recreational vehicle license number and
manufacturer's name, if any.
   C.   Display Of License: Each current license issued in connection with uses
stated herein shall be displayed in some public place on the premises to which
it is applicable. (1985 Code § 19-22-14; amd. 2001 Code)
   D.   Inspection Of Premises: The premises and appurtenant facilities of any
park shall be open to inspection by the community development director at all
times. (Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
   E.   Drainage: It is unlawful to establish, build or construct any park
except on a well drained site so located that drainage therefrom will not
endanger any public culinary or domestic water supply. It is unlawful to
establish, construct or build any park, except in an area free from marshes,
swamps and other potential breeding places for insects or rodents.
   F.   Operator's Responsibility To Maintain Orderly Place: The operator of
any park is hereby required to maintain order on the premises and shall conduct
his business in an orderly and wholesome manner, and he shall not permit
nuisances to be created or continued. (1985 Code § 19-22-10; amd. 2001 Code)
   G.   Compliance With Laws: In addition to the requirements as set forth in
this article, all uses shall be established and constructed in compliance with
all existing state and local statutes, ordinances, codes and regulations,
including the rules and regulations of the county health department and/or
state department of health, local, county and state law enforcement agencies
and fire department. (Ord. 815, 9-25-2012)
   H.   Space Requirements, Existing Mobile Homes; Variances; Park Layout:
Mobile homes which are parked in a mobile home park prior to April 20, 1993,
may remain there even though they do not meet the spacing requirements of
subsection 10-9G-14F of this article. All mobile homes moved into a park after
April 20, 1993, must comply with all of the provisions of this article,
including the spacing requirements for attachments to mobile homes such as
patio covers, decks and carports.
      1.   When a mobile home which does not conform to the spacing
requirements of subsection 10-9G-14F of this article, but which is allowed to
stay in the park in accordance with this subsection, is moved, damaged or
destroyed by fire, flood, wind, earthquake or other calamity or act of God, or
the public enemy, the owner of said mobile home may, within one year from the
date of said move or destruction of the mobile home, repair or replace that
mobile home with a mobile home equal to or smaller in size than that mobile
home without being subject to the spacing requirements of subsection 10-9G-14F
of this article. The owner of the mobile home park shall ensure that all other
mobile homes moved into the mobile home park after the effective date hereof
shall comply with all of the requirements of this article, including subsection
10-9G-14F of this article.
      2.   If physical limitations in the mobile home park are such that it is
not reasonably possible to comply with all of the provisions of this article,
including subsection 10-9G-14F of this article, the mobile home park owner may
apply to the board of adjustment for a variance. (1985 Code § 19-22-10; amd.
2001 Code)
      3.   Within thirty (30) days of the effective date hereof, each mobile
home park owner is hereby required to furnish to the community development
director a park layout which clearly shows for each space the size of the
mobile home in that space, the distance between each mobile home, including any
attachments to the mobile home such as a patio cover, deck, carport, etc., and
the adjacent mobile homes or park boundary or roadway. This park layout map
must be updated annually. Failure to comply with this subsection is an
infraction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
   I.   Enclosure Of Park: A wall or fence not less than four feet (4') nor
more than six feet (6') in height, or a uniformly maintained compact evergreen
hedge, shall be erected and maintained along the boundaries of a mobile home
park. The wall or fence shall be of wood, concrete, brick or other masonry
construction, or may be of chainlink metal construction, provided an evergreen
hedge is also planted. Where, in the opinion of the planning commission, it is
unreasonable to require the construction of a fence, wall or hedge, the
commission may waive or modify the requirements as specified in this
subsection. No such wall, opaque fence or planting shall be placed so as to
create a traffic hazard. No obstruction to view in excess of two feet (2') in
height shall be placed on any street corner.
   J.   Mobile Home Permit Required: The mobile home park manager or operator
is responsible for applying for a permit for each mobile home moved into the
park or any alteration of existing mobile home or space. It is unlawful for the
mobile home park manager or operator to allow a mobile home to be moved into
the park without said permit or to allow any alteration of an existing mobile
home or space without a permit. (1985 Code § 19-22-10; amd. 2001 Code)
10-9G-12: SPECIAL LIMITATIONS AND PROVISIONS:
   A.   Commercial Businesses: No commercial business shall be conducted within
the park, except that a conditional use home occupation may be allowed after
approval by the planning commission.
   B.   Minimum Number Of Spaces: The minimum number of spaces for which a
permit may be issued shall be ten (10).
   C.   Facilities Comply With Ordinances: Any portion of or appendage of any
habitation, shelter or storage facility as permitted herein shall be in
compliance with all city ordinances.
   D.   Animal Control: Household pets shall be permitted subject to any other
ordinance regulating the licensing of same. (1985 Code § 19-22-15)
   E.   Placement Of Mobile Homes: No "mobile home", as defined in section
10-2-2 of this title, shall be occupied or permitted to be occupied on any
property except one which is located in a park as permitted herein. Permanent
habitation of a mobile home or the placement of a mobile home on a permanent
foundation shall not be construed to classify such living quarters as a
dwelling and shall not exempt it from any requirements pertaining to any mobile
home, as provided for herein. (1985 Code § 19-22-15; amd. 2001 Code)
   F.   Development As Space Required: It shall be unlawful to allow any mobile
home to occupy space within a park which has not been developed as a mobile
home space with all required facilities. (1985 Code § 19-22-15)
   G.   Buildings, Structures: No building or structure shall be erected,
altered, used or occupied in connection with the use of a mobile home, on any
mobile home space, except as follows:
      1.   The following shall be permitted; provided, that such space has
sufficient area and width to provide the yard space between such facilities and
other mobile homes as required in subsection 10-9G-14F of this article:
         a.   Awnings or patio covers, whether permanent or temporary, shall
not be closer than six feet (6') from adjacent mobile home or awning, deck or
porch of adjacent mobile home.
         b.   Cabana or other enclosed add on space, open canopy, roof, awning
and covered patio.
         c.   One private storage building not exceeding one hundred twenty
(120) square feet in total floor area. (Ord. 598, 1-2-2002)
      2.   Anchoring; Skirting: Mobile homes must be tied down per state
requirements and flood plain ordinance requirements as specified in subsection
10-27-5A1 of this title, national conference of states on building codes and
standards (NCSBCS), and american national standards institute (ANSI) 225.1,
manufactured home installations, 1987. All mobile homes must be skirted. (1985
Code § 19-22-15)
10-9G-13: SANITATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Compliance; Reporting Violations: All state, county and local health
regulations apply to parks and it shall be the responsibility of the operator
of any park to notify health officials of any violation of health regulations.
   B.   Refuse Collection, Storage And Disposal: Refuse shall be collected,
stored and disposed of in accordance with the following requirements:
      1.   The storage, collection, and disposal of refuse shall be so managed
as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding area,
accident hazards or air pollution.
      2.   All garbage shall be collected at least once each week. The operator
shall arrange for all refuse to be collected and transported to a public
disposal area in covered vehicles or covered containers.
      3.   All mobile homes are required to connect with public sewer
facilities. Each mobile home and recreational vehicle space shall have a
trapped sewer inlet to receive all wastes.
      4.   A supply of water, safe for human consumption, shall be provided
under pressure and in quantities to meet all requirements for the maximum
number of persons which may reside on the premises at any time. Water supply
must come from an approved public water system. (1985 Code § 19-22-16)
10-9G-14: LOCATION AND GENERAL LAYOUT OF PARK:
   A.   Grade And Fill: The site of any park shall be graded and/or filled and
maintained so as to prevent the accumulation of storm or wastewater of any kind
and no such use shall be permitted in low swampy places where the ground water
causes the surface soil to become wet. The earth shall be sloped away from all
patios, mobile home stands, buildings and water supply wells to ensure
immediate drainage and diversion of surface water away from these facilities.
   B.   Access Roads: Adequate access roads shall be provided to prevent public
safety hazards. Hard-surface roads at least twenty feet (20') wide shall be
provided to serve each space and common parking areas. Each such access road
shall be unobstructed and shall connect directly to a major public street or a
collector traffic street. Direct vehicular access to space shall be limited to
the access road or roads provided. Where any access road connects to two (2) or
more public streets, it shall be arranged so as to control through traffic.
   C.   Parking Spaces: Hard-surfaced parking spaces shall be provided for the
parking of motor vehicles in the ratio of at least two (2) parking spaces to
each mobile home space.
   D.   Storage Space: There shall be provided for each mobile home space a
minimum of two hundred (200) square feet of hard-surfaced storage space in a
common area for the storing of recreational vehicles and/or parking for guests.
   E.   Playground, Park Areas: Playground and park area shall be provided for
each mobile home park having ten (10) or more units and shall be restricted to
and maintained for such use. These areas shall be protected from the public
street and from parking areas. A minimum usable area of two thousand (2,000)
square feet shall be set aside and developed for each mobile home park having
at least ten (10) units and one hundred (100) square feet additional for each
additional unit up to and including an additional ten (10) units, and fifty
(50) square feet additional for each unit above twenty (20) units.
   F.   Space Requirements: Each mobile home space shall meet the following
requirements:
      1.   That portion of the stand designed for the location of the mobile
home shall be hard-surfaced with a concrete slab or concrete blocking squares
to carry the weight of the mobile home. That portion of the stand designed for
the location of cabana or other add-on enclosed space and patio as permitted
shall be similarly hard-surfaced with concrete, brick, block or similar
material over the overall area in addition to an appropriate and adequate
foundation or support for such structures.
      2.   Space between each mobile home, cabana or other add-on space shall
be provided as follows (where there is more than one requirement, the more
restrictive shall apply):
         a.   From a mobile home to the mobile home on the opposite side of the
access road: forty foot (40') minimum.
         b.   Between a mobile home and a common parking area, or access road:
ten foot (10') minimum.
         c.   Between a mobile home and a public street: thirty feet (30').
         d.   Between the side of any mobile home and the boundary of a mobile
home park: fifteen feet (15') and fencing is required.
         e.   Yard space between the end of a mobile home and the boundary
line: fifteen foot (15') minimum. Where due to the shape of the mobile home
space it is desirable to locate the mobile home closer to the boundary line,
the planning commission may authorize a reduction to allow the corner or end of
a mobile home to be not less than five feet (5') from the park boundary.
         f.   Mobile homes shall be located so that they are spaced not less
than fifteen feet (15') apart from side to side the entire length of the mobile
home. Carport covers, patio covers, decks and awnings shall be not less than
six feet (6') to any adjacent carport cover, deck, awning, patio cover or
mobile home. This six foot (6') area runs parallel from front to rear of mobile
home or recreational vehicle. Mobile homes must be not less than ten feet (10')
apart from end to end.
   G.   Layout: The park layout shall meet the following requirements:
      1.   All access roads shall be retained as private roads on the property.
The gradient of any road providing access either to the park or to an
individual space shall be not more than eight percent (8%).
      2.   The location of management office building shall be in accordance
with the zoning ordinance regulating the location of main buildings; service
buildings, if detached, shall also be located as required for accessory
buildings. Service facilities may be provided as a part of the main building if
desired. (1985 Code § 19-22-17)
10-9G-15: ELECTRIC SERVICE, WIRING, FUEL AND FIRE PROTECTION:
   A.   Electrical Wiring: All electrical wiring shall be installed to conform
with the requirements of the current edition of the national electrical code.
An electrical outlet supplying at least one hundred ten (110) volts shall be
provided for each space. Such electrical outlets shall be weatherproof. No
person shall make an electrical connection for any mobile home or recreational
vehicle without obtaining a permit and the approval of the community
development director, except that previously approved electrical connection
systems may be employed without obtaining such permit. (Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
   B.   Fuel Storage: Bulk storage of gasoline or other fuel shall be done only
in compliance with the requirements of the national board of fire underwriters
and in accordance with the city fire prevention code. All aboveground storage
facilities shall be enclosed and screened from view by the use of ornamental
fences, walls or hedges. Liquefied petroleum gas for cooking purposes shall not
be used at individual mobile home spaces unless the containers are properly
connected by copper or other suitable metallic tubing. Liquefied petroleum gas
cylinders shall be securely fastened in place, and shall be adequately
protected from the weather. No cylinder containing liquefied petroleum gas
shall be located in a mobile home, nor within five feet (5') of a door thereof.
Cooking and heating stoves shall be of a type approved by the fire
underwriter's laboratory. (1985 Code § 19-22-18)
   C.   Fire Protection: All mobile home parks shall be subject to the rules
and regulations of the fire department and in accordance with the international
fire code and applicable standards. (Ord. 815, 9-25-2012)
CHAPTER 10
COMMERCIAL ZONES
ARTICLE A.  COMMERCIAL ZONES (C-1, C-2, C-3)
SECTION:
10-10A-1: Purpose And Intent
10-10A-2: Site Development Standards
10-10A-3: Special Regulations
10-10A-4: Uses
10-10A-5: Site Plan Approval Required
10-10A-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of the C-1 neighborhood commercial zone, C-2 community commercial
zone and C-3 regional commercial zone is to provide suitable areas for the
location of the various types of commercial activity needed to serve the people
and commerce of the city. It is also to separate into three (3) zones, uses
based upon type of activity which are compatible and complementary, as well as
intensity of land utilization and accessory use needs. (Ord. 860, 9-2-2014)
10-10A-2: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
 
  C-1 C-2 C-3
Minimum lot area              None                          None     None
Minimum lot width             None                          None     None
Minimum yard setbacks:
 Front                        20 feet                       20 feet  20 feet
 Side                         None, except 20 feet adjacent to a residential
                              boundary
 Side facing street on corner 20 feet                       20 feet  20 feet
 lot
 Rear                         None, except 20 feet adjacent 20 feet1 20 feet1
                              to a residential boundary1
Building height:
 Minimum                      1 story                       1 story  1 story
 Maximum                      21/2 stories or 35 feet       None     None
Maximum lot coverage          Not over 45 percent of lot area by buildings or
                              accessory buildings
 
Note:
   1.      If it is determined by the fire department that a distance greater
than 20 feet is necessary for separation or access to a building this setback
may be increased in the C-1, C-2 and C-3.
(Ord. 860, 9-2-2014)
10-10A-3: SPECIAL REGULATIONS:
Hereinafter specified permitted and conditional uses shall be allowed only when
the following conditions are complied with:
   A.   Manufacturing Within Enclosed Building: All manufacturing shall be done
within a completely enclosed building.
   B.   Odor, Noise: All uses shall be free from objection because of odor,
dust, smoke or noise.
   C.   Entertainment: In the C-1 neighborhood commercial zone, no
entertainment, except recorded music, shall be permitted in cafes, cafeterias,
ice cream parlors or restaurants.
   D.   Uses Adjacent To A Residential Zone Boundary: All commercial uses which
are located within fifty feet (50') of a residential zone boundary and which
create noise, vibrations, odors or dust not commonly associated with a
residential use shall be conducted completely within the confines of the
business building or structure and shall not unreasonably disturb the adjacent
residents. Normal deliveries and routine maintenance of building and grounds
are exempted from the requirements of this subsection.
   E.   Check Cashing, Payday Loan, Title Loan And Pawnshop Businesses: Check
cashing, payday loan, title loan and pawnshop businesses are allowed as a
conditional use only in the C-3 zone. The C-1, C-2 zones, planned commercial
zones, manufacturing zones, planned manufacturing zones, retail/commercial
overlay zone, mixed use zone, office park zone, low impact transition overlay
zone and the landmark development zone are expressly prohibited from having
these uses. (Ord. 808, 6-19-2012)
   F.   Limit Based On Population: Payday loans/check cashing/consumer loans/
title loans/pawnshops/gold buyers, no more than one of each for every four
thousand (4,000) residents (payday loans, check cashing and consumer loans are
classified as being the same). Retail jewelry stores that do manufacturing
repair and buying metal and stones are exempt from this section. (Ord. 850, 2-
4-2014)
   G.   Retail Smoke Shops: A retail smoke shop is allowed only in the C-3 zone
as a conditional use. The smoke shop must comply with the following: The state
of Utah guidelines require a distance of at least one thousand feet (1,000')
for the "specialty business" smoke shop from a community location, which is
defined as a school, church, library or park. Riverdale City requires that a
smoke shop sell only tobacco and tobacco related products meaning: cigarettes,
cigars, blunts, cigarillos, little cigars, snuff, and dipping tobacco. The sale
of tobacco paraphernalia other than pipes, rolling paper and humidors is
prohibited. No more than one smoke shop for every nine thousand (9,000)
residents is permitted.
   H.   Violations; Penalty: Any principal or manager of firms or corporations
who fails to reasonably train the agents or employees of said firms or
corporations regarding the provisions of this chapter shall be in violation of
this article and shall be guilty and subject to penalty as provided in section
10-1-15 of this title. (Ord. 808, 6-19-2012)
10-10A-4: USES:
In the following list of possible uses, those designated in any zone as "P"
will be a permitted use. Uses designated as "C" will be allowed only when
authorized by a conditional use permit obtained as provided in chapter 19 of
this title. Uses designated "N" will not be allowed in that zone.
 
   C-1 C-2 C-3
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to a permitted use    C C P
Air conditioning, sales and service (no manufacturing of ducts)           N C P
Ambulance:
 Base station                                                             C C C
 Substation                                                               C C C
Amusement enterprises including:
 Bowling alley                                                            N C P
 Dance hall                                                               N C C
 Haunted house/spook alley                                                N C C
 Pool hall                                                                N C P
 Privately owned park and playground, accessory to a commercial use       C C C
 Publicly owned park and playground                                       P P P
 Recreation center                                                        N C P
 Roller/ice skating rink                                                  N C P
 Theater:
  Indoor                                                                  N C P
Animal services including:
 Dog or cat hotel/kennel                                                  N N C
 Grooming for cats and dogs                                               N C P
 Hospital, small animals only, and provided conducted within completely   N C P
 enclosed building, including kennel
 Hospital/veterinary for large animals                                    N C C
 Pet and pet supply store, including kennel                               N C P
Antique, import or souvenir shop                                          C C P
Athletic and sporting goods including:
 Archery shop and range, provided conducted within completely enclosed    C C P
 building
 Bicycle sales and service                                                C C P
 Boat sales                                                               C C P
 Gymnasium                                                                C C P
 Handgun shooting range (indoor)                                          N C C
 Health club                                                              C C P
 Motorboat sales and service                                              N C C
 Store, excluding sale or repair of motor vehicles, motorboats or motors  N C P
Automobile including:
 Convenience store, with car wash, no gas                                 N C P
 Gas island and convenience store, with car wash                          N C P
 New or used sales and service                                            N C C
 Parts sales                                                              N C P
 Rental auto                                                              N C C
 Rental, U-haul type                                                      N C C
 Repair including paint, body and fender, brake, muffler, upholstery or
 transmission work, provided conducted within completely enclosed         N C C
 building
 Tire sales and service                                                   N C C
Bakery:
 Manufacture limited to goods retailed on premises                        N C P
 Manufacture of goods sent to other locations                             N C P
Bath and massage establishment                                            N C C
Blueprinting or photostatting                                             C C P
Building materials sales                                                  N C P
Bus terminal                                                              N C P
Candy:
 Manufacture of goods shipped to other locations                          N C P
 Store, confectionery                                                     C C P
Car wash:
 Automatic/drive-through type                                             N C P
 Manual spray                                                             N C P
Carpet sales                                                              N C P
Church                                                                    P P P
Church, temporary revival, no tents allowed                               C C C
Cleaning:
 Dry cleaning establishment                                               N C P
 Laundromat                                                               P P P
Clinics:
 Laboratory, dental or medical                                            C C P
 Medical or dental                                                        C C P
 Optometrist, optician or oculist                                         C C P
 Physician or surgeon                                                     C C P
Data processing service and supplies                                      N C P
Detective agency or security                                              C C P
Dwelling, single-family, when attached to business structure and occupied C C C
by the business owner or a business employee:
 Hotel                                                                    N C P
 Motel                                                                    N C P
Educational institution:
 Nursery school and preschool                                             C C P
 Public or private college or university                                  C C C
 Public, private or charter school grades K-12                            C C C
 Trade, technical or industrial school                                    C C C
Electrical and heating appliances and fixture sales and service           N C P
Electronic equipment sales and service                                    N C P
Employment agency                                                         N C P
Express and transfer parcel service (store)                               N C P
Financial institution:
 Bank                                                                     N C P
 Credit union                                                             N C P
 Payday loans/check cashing/consumer loans/title loans                    N N C
Food service:
 Cafe or cafeteria                                                        C C P
 Catering establishment                                                   C C P
 Delicatessen                                                             C C P
 Ice cream parlor                                                         C C P
 Restaurant                                                               C C P
 Restaurant, drive-in                                                     C C P
Glass sales and service, home and auto                                    N C P
Gold buying store including all precious metals                           N N C
Government buildings or uses, nonindustrial                               C C P
Greenhouse and nursery, soil and lawn service                             N C P
Gunsmith                                                                  N C P
Home improvement store                                                    N C P
Hospital:                                                                 C C P
 Hospital with heliport                                                   N C C
Household appliance sales and incidental service                          N C P
Household cleaning and repair                                             N C P
Insurance agency                                                          C C P
Janitor service and supply                                                N C P
Jewelry store including manufacturing, repair and buying metal and stones N C P
Library                                                                   C C P
Linen supply service                                                      N C C
Liquor store, state store only                                            N C C
Locksmith                                                                 C C P
Lodge or social hall                                                      N C C
Machine shop operations incidental to any use permitted in C-3 district   N C C
Manufacture of goods retailed on premises                                 N C C
Miniature golf                                                            N C C
Mortuary                                                                  N C P
Motorcycle and motor scooters sales and service                           N C C
Museum                                                                    C C P
Office in which goods or merchandise are not commercially created,        C C P
exchanged or sold
Office in which goods or merchandise may be commercially created,         N C C
exchanged or sold
 Accountant                                                               C C P
 Legal                                                                    C C P
 Medical/dental                                                           C C P
 Office machines sales and service                                        N C P
 Office supply                                                            N C P
 Professional                                                             C C P
Parking lot or garage for passenger automobiles                           C C C
Pawnshop                                                                  N N C
Pest control and extermination                                            N C P
Pharmacy                                                                  C C P
Photo studio                                                              C C P
Post office                                                               C C P
Printing, lithographing, publishing or reproduction sales and service     N C P
Public utilities substation                                               C C C
RV sales and service                                                      N C C
Radio, television or FM broadcasting station                              N C P
Real estate agency                                                        C C P
Reception center or wedding chapel                                        N C P
Rental agency for home and garden equipment                               N C P
Retail goods establishments                                               C C P
Retail service establishments                                             C C P
Smoke shop                                                                N N C
Tattoo parlor                                                             N C C
Taxidermist                                                               C C P
Telemarketing                                                             N C P
Temporary building for uses incidental to construction work. Such         P P P
buildings shall be removed upon the completion of the construction work
Travel agency                                                             C C P
Utility substation or building                                            C C C
Ventilating equipment sales and service, including heating and air        N C P
conditioning
 
(Ord. 803, 4-4-2012; amd. Ord. 850, 2-4-2014)
10-10A-5: SITE PLAN APPROVAL REQUIRED:
In considering any site plan as regulated by this title for permitted or
conditional uses specified in this chapter, the planning commission shall
endeavor to ensure, among other things, the safety and convenience of traffic
movement both within the area covered and in relation to access streets,
harmonious and beneficial relation among the buildings and uses in the area
covered, and satisfactory and harmonious relation between such area and
contiguous land and buildings and adjacent neighborhoods. In any commercial
zone, the location of main and accessory buildings on the site and in relation
to one another, the traffic circulation features within the site, the height
and bulk of buildings, the provision of off street parking space, the provision
of driveways for ingress and egress, and provision of other open space on the
site, and the display of signs, shall be in accordance with a site plan or
plans or subsequent amendment thereof, approved in any case by the planning
commission prior to issuance of a building or land use permit. A site plan may
also include provisions for landscaping, fences and walls designed to further
the purposes of the regulations for commercial zones, and such features shall
be provided and maintained as a condition of the establishment and maintenance
of any use to which they are appurtenant. Conditional uses are regulated by
chapter 19 of this title. (Ord. 803, 4-4-2012)
ARTICLE B.  PLANNED COMMERCIAL ZONES (CP-1, CP-2, CP-3)
SECTION:
10-10B-1: Purpose And Intent
10-10B-2: Use Regulations
10-10B-3: Site Development Standards
10-10B-4: Special Parking Requirements
10-10B-5: Protection Of Adjoining Residential Properties
10-10B-6: General Regulations
10-10B-7: Application Submission
10-10B-8: Planning Commission Approval
10-10B-9: City Council Action
10-10B-10: Building Permit Issuance
10-10B-11: Time Limitation
10-10B-12: Application To Existing Commercial District
10-10B-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   The intent of the planned commercial zones is to permit the
establishment of a well designed complex of retail commercial facilities for a
neighborhood, community or region which will provide goods and services for the
people to be served, minimize traffic congestion on public streets in the
vicinity and which shall best fit the general environment and land use pattern
of the area to be served. The protective standards contained in this article
are intended to minimize any adverse effect of the planned commercial zone on
nearby property values by achieving maximum compatible integration of the area,
and to provide for safe and efficient use of the planned commercial zone
itself.
   B.   The three (3) types of planned commercial zones provided for in this
article are as follows:
      1.   CP-1, neighborhood: Provides for the sale and supply of daily living
needs for the people in the neighborhood.
      2.   CP-2, community: Provides, in addition to the convenience goods, a
wider range of facilities for the sale of retail goods and personal services
for the neighborhood and major segments of the community.
      3.   CP-3, regional: Provides for the sale and supply of the complete
range of retail and wholesale goods and personal services for the metropolitan
area and, also, a center for recreational entertainment and cultural activities
for the entire region. (Ord. 860, 9-2-2014)
10-10B-2: USE REGULATIONS:
Any permitted use or any conditional use allowed in the C-1, C-2 and C-3 zones
shall be a conditional use in their respective CP-1, CP-2 or CP-3 zone;
provided, that a conditional use permit is obtained as provided in chapter 19
of this title. Such uses shall be indicated on the final development plan.
(Ord. 860, 9-2-2014)
10-10B-3: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
 
  CP-1 CP-2 CP-3
Minimum lot area              None         3 acres None
Maximum lot area              5 acres      None    None
Minimum yard setbacks:
 Front                        20 feet      20 feet 20 feet
 Side                         None, except 10 feet adjoining a residential zone
 Side facing street on corner 20 feet      20 feet 20 feet
 lot
 Rear                         None, except 20 feet adjoining a residential zone
Building height:
 Minimum                      1 story      1 story 1 story
 Maximum or 35 feet           21/2 stories None    None
Lot coverage:
 The aggregate area of all
 buildings shall not exceed   40%          50%     60%
 the entire lot
 
(Ord. 860, 9-2-2014)
10-10B-4: SPECIAL PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
Notwithstanding the provisions of chapter 15 of this title, there shall be
provided off street parking facilities in the ratio of not less than three (3)
square feet of parking for each one square foot of sales floor area within the
development. (1985 Code § 19-24-4)
10-10B-5: PROTECTION OF ADJOINING RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES:
Where a planned commercial development adjoins any lot in any residential zone,
there shall be provided and maintained along such property line a wooden or
ornamental masonry fence of not less than six feet (6') in height; provided,
however, that such fence shall be three and one-half feet (31/2') in height
along the property line which bounds the front yard of adjoining residential
lots; at least fifty percent (50%) of such wall should be maintained with a
minimum six foot (6') wide planting strip and landscaping with trees and
shrubs. (1985 Code § 19-24-5)
10-10B-6: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Ownership: A CP zone may be established only upon land held in single
ownership or under unified control or where the planning commission determines
that commercial development on separate adjoining properties should be
coordinated to form a physically unified commercial facility which will be
compatible with the surrounding land uses. At the time a CP zone is established
and before building permits are issued, deed restrictions on the property or
properties covered under the zone change shall be filed by the applicant or
owners of subject property with the county recorder and shall provide that
development take place on such property or properties in accordance with the
final site development plan approved by the city council and on file with the
city recorder.
   B.   Nonconforming Use: A CP zone shall not be established upon a tract of
land which would contain a nonconforming use or its integration into planned
development.
   C.   Master Plan: The location of the CP zone shall have an acceptable
relationship to, and further the purposes of, the master plan for the city as
determined by the planning commission. (1985 Code § 19-24-6)
10-10B-7: APPLICATION SUBMISSION:
A rezoning petition for a planned commercial zone shall be submitted to the
planning commission and shall be accompanied by a preliminary development plan
for the commercial center showing a unified and organized arrangement of
buildings and structures and their proposed uses, off street parking, internal
and external traffic circulation, service facilities, schematic architectural
drawings, landscaping plans and sketches demonstrating the design and character
of the proposed development. The developer shall submit all evidence deemed
necessary by the city council and/or planning commission of his ability to
undertake the proposed project. (1985 Code § 19-24-7)
10-10B-8: PLANNING COMMISSION APPROVAL:
The planning commission shall recommend approval or denial of the zoning
petition and preliminary development plan to the city council. The
recommendation of the planning commission may contain conditions, limitations
or amendments to the preliminary development plan to ensure that the planned
commercial development is integrated into its surroundings and serves the
public interest to the greatest extent possible. The planning commission shall
also recommend a reasonable amount to be provided by the developer by cash
deposit or bond, to ensure the completion of the landscaping for the entire
plan or phase thereof. (1985 Code § 19-24-8)
10-10B-9: CITY COUNCIL ACTION:
The city council, after holding a public meeting thereon, may approve, modify
or disapprove a petition for a planned commercial zone. In approving a zoning
petition, the city council shall concurrently approve a preliminary development
plan, the amount required to ensure completion of the landscaping, together
with whatever amendments, conditions or requirements it deems necessary to
secure the purpose of this article. (Ord. 650, 11-1-2005)
10-10B-10: BUILDING PERMIT ISSUANCE:
After the rezoning of the site to a CP zone, a final development plan for the
entire district or for the initial phase, if a stage plan development plan has
been approved, shall be submitted to and approved by the planning commission as
complying with the regulations and requirements attached thereto prior to the
issuance of any building or land use permits. The final development plan shall
show in detail the proposed areas and locations of buildings, off street
parking, internal and external traffic circulation, improvements, landscaping,
signs and service facilities. No changes shall be made in the final development
plan during the course of construction pursuant thereto without obtaining prior
approval of the planning commission. Copies of the approved final development
plan shall be kept on file in the office of the planning commission, building
inspector and city recorder, and only changes which may be subsequently
approved shall be added thereto. (1985 Code § 19-24-10)
10-10B-11: TIME LIMITATION:
   A.   A building permit shall be secured and construction begun in accordance
with the approved final development plan within eighteen (18) months from the
effective date of the ordinance establishing such zone or other period of time
as determined by the city council. Application may be made for not more than a
six (6) month extension of the time limit for commencement of construction. Use
and building permits shall be issued only for those uses and buildings
indicated on the approved final development plan.
   B.   In the event that construction is not started within the specified time
limits, the planning commission shall review the classification of the zone and
the progress which has taken place and, if deemed necessary, revoke the plan
approval and initiate proceedings to rezone said property to its prior
classification or to a zone consistent with the comprehensive master plan.
   C.   All construction authorized in the approved final development plan
shall be completed within three (3) years of the date construction commenced. A
plan for stage development which will require more time than the limits
contained herein may be approved by the city council after recommendation by
the planning commission.
   D.   In the event that construction is not completed within the time limits
specified, the planning commission shall review the development which has taken
place and if necessary initiate proceedings to reclassify the property or part
thereof in a manner consistent with the comprehensive master plan. (1985 Code §
19-24-11)
10-10B-12: APPLICATION TO EXISTING COMMERCIAL DISTRICT:
In the case of existing commercial districts, the planning commission and city
council may proceed to rezone such districts to an equivalent planned
commercial zone without the requirements of a preliminary development plan and
other necessary information; but, after being so zoned to a planned commercial
zone, a preliminary and final development plan of each development shall be
submitted to and approved by the planning commission and city council in
accordance with the provisions of this article prior to the issuance of
building permits; provided, however, that improvements already in existence at
the time of rezoning shall not be affected. (1985 Code § 19-24-12)
CHAPTER 11
MANUFACTURING ZONES
ARTICLE A.  MANUFACTURING ZONES (M-1, M-2)
SECTION:
10-11A-1: Purpose And Intent
10-11A-2: Uses
10-11A-3: Site Development Standards
10-11A-4: Site Plan Approval Required
10-11A-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of heavy manufacturing zones is to provide suitable areas that will
accommodate the need for heavy intensity manufacturing and extractive and
associated uses where the environmental impact upon the community may be
substantial and where public regulation may be necessary to preserve the
general welfare of the community. The two (2) types of manufacturing zones
provided for in this article are as follows: (1985 Code § 19-25-1)
   A.   M-1 - light manufacturing use zone.
   B.   M-2 - heavy manufacturing use zone. (1985 Code § 19-25-1; amd. 2001
Code)
10-11A-2: USES:
In the following list of possible uses, those designated in any zone as "P"
will be a permitted use. Uses designated as "C" will be allowed only when
authorized by a conditional use permit obtained as provided in chapter 19 of
this title. Uses designated as "N" will not be allowed in that zone. All
permitted and conditional uses allowed in the C-3 zone are also allowed as
conditional uses in the M-1 zone, except those uses having to do with hotels,
lodging houses, and motels.
 
    M-1 M-2
Accessory uses and buildings customarily incidental to a permitted use      P P
Agriculture                                                                 P P
Ambulance base station                                                      P P
Ambulance substation                                                        P P
Animal hospitals                                                            P P
Animals and fowl for family food production                                 P P
Battery manufacture                                                         C C
Boat building                                                               P P
Body and fender work, if conducted within a closed building                 P P
Bottling works, soft drinks                                                 P P
Building material sale yard including the sale of rock, sand, gravel and
the like as an incidental part of the main business, but excluding
concrete mixing, except as such concrete mixing is necessary in the         C P
preparation and manufacture of any of the products specified in this
section
Carnival or other amusement enterprises, transient in nature                C C
Carpenter shop, cabinet shop                                                C C
Carpet and rug cleaning and dyeing                                          P P
Construction of buildings to be sold and moved off the premises             P P
Contractor's equipment storage yard or rental of equipment used by          C C
contractors
Dairy                                                                       P P
Draying, freighting or trucking yard or terminal                            C P
Dry cleaning plant                                                          P P
Dwelling unit for watchman and family                                       P P
Egg handling, process and sales                                             P P
Electric appliances and/or electronic instruments assembly                  P P
Express office                                                              P P
Feed, cereal or flour mill                                                  N P
Fertilizer and soil conditioner manufacture, processing and/or sales,       C C
providing only nonanimal products
Foundry, casting lightweight, nonferrous metal without causing noxious      C C
odors or fumes
Garage, public                                                              P P
Glass manufacturing                                                         C C
Go-cart racing or drag strip racing                                         N C
Honey extraction                                                            P P
Ice manufacturing and storage                                               P P
Incinerator nonaccessory; provided, that no objectionable fumes and odors   N C
are emitted
Kennel, enclosed within a building                                          C C
Knitting mill                                                               P P
Laboratory                                                                  P P
Laundry                                                                     P P
Lithographing including engraving and photo engraving                       P P
Machine shop                                                                P P
Manufacture, fabrication, assembly, canning, compounding, packaging,        C C
process, treatment, storage and/or maintenance of the following:
 Automobile and parts
 Cans
 Emery cloth excelsior
 Hardware
 Machinery, matches
 Oxygen
 Salt
Manufacture of brick and all clay, ceramic, cinder, concrete, synthetic,
cast stone, plastic and pumice stone products, including the manufacture
or fabrication of building blocks, tile or pipe from raw material for use
in building construction or for sewer or drainage purposes, and including   C C
rock or gravel crushings or raw material which is incidental to the above
described products; and provided, that such crushing facilities shall be
located not closer than 200 feet to any property line
Manufacturing and maintenance of the following:                             P P
 Business machines
 Cameras and photographic equipment
 Electric and neon sign, billboard and/or commercial advertising
 structures
 Light sheet metal products, including heating and ventilating ducts and
 equipment
 Musical instruments
 Novelties
 Rubber and metal stamps
 Toys
Manufacturing, compounding and treatment of articles of merchandise from    C C
the following previously prepared materials:
 Bone
 Feathers
 Fiber
 Fish
 Glass
 Hair
 Horn
 Leather
 Paint
 Paper
 Plastic
 Rubber
 Tobacco
Manufacturing, compounding, assembling and treatment of articles of         P P
merchandise from the following previously prepared materials:
 Canvas
 Cellophane
 Cloth
 Cork
 Felt
 Shell
 Straw
 Textile
 Wood
 Yarn
Manufacturing, compounding, processing, packing, and treatment of the       P P
following products:
 Bakery goods
 Candy
 Dairy products
 Pharmaceuticals
Manufacturing, compounding, processing, packing and treatment of the        C C
following products:
 Cosmetics
 Food products, excluding the following: fish, sauerkraut, pickles,
 vinegar, yeast, the rendering of fat
 Toiletries
Manufacturing, fabrication, assembly, canning, compounding, packaging,      N C
processing, treatment, storage and/or maintenance of the following:
 Alcohol
 Brass
 Candles, cast stone products, cement and cinder products, copper ceramic
 products, clay products
 Dyestuff
 Feathers, fiber, fish food products
 Glass, glucose, gypsum
 Hair
 Ink, iron
 Lampblack, linoleum, lime
 Malt, meats
 Oilcloth, oiled rubber goods
 Paper, paint, pulp, pickles, plaster, plaster of Paris, plastic
 Sauerkraut, sheet metal, shellac, shoddy, shoe polish, soap and
 detergent, starch, steel
 Terra cotta, tile, turpentine
 Varnish, vinegar
 Yeast
Manufacturing, processing, compounding, packing treatment and/or storage    N C
of acetylene gas
Meat products smoking, curing and packing; provided, that no objectionable  C C
fumes are emitted
Metals and metal products treatment and processing                          N C
Monument works                                                              P P
Motion picture studio                                                       P P
Motor vehicles, trailers, bicycles and machinery repairing, rentals, sales  P P
and reconditioning
Parking lot                                                                 C C
Petroleum refining and storage                                              N C
Planing mill                                                                P P
Printing, including engraving and photo engraving, blueprinting,            C C
photostating and duplication
Public and quasi-public uses                                                P P
Public transit yards                                                        C C
Radio and television transmitting towers                                    P P
Railroad yards, shop and/or roundhouse                                      N C
Retail sale of products produced by, developed in conjunction with, or
normally required and used in the performance of a commercial or
manufacturing operation permitted in this zone; and provided the retail
sale is clearly an accessory use to the main permitted use and is           C C
conducted within the same building or if the main use is not a building
then on the same property; provided however, no retail sale of products
may be made in conjunction with a warehousing or wholesale business
Sandblasting                                                                C C
Service station                                                             P P
Sign painting shop                                                          P P
Temporary building for uses incidental to construction work, including
living quarters for a guard or night watchman, which building must be       C C
removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work
Transfer company                                                            C C
Trucking terminal                                                           C C
Upholstering, including mattress manufacturing, rebuilding, and renovating  P P
Used car lot                                                                P P
Veterinary and hotel or beauty parlor for cats and dogs                     P P
Warehouse                                                                   P P
Weaving                                                                     P P
Welding shop                                                                C C
Wholesale business                                                          P P
Uses which follow, provided they are located at least 600 feet from any     N C
zone boundary:
 Blast furnace
 Cement, concrete, mortar, plaster, or paving material central mixing
 plant
 Gravel pits, quarries
 Junk or salvage yard, provided the use is enclosed with a 7 feet high
 solid fence or wall
 Manufacturing, processing, refining, treatment, distillation, storage or
 compounding of the following:
  Acid
  Ammonia
  Asphalt
  Bleaching powder and chlorine
  Bone
  Chemicals of an objectionable or dangerous nature
  Coal or wood
  Creosote
  Disinfectants or insecticides
  Fat
  Fireworks or explosives
  Fur
  Gas
  Gelatin or size
  Glue
  Hide
  Ore
  Plastic
  Potash
  Pyroxylin
  Roofing or waterproofing materials
  Rubber or gutta percha
  Tallow grease or lard
  Tar
  Wood
 Ore benefication
 Smelting or refining of materials
 
(Ord. 658, 4-18-2006)
10-11A-3: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
 
  M-1 M-2
Minimum site area      20,000 square feet
Minimum lot width      100 feet           100 feet
Minimum yard setbacks:
                       30 feet on streets of less than 80 feet in width, 50
 Front                 feet on all streets and highways of 80 or more feet in
                       width
 Side                  None, except 20 feet adjacent to a residential boundary
 Rear                  None, except 20 feet where building rears on a
                       residential zone
Building height:
 Minimum               1 story            1 story
 Maximum               None               None
Lot coverage           Not over 80 percent of lot area of building
 
(Ord. 658, 4-18-2006)
10-11A-4: SITE PLAN APPROVAL REQUIRED:
In considering any site plan as regulated by this title for permitted or
conditional uses specified in this article, the planning commission shall
endeavor to ensure, among other things, the safety and convenience of traffic
movement both within the area covered and in relation to access streets,
harmonious and beneficial relation among the buildings and uses in the area
covered, and satisfactory and harmonious relation between such area and
contiguous land and buildings and adjacent neighborhoods. In any manufacturing
zone, the location of main and accessory buildings on the site and in relation
to one another, the traffic circulation features within the site, the height
and bulk of buildings, the provision of off street parking space, the provision
of driveways for ingress and egress, and the provision of other open space on
the site, and the display of signs, shall be in accordance with a site plan or
plans or subsequent amendment thereof, approved in any case by the planning
commission prior to issuance of a building or land use permit. A site plan may
also include provisions for landscaping, fences and walls designed to further
the purposes of the regulations for manufacturing zones and such features shall
be provided and maintained as a condition of the establishment and maintenance
of any use to which they are appurtenant. Conditional uses are regulated by
chapter 19 of this title. (Ord. 658, 4-18-2006)
ARTICLE B.  PLANNED MANUFACTURING ZONES (MP-1, MP-2) 1
SECTION:
10-11B-1: Purpose And Intent
10-11B-2: Use Regulations
10-11B-3: Site Development Standards
10-11B-4: Protection Of Adjoining Residential Properties
10-11B-5: Special Parking Limitations
10-11B-6: General Regulations
10-11B-7: Application Submission
10-11B-8: Planning Commission Approval
10-11B-9: City Council Action
10-11B-10: Building Permit Issuance
10-11B-11: Time Limitation
10-11B-12: Application To Existing Manufacturing Districts
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  10-5-4 of this title for rezone provisions.
10-11B-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   The intent of the planned manufacturing zone is to permit the
establishment of a well designed complex of manufacturing facilities for the
community or region which will minimize traffic congestion on public streets in
the vicinity, and which shall best fit the general environment and land use
pattern of the area to be served. The protective standards contained in this
article are intended to minimize any adverse effect of the planned
manufacturing zone on nearby property values by achieving maximum compatible
integration of land uses, by preserving the aesthetic qualities of the area,
and by providing safe and efficient use of the planned manufacturing zone
itself. It is not the intent that the planned manufacturing zone shall be
applied in a broad brush manner, but rather be used discriminately in areas
where it is determined by the planning commission and/or city council that the
planned manufacturing zone and its built in control processes would be highly
beneficial in protecting the established surrounding environment, especially
residential uses in abutting residential zones. (1985 Code § 19-26-1)
   B.   The two (2) types of planned manufacturing zones provided for in this
article are as follows:
      1.   MP-1 - light manufacturing use zone.
      2.   MP-2 - heavy manufacturing use zone. (1985 Code § 19-26-1; amd. 2001
Code)
10-11B-2: USE REGULATIONS:
Any permitted use or any conditional use allowed in the M-1 or M-2 zone shall
be permitted in the respective MP-1 or MP-2 zone, provided, where applicable, a
conditional use permit is obtained as provided in chapter 19 of this title.
Such uses shall be indicated on the final development plan. (1985 Code § 19-26-
2)
10-11B-3: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The site development standards are the same as provided in section
10-11A-3 of this chapter, or as determined by the planning commission and/or
city council. (1985 Code § 19-26-3)
10-11B-4: PROTECTION OF ADJOINING RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES:
Where a planned manufacturing development adjoins any lot in any residential
zone, there shall be provided and maintained along such property line a wooden
or ornamental fence of not less than six feet (6') in height; provided,
however, that such fence shall be three and one-half feet (31/2') in height
along the property line which bounds the front yard of adjoining residential
zone. (1985 Code § 19-26-4)
10-11B-5: SPECIAL PARKING LIMITATIONS:
Notwithstanding the provisions of chapter 15 of this title, there shall be
provided off street parking facilities of not less than one space for each
employee on the highest work shift with the greatest density of employees or as
determined by the planning commission and city council. (1985 Code § 19-26-5)
10-11B-6: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Ownership: An MP zone may be established only upon land held in single
ownership or under unified control or where the planning commission determines
the manufacturing development on separate adjoining properties should be
coordinated to form a physically unified manufacturing facility which will be
compatible with the surrounding land uses.
   B.   Nonconforming Uses: An MP zone shall not be established upon a tract of
land which would contain a nonconforming use after the passage of a rezoning
amendment unless the development planned for the tract includes the elimination
of the nonconforming use or its integration into planned development.
   C.   Master Plan: The location of the MP zone shall have an acceptable
relationship to further the purposes of the master plan for the city as
determined by the planning commission. (1985 Code § 19-26-6)
10-11B-7: APPLICATION SUBMISSION:
A rezoning petition for a planned manufacturing zone shall be submitted to the
planning commission and shall be accompanied by a preliminary development plan
showing a unified and organized arrangement of buildings and structures and
their proposed uses, off street parking, internal and external traffic
circulation, service facilities, schematic architectural drawings, landscaping
plans and sketches demonstrating the design and character of the proposed
development. The developer shall submit all evidence deemed necessary by the
city council and/or planning commission of his ability to undertake the
proposed project. (1985 Code § 19-26-7)
10-11B-8: PLANNING COMMISSION APPROVAL:
The planning commission shall recommend approval or denial of the zoning
petition and preliminary development plan to the city council. The
recommendation of the planning commission may contain conditions, limitations
or amendments to the preliminary development plan to ensure that the planned
manufacturing development is integrated into its surroundings and serves the
public interest to the greatest extent possible. (1985 Code § 19-26-8)
10-11B-9: CITY COUNCIL ACTION:
The city council, after holding a public meeting thereon, may approve, modify
or disapprove a petition for a planned manufacturing zone. In approving the
zoning petition, the city council shall concurrently approve a preliminary
development plan, together with whatever amendments, conditions or requirements
it may deem necessary to secure the purpose of this article. (Ord. 650, 11-1-
2005)
10-11B-10: BUILDING PERMIT ISSUANCE:
After the rezoning of the site to an MP zone, a final development plan for the
entire district or for the initial phase, if a stage development plan has been
approved, shall be submitted to and approved by the planning commission as
complying with the regulations and requirements attached thereto prior to the
issuance of any building or land use permits. The final development plan shall
show in detail the proposed areas and locations of buildings, off street
parking, internal and external traffic circulation, improvements, landscaping,
signs and service facilities. No changes shall be made in the final development
plan during the course of construction pursuant thereto without first obtaining
approval of the planning commission. Copies of the approved final development
plan shall be kept on file in the offices of the planning commission, building
inspector and city recorder, and only changes which may be subsequently
approved shall be added thereto. (1985 Code § 19-26-10)
10-11B-11: TIME LIMITATION:
   A.   A building permit shall be secured and construction begun in accordance
with the approved final development plan within eighteen (18) months from the
effective date of the ordinance establishing such zone or such other period of
time as is determined by the city council. Application may be made for not more
than six (6) months' extension of the time limit for commencement of
construction. Use and building permits shall be issued only for those uses and
buildings indicated on the approved final development plan.
   B.   In the event that construction is not started within the specified time
limits, the planning commission shall review the classification of the zone and
the progress which has taken place and, if deemed necessary, revoke the plan
approval and initiate proceedings to rezone said property to its prior
classification or to a zone consistent with the comprehensive master plan.
   C.   All construction authorized in the approved final development plan
shall be completed within three (3) years of the date construction was
commenced. A plan for stage development which will require more time than the
limits contained herein may be approved by the city council, after
recommendation by the planning commission.
   D.   In the event that construction is not completed within the time limits
specified, the planning commission shall review the development which has taken
place and, if necessary, initiate proceedings to reclassify the property or
part thereof in a manner consistent with the comprehensive master plan. (1985
Code § 19-26-11)
10-11B-12: APPLICATION TO EXISTING MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS:
In the case of existing manufacturing districts, the planning commission and
city council may proceed to rezone such districts to an equivalent planned
manufacturing zone without the requirements of a preliminary development plan
and other necessary information; but, after being zoned to a planned
manufacturing zone, a preliminary and final development plan for each
development shall be submitted to and approved by the planning commission and
city council in accordance with the provisions of this article prior to the
issuance of building permits; provided, however, that improvements already in
existence at the time of rezoning shall not be affected. (1985 Code § 19-26-12)
CHAPTER 12
INFILL LOTS
SECTION:
10-12-1: Purpose
10-12-2: Definitions
10-12-3: Review Criteria
10-12-1: PURPOSE:
To set forth the criteria, conditions and requirements necessary to allow for
development of unique type lots that otherwise do not qualify for development
under existing ordinances in their current location or condition. (Ord. 759, 6-
1-2010)
10-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
FLAG LOT: Property that has no less than sixteen feet (16') of frontage on a
street and meets the area requirement of the zone.
RESIDENTIAL INFILL: The development of residential dwelling units on vacant
property or underutilized land located in various areas of the city. Infill
lots shall include flag lots that are not part of an approved and recorded
subdivision.
ZERO LOT LINE/ZERO SIDE YARD: A form of housing development in which individual
dwelling units are placed on separate, individually owned, platted and recorded
lots. They may be attached to one another or directly abutting a separately
owned lot. (Ord. 730, 3-17-2009)
10-12-3: REVIEW CRITERIA:
   A.   Compatibility With Existing Neighborhood: The proposed use and site
plan for a residential infill development shall be compatible with and
complementary to the character of the site, existing adjacent properties and
surrounding neighborhood. (Ord. 741, 7-21-2009)
      1.   In determining the compatibility of the proposal for development of
an infill lot, the planning commission shall consider: the density of the
surrounding neighborhood; proposed number of dwelling units; and setbacks from
property lines and existing structures.
      2.   In determining the compatibility of the site plan and building plan,
the planning commission shall consider: compatibility with surrounding
neighborhood; and the relationship of landscaping, screening, architectural
style, parking location and height of all structures. It is the goal of
Riverdale City in reviewing and approving any request for infill lot
development that each development improves and enhances the residential area
with a higher quality development than is currently present on properties
abutting the proposed infill development.
      3.   If the proposal for development of an infill lot includes the
demolition of a residential structure, the planning commission shall consider
the effect such demolition has on the adjacent property and surrounding
neighborhood.
      4.   If development of an infill lot is proposed on property that exists
at the time of the adoption hereof and it does not meet the minimum lot width
or area requirements of the zone, the planning commission may approve the
development of the lot as long as the required setbacks of the zone are
maintained.
      5.   The zero lot line/zero side yard development concept is allowed on
infill lots as a conditional use that is reviewed by the planning commission
and complies with all aspects of this chapter.
      6.   Wider frontage on a flag lot may be required if the fire department
review for access deems it is necessary.
      7.   This chapter is separate and distinct from chapter 14, "Regulations
Applicable To All Zones", of this title and specifically subsection 10-14-4J of
this title which pertains to zero side yard development in residential zones.
      8.   Infill lot development shall comply with all city adopted regulatory
codes.
      9.   Each infill lot developer shall enter into a residential development
agreement with Riverdale City that lists specific requirements and conditions
for each development as outlined by the planning commission, department of
community development, fire department, department of public works, city
attorney and city administration. (Ord. 730, 3-17-2009)
CHAPTER 13
SPECIAL USE DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A.  SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES OVERLAY ZONE (CP-4) 1
SECTION:
10-13A-1: Purpose
10-13A-2: Definitions
10-13A-3: Permitted Locations And Restrictions
10-13A-4: Distance From Other Similar Businesses
10-13A-5: Sign Restrictions
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 3, chapter 8 of this code for business license provisions.
10-13A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose and object of this article is to establish uniform and reasonable
regulations to prevent the concentration of sexually-oriented businesses or
their locations in areas deleterious to the community, to regulate the signs of
such businesses, to control the adverse effects of such signs, and to prevent
inappropriate exposure to the community. This article by its terms is designed
to prevent crime, protect the city's retail trade, maintain property values and
generally protect and preserve the quality of urban life. This article is not
designed to suppress the expression of unpopular views. This article is to be
construed as a regulation of time, place and manner of the operation of these
businesses consistent with the limitations provided by the United States and
Utah Constitutions. (1985 Code § 19-32-1)
10-13A-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
defined in this section:
GATEWAY: Those areas identified as city gateways on the Riverdale general plan,
land use planning map, as adopted and as may be amended.
HISTORIC BUILDINGS OR SITES: Those buildings or sites found on either the
national or state historic registers, or the city register of cultural and
historic resources.
PUBLIC PARK: A park, playground, swimming pool, golf course or athletic field
within the city which is under the control, operation or management of the
city's public works or recreation department.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION: A building which is used primarily for religious worship
and related religious activities.
SCHOOL: An institution of learning or instruction primarily catering to minors,
whether public or private, which is licensed as such a facility either by the
city or the state. This definition shall include nursery schools,
kindergartens, elementary schools, junior high schools, senior high schools or
any special institution of learning under the jurisdiction of the State
Department of Education, but not including trade schools, charm schools,
dancing schools, music schools or similar limited schools, nor public or
private universities or colleges.
SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS: Any business for which a sexually- oriented
business license is required pursuant to the sexually- oriented business
license ordinance set out in title 3, chapter 5 of this code. (1985 Code § 19-
32-3)
10-13A-3: PERMITTED LOCATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS:
Sexually-oriented businesses shall only be permitted in areas designated as CP-
4 overlay areas as set forth on the overlay map attached to the ordinance
codified herein and on file in the city office. Sexually-oriented business
zones are conditional use zones (requiring a conditional use permit as provided
in chapter 19 of this title), and are subject to the following additional
restrictions:
   A.   No sexually-oriented business shall be located within a one thousand
foot (1,000') radius of any church, park, school, residential zone or
residential dwelling in a nonresidential zone, as measured by a straight line
without regard to intervening structures. The distance is measured from the
property line of the church, park, school or residential zone nearest the
sexually-oriented business and the property line of the sexually-oriented
business nearest the church, park, school or residential zone. (1985 Code § 19-
32-3)
   B.   No sexually-oriented business shall be permitted within three hundred
feet (300') of any gateway. (1985 Code § 19-32-3; amd. 2001 Code)
   C.   No sexually-oriented business shall be permitted within three hundred
feet (300') of any historic building or site. The distance shall be measured
from the property line of the historic building or site nearest the sexually-
oriented business and the property line of the sexually-oriented business
nearest the historic building or site. (1985 Code § 19-32-3)
10-13A-4: DISTANCE FROM OTHER SIMILAR BUSINESSES:
No sexually-oriented business shall be allowed within one thousand feet
(1,000') of any other sexually-oriented business, measuring a straight distance
from the nearest property line of one business to the nearest property line of
the other business. (1985 Code § 19-32-4)
10-13A-5: SIGN RESTRICTIONS:
Notwithstanding any contrary provision contained in chapter 16 of this title,
sexually-oriented business signs shall be limited as follows:
   A.   Number: No more than one sign promoting or identifying the sexually-
oriented business shall be allowed on any sexually- oriented business premises.
   B.   Off-Premises Signs: Off-premises signs are prohibited.
   C.   Size: No sign on the sexually-oriented business premises promoting or
identifying the sexually-oriented business shall be allowed to exceed eighteen
(18) square feet.
   D.   Animation: No animation shall be permitted on or around any sexually-
oriented business sign or on the exterior walls or roof of the premises.
   E.   Descriptive Art Or Designs: No descriptive art or designs depicting any
activity related to or inferring the nature of the business shall be allowed on
any sexually-oriented business sign. The sign shall contain alpha-numeric copy
only.
   F.   Type; Projection: Signage is limited to one flat wall sign and shall
not project more than twelve inches (12") from the wall to which it is
attached.
   G.   Painted Wall Advertising: Painted wall advertising shall not be
allowed.
   H.   Other Signs Prohibited: Other than the flat wall sign specifically
allowed by this section, sexually-oriented businesses shall not construct or
allow to be constructed any other type of sign, including those types of signs
listed in chapter 16 of this title, or use any light or other device designed
to draw attention to the business location. (1985 Code § 19-32-5)
ARTICLE B.  RETAIL/COMMERCIAL PARK OVERLAY ZONE (RCP)
SECTION:
10-13B-1: Purpose
10-13B-2: Objectives And Intent
10-13B-3: Planned Uses
10-13B-4: Development Standards
10-13B-5: Building Setbacks
10-13B-6: Screening; Walls, Fences, Hedges
10-13B-7: Parking
10-13B-8: Landscaping
10-13B-9: Hardscape
10-13B-10: Signs; Illumination
10-13B-11: Lighting
10-13B-12: Outside Speakers
10-13B-13: Riparian Environment
10-13B-14: Architectural Design
10-13B-15: Submittal Requirements
10-13B-16: Security; Site Improvements
10-13B-17: Guarantees And Covenants
10-13B-18: Site Deficiencies
10-13B-1: PURPOSE:
The purposes of this article are:
   A.   To describe certain overlay zones to impose special development
guidelines on identified areas; and
   B.   To establish locations within the city which will accommodate planned
retail developments; and
   C.   To establish regulations for use and development of land within the
city which govern uses, density, open spaces, structures, buildings, energy
efficiency, light and air quality, transportation, infrastructure, public
facilities, vegetation, and trees and landscaping. (Ord. 560, 3-3-1999)
10-13B-2: OBJECTIVES AND INTENT:
   A.   The objectives of this article are:
      1.   To create an overlay zone that allows for a mixture of retail and
commercial uses; and
      2.   To define a range of services and uses which may be offered by
planned retail/commercial park (RCP) entities within the community; and
      3.   To establish guidelines for the physical development of such retail/
commercial park (RCP) entities and uses; and
      4.   To preserve and enhance the urban character of the city.
   B.   The intent of these regulations is to establish a standard for retail/
commercial park (RCP) development and maintenance which:
      1.   Promotes the overall functionality, safety and visual attractiveness
of retail/commercial buildings, accompanying substructures and surrounding
landscape; and
      2.   Promotes development and uses that are in harmony with the goals and
direction of the city; and
      3.   Promotes the quality of architecture and the use of quality building
materials to encourage creativity of design; and
      4.   Promotes the successful completion of the development of a retail/
commercial park project, and of the ability of retail/commercial park entities
to succeed; and
      5.   Provides for diversity in the tax base of the city; and
      6.   Provides for large view corridors between buildings and structures
to allow view of mountain ranges, trees, river areas, or such areas as may be
deemed viable by the planning commission and city council; and
      7.   Promotes implementation of high quality visually integrated urban
design corridors, gateways and districts; and
      8.   Promotes the integration of public transit in site development.
(Ord. 560, 3-3-1999; amd. 2001 Code)
10-13B-3: PLANNED USES:
All uses in the Retail/Commercial Park Overlay Zone shall be planned uses. The
approval of the planned uses shall be granted at the time of approval of the
final site plan. (Ord. 560, 3-3-1999)
10-13B-4: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Development in the Retail/Commercial Park Overlay Zone (RCP) shall have the
following characteristics:
   A.   In order to encourage uses consistent with the purposes of the Retail/
Commercial Park Overlay Zone (RCP) and to ensure adequate site planning, the
entire zoned area shall be master planned at the time of the overall
development plan approval, even though the entire zoned area may be developed
in phases. Each phase shall adhere to an approved original master site plan and
development agreement for the retail/commercial park (RCP) zoned area; and
   B.   All new or remodeled/refurbished construction shall comply with the
provisions of the development agreement for the specific area. The provisions
and terms of the development agreement shall be transferable if ownership of
the development area changes. (Ord. 560, 3-3-1999)
10-13B-5: BUILDING SETBACKS:
Specific setbacks shall be included in the overall development plan and the
project development agreement. (Ord. 560, 3-3-1999)
10-13B-6: SCREENING; WALLS, FENCES, HEDGES:
An opaque screen shall be installed and maintained along all zone boundaries,
other than streets. The following are acceptable means of providing such
screening:
   A.   Walls: A wall shall consist of concrete, stone, brick, tile or similar
type of solid masonry material a minimum of eight inches (8") thick. All such
walls must be landscaped with vegetation in front of the wall.
   B.   Berms: Berms of varying height and width shall face any street or
property. The exact height and width of the berm shall be determined at the
time of development review. (Ord. 560, 3-3-1999)
10-13B-7: PARKING:
Design of the parking areas shall attempt to minimize the large uninterrupted
hard-surfaced areas with landscaping islands. Landscaping shall integrate the
parking areas into the building providing view corridors and pedestrian
pathways. Traffic management of parking areas shall integrate these areas with
the streets and adjacent uses to increase the safe flow of traffic. Landscaping
of parking areas must be five percent (5%) of the land inside the perimeter of
the parking area.
   A.   Landscape Strip: A landscape strip may be required on both sides of a
street entrance to allow for queuing. A landscaped pedestrian path from bus
stop or public right of way shall be provided. Planting islands shall be
provided throughout the lot at the ends of parking rows. These strips and
islands are to be planted with shade trees, low shrubs and ground cover.
   B.   Landscaped Berm: A rolling landscaped berm shall be utilized to screen
and buffer parking and loading areas from adjoining access streets and lots.
   C.   Circulation: Circulation within the parking areas shall provide for
free flow of vehicular traffic. The on-site parking and traffic circulation
plan shall be a part of the traffic impact analysis required as a part of the
overall development site plan review; said analysis shall be paid for by the
developer. (Ord. 560, 3-3-1999)
10-13B-8: LANDSCAPING:
All landscaping shall be installed and maintained in conformance with a
landscape plan, which has been recommended by the planning commission and
approved by the city council.
   A.   Landscape Plan: At the time of the overall development plan submittal
to the planning commission, an overall landscape plan shall also be submitted
showing typical landscaping. Detailed landscape plans shall be submitted at the
time of site plan review. Twenty percent (20%) of a business/commercial area
shall be maintained in landscaped open space.
   B.   Tree Stands, Natural Vegetation: Existing significant tree stands and
natural vegetation shall be integrated into the site landscape plan to the
maximum extent possible.
   C.   Preparation By Registered Architect: The city requires that landscaping
plans be designed by a registered landscape architect. (Ord. 560, 3-3-1999)
10-13B-9: HARDSCAPE:
Hardscape may be used in coordination with architecture and landscaping to
provide a link between the street edge and individual developments. Hardscape
detail shall be included in the overall development plan. (Ord. 560, 3-3-1999)
10-13B-10: SIGNS; ILLUMINATION:
Sign design and illumination themes shall also be included for review by the
planning commission and city council. The planning commission and city council
shall not approve a development proposal without a sign plan. Architectural
themes shall be carried into the sign plan. (Ord. 560, 3-3-1999)
10-13B-11: LIGHTING:
Site and security lighting shall be designed to enhance the architectural
quality of the development. Screening of lights from residential areas and
glare from traffic areas shall be minimized. Lighting consistency utilizing a
design approved for the entire area shall be required in the parking lots.
(Ord. 560, 3-3-1999)
10-13B-12: OUTSIDE SPEAKERS:
Outside speakers, pagers and sound systems of any kind or nature whatsoever are
strictly prohibited. (Ord. 560, 3-3-1999)
10-13B-13: RIPARIAN ENVIRONMENT:
If the project affects the riparian environment, mitigation of effects shall be
included in the development agreement. (Ord. 560, 3-3-1999)
10-13B-14: ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN:
As part of review of proposed development, the planning commission shall review
the proposed development plans to ensure compliance with the architectural
design guidelines.
   A.   Overall Architectural Outline:
      1.   The proposed development shall include architectural renderings and
elevations of the proposed buildings. Relationships to surrounding uses shall
be considered in respect to scale and massing of the proposed uses.
Architectural style, colors and materials will be assessed in order to maintain
a consistent quality throughout the zone.
      2.   The design shall improve community appearance by avoiding excessive
variety and monotonous repetition.
      3.   All building elevations shall be architecturally treated and with
the same materials on all faces of the building.
   B.   Architectural Guidelines: The following architectural design guidelines
apply to all permitted and conditional uses in the Retail/Commercial Park
Overlay Zone:
      1.   Detailed architectural guidelines are attached to the ordinance
codified herein as Exhibit A and on file in the city office.
      2.   All architectural treatments may be reviewed by a registered
architect chosen by the city and paid for by the developer.
      3.   The height of buildings shall be determined at the time of
development review. (Ord. 560, 3-3-1999)
10-13B-15: SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS:
All buildings and structures proposed for development under this article shall
be subject to a site plan review process as adopted by the city. There shall be
submitted to the planning commission a master plan for the development of the
entire zone for the purpose of meeting the requirements set forth in this
article. Each phase of the process shall go though a site plan review. (Ord.
560, 3-3-1999)
10-13B-16: SECURITY; SITE IMPROVEMENTS:
All retail/commercial park developments within the city shall comply with the
city's bonding requirements. (Ord. 560, 3-3-1999)
10-13B-17: GUARANTEES AND COVENANTS:
Guarantees and covenants for the development shall be included in the project
development agreement. (Ord. 560, 3-3-1999)
10-13B-18: SITE DEFICIENCIES:
For all existing developments that have improvements greater than fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00), the city shall require that ten percent (10%) of
the additional construction cost be provided to address existing deficiencies
due to the fact that the development does not meet present zoning ordinances
with respect to architectural design, urban design, landscaping, parking and
other development standards. Before a building permit can be issued, a plan
must be submitted to the city addressing and correcting any and all
deficiencies related to the development. The city planning staff will review
the site deficiencies to be corrected and will submit their recommendation to
the planning commission and city council. (Ord. 560, 3-3-1999)
ARTICLE C.  OFFICE PARK ZONE (OP)
SECTION:
10-13C-1: Purpose
10-13C-2: Objectives And Intent
10-13C-3: Permitted Uses
10-13C-4: Conditional Uses
10-13C-5: Prohibited Uses
10-13C-6: Development Standards
10-13C-7: Site Coverage
10-13C-8: Building Setbacks
10-13C-9: Building Height
10-13C-10: Screening; Walls, Fences, Hedges
10-13C-11: Parking
10-13C-12: Loading
10-13C-13: Driveway And Curb Openings
10-13C-14: Landscaping
10-13C-15: Hardscape
10-13C-16: Substructures; Storage, Refuse Collection
10-13C-17: Signs; Illumination
10-13C-18: Lighting
10-13C-19: Projections
10-13C-20: Grading
10-13C-21: Utilities; Equipment
10-13C-22: Roof Design
10-13C-23: Nuisances
10-13C-24: Change Of Use
10-13C-25: Riparian Environment
10-13C-26: Weber River Parkway
10-13C-27: Architectural Design
10-13C-28: Submittal Requirements
10-13C-29: Site Plan; Development Approval Procedures
10-13C-30: Conditional Use Process
10-13C-31: Security; Site Improvements
10-13C-32: Guarantees And Covenants
10-13C-1: PURPOSE:
The purposes of this article are:
   A.   To establish locations within the city which will accommodate offices
and laboratories for professional persons and supporting uses; and
   B.   To establish regulations for use and development of land within the
city which govern uses, density, open spaces, structures, buildings, energy
efficiency, light and air, air quality, transportation, infrastructure, public
facilities, vegetation, and trees and landscaping; and
   C.   To meet the purposes of the Utah Municipal Land Use Development and
Management Act, at Utah Code Annotated section 10-9-102, which are to provide
for the health, safety and welfare, and to promote the prosperity, to improve
the morals, peace and good order, comfort, convenience and aesthetics of the
city and its present and future inhabitants and businesses, to protect the tax
base, secure economy in governmental expenditures, and to protect urban and
nonurban development. (1985 Code § 19-35-1)
10-13C-2: OBJECTIVES AND INTENT:
   A.   The objectives of this article are:
      1.   To define a range of services and uses which may be offered by
office park (OP) entities within the community; and
      2.   To establish guidelines for the physical development of such office
park (OP) entities and uses; and
      3.   To preserve as much of the natural forest and vegetation, wetlands,
and riverfront as possible.
   B.   The intent of these regulations is to establish a standard for office
park (OP) development and maintenance which:
      1.   Promotes the overall functionality, safety and visual attractiveness
of office park (OP) buildings, accompanying substructures and surrounding
landscape; and
      2.   Preserves and enhances the Weber River parkway as established in the
general plan, as represented in Figure 18 of said general plan, and preserves
and enhances such other open space, passive recreation and visual enhancement
in the city; and
      3.   Promotes development and uses that are in harmony with the goals and
direction of the city; and
      4.   Allows some flexibility of architecture so as to encourage
creativity of design; and
      5.   Promotes the successful completion of the development of an office
park project, and of the ability of office park entities to succeed; and
      6.   Provides for diversity in the tax base of the city; and
      7.   Provides for large view corridors between buildings and structures
to allow view of mountain ranges, trees, river areas, or such areas as may be
deemed viable by the planning commission. (1985 Code § 19-35-2; amd. 2001 Code)
10-13C-3: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Primary Uses: The following is a representative list of permitted
principal uses for the OP zone, and are subject to the standards and procedures
established in this title:
Bank, credit union, securities company or other such financial institution.
Business, administrative offices, professional offices and secondary
activities, not open to the public, which support or are accessory to the
primary activity of the permitted area, including, but not limited to, the
following:
      Architect;
      Attorney;
      Certified public accountant;
      Corporate headquarters offices;
      Golf course/golf driving range;
      Hotel;
Insurance (not claims adjustment), and real estate services;
      Professional registered engineer or surveyor.
Community use, church, public building, library.
Medical facilities (nonresidential), doctor, dentist, psychologist,
psychiatrist, nurse, or physical therapist.
   B.   Secondary Uses: Retail and service facilities within an office
building, but limited to only fifty percent (50%) of the gross ground floor
area of the building and uses similar to barber shop, beauty shop, dining room,
restaurant, newsstand, spa/health club, and retail stores for the sale of
books, gifts, flowers, medicines, sundries. Such facilities shall not have any
customer entrances directly from the street nor visible from any sidewalk.
There shall be no exterior evidence of such accessory uses such as signs or
display windows. (1985 Code § 19-35-3)
10-13C-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following is a representative list of conditional uses for the OP zone, and
are subject to the standards and procedures established in this title and the
conditional use permit approval process as set forth in section
10-13C-30 of this article. Such operations shall not deal in large volumes of
product handling, storage and distribution; nor shall such operations include
on- site milling, forging or heavy grinding of parts or similar manufacturing
operations:
   A.   Specified Uses:
Art or music studio.
Dine-in restaurant, stand alone, but only allowed with increased restrictions
such as increased setback requirements.
High technology manufacturing and assembly that is clean and nonpolluting. Uses
shall include fabricating, processing, testing, assembling, packaging and
manufacture of products which have a high value in relation to bulk, from
previously prepared materials, but not including uses involving primary
production of wood, metal, petroleum or chemical products from raw materials.
Laboratory and research center; including laboratories, scientific, medical,
chemical, applied physics, mechanical, electronic, biological, genetic or other
similar experimental research, project development or testing facilities.
Marketing, telemarketing and advertising services.
Parking structure.
Spas and/or health clubs.
   B.   Other Similar And Compatible Uses: Other similar uses not specifically
listed above may be approved by the planning commission and city council, with
the issuance of a conditional use permit, upon findings that the proposed use
most closely fits within one of the listed categories, and that any expected
impacts will be no greater than that of other uses listed. (1985 Code § 19-35-
4)
10-13C-5: PROHIBITED USES:
The permitted and/or conditional uses enumerated above shall not be construed
to include, either as a main or accessory use, any of the following uses. This
list of prohibited uses is intended to be illustrative of the types of uses
which are not allowed:
Cabinet and carpenter shop.
Food processing operation, except as incidental to permitted restaurant or
cafeteria operation.
Junk or salvage yard.
Liquor store, private clubs, bars, taverns.
Manufacturing and assembly operation, except as otherwise provided.
Motor vehicle and recreational vehicle dealerships.
Petroleum storage, sales, processing or production.
Plumbing or metal shop.
Repair establishment (automotive and major equipment).
Retail sales, except as otherwise specified in this article.
Sand, gravel and other extraction mining.
Storage lots or facilities and enclosed storage areas.
Terminal, including truck or bus terminals and other distribution facility.
(1985 Code § 19-35-5)
10-13C-6: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Development in an OP zone shall have the following characteristics:
   A.   Master Planning: In order to encourage uses consistent with the
purposes of the Office Park (OP) Zone and to ensure adequate site planning, the
entire zoned area shall be master planned at the time of conceptual and
preliminary site plan approval, even though the entire zoned area may be
developed in phases. Each phase shall adhere to an approved original master
site plan for the zoned area, except as may be subsequently amended by approval
of the planning commission and city council. It is strongly recommended that
the zoned area be under development control of a single person, association,
partnership or corporation at the time of application for a preliminary master
site plan approval.
   B.   Design Controls: Overall unity of site design shall be accomplished
through:
      1.   Architectural harmony of buildings and structures; and
      2.   Design integration of the common open space system and storm
drainage system. (1985 Code § 19-35-6)
10-13C-7: SITE COVERAGE:
Coverage regulates the area of the site that may be covered by the building.
Covered walkways, roof structure overhangs and other solar protection or
aesthetic structural elements shall not be included in building coverage
calculations. These guidelines also help protect area dedicated to landscape
and parking.
   A.   Building, Landscape Ratios: Building and landscape ratios shall be
complied with as follows:
      1.   Ground Floor And Parking Ratio: All combined gross ground floor
areas of buildings or structures and parking areas for a lot shall not occupy
more than sixty percent (60%) of the total area of the lot.
      2.   Landscaped Open Space: Not less than forty percent (40%) of the
total area of the lot shall be landscaped open space.
   B.   Covered Parking Structures: When covered parking structures are
provided, such structures shall cover no more than twenty percent (20%) of the
ground plane.
   C.   Height: The maximum height of any given building or structure shall be
three (3) stories above the ground level, except as may be provided for in
section
10-13C-9 of this article.
   D.   Number Of Buildings: More than one building may be placed on each lot.
   E.   Size Of Development: The minimum size of any phase developed within the
OP zone shall be four (4) acres.
   F.   Lot Size: The minimum size of any lot within any phase developed shall
be two (2) acres. (1985 Code § 19-35-7)
10-13C-8: BUILDING SETBACKS:
It shall be within the authority of the planning commission to determine, for
any development in this zone, which property line or lines shall be considered
as side or as rear lines for the purpose of administering this article.
   A.   Distance To Street Right Of Way: No building shall be closer to a
public street right of way than eighty feet (80'), unless all parking is
provided in the rear of the building, in which case it may be no closer than
fifty feet (50').
   B.   Front: The public street right-of-way line shall be considered the
front property line of a lot. Where a lot is bordered on two (2) or more sides
by a public street right of way, all such sides shall be considered as front
property lines, and the area between the front property line and the building
lines shall be known as the front setback area in all cases. Canopies,
overhangs and similar coverings may project into the front setback area as much
as ten feet (10'), if approved by the planning commission.
   C.   Sides: Side setback areas shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20'),
including canopies and overhangs, except where a side property line abuts a
residential zone, in which case the setback area shall be a minimum of one
hundred feet (100').
   D.   Rear: Rear setback areas shall be a minimum of ten feet (10'), except
where a rear property line abuts a residential zone, in which case the rear
setback area shall be a minimum of one hundred feet (100'). (1985 Code § 19-35-
8)
10-13C-9: BUILDING HEIGHT:
   A.   Maximum; Exception: No building shall be constructed to a height
exceeding three (3) stories, with a maximum of fifty five feet (55'), unless
pursuant to the issuance of a conditional use permit, and upon findings for
good cause, the planning commission finds that a taller building would not
adversely affect the character, view values and peaceful enjoyment of
surrounding properties in and outside the park. In no case shall any structure
be permitted to exceed five (5) stories above the ground level.
   B.   Applicable Developments: The height requirements of this section shall
apply to all office park (OP) developments, except that after review by the
planning commission, the commission may approve, disapprove or approve with
modifications the height on each proposed building or structure in the OP zone.
The decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council.
   C.   Criteria For Considering Adjustment: The planning commission shall take
into account the following criteria when a proposal for height adjustment is
requested:
      1.   The geographical position of the building or structure and possible
visual effects on existing structures on- or off-site; and
      2.   Potential problems on neighboring sites caused by shadows, loss of
solar access, loss of air circulation, closing of views or ridge line
intrusion; and
      3.   The influence on the general vicinity including contact with
existing buildings and structures, streets, traffic congestion and circulation,
adjacent open space and adjacent residential developments; and
      4.   In no case will any increase in height be permitted when the effect
of the height increase is to increase the allowable square footage over that
which is, or would be, possible under normal zone standards. (1985 Code § 19-
35-9)
10-13C-10: SCREENING; WALLS, FENCES, HEDGES:
An opaque screen shall be installed and maintained along all zone boundaries,
other than streets. The following are acceptable means of providing such
screening:
   A.   Walls: A wall shall consist of concrete, stone, brick, tile or similar
type of solid masonry material a minimum of eight inches (8") thick. All such
walls must be landscaped with vegetation in front of the wall.
   B.   Berms: A berm shall be no less than twenty feet (20') in width at the
base facing any street or property. It shall be constructed of earthen material
and it shall be landscaped. Grading of berms is further detailed in section
10-13C-20 of this article.
   C.   Signs Prohibited: No signs or sign supports shall be permitted on any
required screening.
   D.   Lower Elevation At Boundary Line: Notwithstanding the requirements
listed above, where the finished elevation of the property is lower at the
boundary line, or within five feet (5') inside the boundary line, than an
abutting property elevation, such change in elevation may be used in lieu of,
or in combination with, additional screening to satisfy the screening
requirements for this zone.
   E.   Standards: Since walls and hedges are a main visual feature in any
development, regulations related to the placement, size and appearance of such
structures must be enacted. The following standards shall apply to the
installation of all fences, walls, hedges or other visual obstructions used for
the purpose of screening, either around the perimeter of the development site
or within the development site:
      1.   No wall, hedge or other visual obstruction in excess of six feet
(6') in height shall be allowed on any office park development site, unless
along a zone boundary which abuts a residential zone, in which case the height
shall be eight feet (8').
      2.   When there is a difference in the ground level between two (2)
adjoining lots, the height of any fence, wall or hedge constructed along the
property line shall be determined by using the finished grade of the highest
contiguous lot.
      3.   Only one type of fence or wall design shall be permitted on any one
parcel or development. The design may include an appropriate mix of materials
subject to the guidelines of these articles and approval by the planning
commission.
      4.   The use of chainlink, barbed wire, wood, electrified fence, or razor
wire fence in conjunction with any fence, wall or hedge, or by itself, is
prohibited, unless required by any law or regulation of the state.
      5.   On a corner lot, no fence, wall, hedge, sign or other structure,
shrubbery, mounds of earth, or other visual obstruction over thirty six inches
(36") in height above the nearest street curb elevation, shall be erected,
placed, planted or allowed to grow within a traffic safety sight area.
      6.   To protect safe sight distance for vehicular movement, sight
obstructing fences, walls or other obstructions shall not exceed thirty six
inches (36") in height when located in a front setback.
      7.   All walls and fences constructed both around the perimeter of the
development or within the site must be of a similar material and construction
to the primary building.
      8.   Wall materials shall consist of masonry construction finished with a
light colored stucco, or mortar washed brick.
      9.   If walls are finished in stucco, colors will be limited to earth
tones. No bright or neon colors will be allowed.
      10.   Any hedges used as screening shall be consistent in appearance to
the general landscape of the site. Such hedges may be geometric in shape, but
shall be pruned and maintained so as to avoid unsightly appearance and to avoid
vehicular sight hazards.
      11.   Perimeter buffer yards adjoining a residential zone boundary shall
not be less than one hundred feet (100') deep if screened with a decorative
masonry wall, such yards shall be not less than one hundred feet (100') deep
with landscaped berms at least six feet (6') in height. (1985 Code § 19-35-10)
10-13C-11: PARKING:
Except as may be provided elsewhere in this title, there shall be provided at
the time of erection of any building, or at the time any main building is
enlarged or increased in capacity, minimum off street parking space with
adequate provisions for ingress and egress by standard sized automobiles. If
any land, structure or use is changed from one use to another which requires
more off street parking spaces, there shall be provided such additional off
street parking for the new use as is required by this article. All parking
structures and facilities shall be on the first floor of the building or
terraced, except for the front side of the building or structure may have a row
of nonterraced parking on the ground level of the building at the main entrance
of the building, with said ground level parking being hidden or screened from
view from any city street.
   A.   Parking Lot Characteristics: Each parcel of land developed for off
street parking in response to the requirements of this article shall provide
the following characteristics: (Ord. 847, 11-6-2013)
      1.   Surfacing: Surfacing shall be hard surfaced and maintained in good
condition and kept clear and in an unobstructed and usable condition at all
times during business hours. Responsibility for maintenance of the lot shall
rest with the property owner. The lot shall provide adequate access to a street
or alley.
      2.   Grading: Parking lots shall be graded for proper drainage with
surface water diverted in such a way as to keep the parking area free of
accumulated water or ice. All surface drainage shall be detained within
development site and approved by city engineer.
      3.   Lighting: Lots shall be properly illuminated, with luminaries
arranged so as to baffle and direct light away from any adjoining residential
buildings. Lighting details are specified in section
10-13C-18 of this article.
      4.   Size Of Spaces: Each parking space shall be a minimum of nine feet
(9') wide by eighteen feet (18') long. (1985 Code § 19-35-11)
      5.   Handicapped Parking: All structures which are regulated by the
provisions of the international building code shall have adaptations which
assist access by handicapped persons and shall, in addition, provide off street
parking for handicapped persons as required by applicable state or federal
regulations. (Ord. 847, 11-6-2013)
   B.   Specific Requirements For Each Land Use: Minimum required off street
parking shall be provided for each use as listed below. Requirements calculated
on square footage of office park (OP) space shall be based upon floor area
devoted to the principal use and shall not include area devoted to storage,
restrooms or maintenance areas. Parking for uses not specifically listed below
shall be provided in the same ratio as the use most nearly approximating the
characteristics of the unlisted use, as determined by the planning commission.
Parking shall be provided as follows, with spaces based upon one or a
combination of uses listed:
      1.   Number Of Stalls Required: Parking stalls for all uses shall be four
and one-half (4.5) per one thousand (1,000) square feet of building space.
      2.   Increase For Exceptional Needs: Increase of the minimum may be
required by the planning commission or city council if there is an exceptional
need for said increased parking.
      3.   Actual Usage; Increase: In cases where more parking is appropriate,
the planning commission may increase requirements based upon actual usage by
employees and customers.
      4.   Unclear Category: In cases where the category into which a use
should be placed is unclear, or a use does not conform to any of the above
categories, or the use is allowed under a conditional use permit, the planning
commission shall determine the appropriate category or establish a parking
ratio.
      5.   Shared Parking: In cases where uses occupying the same structure or
within two hundred fifty feet (250') of one another on the same lot or adjacent
lots under the same ownership are uses where parking demand times do not
normally or significantly overlap, shared parking may be permitted by the
planning commission. At the time of site plan review for each development
phase, a precise parking plan shall be submitted showing all parking spaces,
the overall circulation system, an analysis of the parking demand for the
specific land uses proposed, and other justification as necessary for
requesting reductions in parking space requirements.
      6.   On Street Parking Prohibited: No on street parking shall be
permitted in the office park (OP) zone. No parking shall be permitted in the
minimal front, side or rear setback areas except:
         a.   Where a side or rear setback area abuts a residential zone,
parking may be permitted to within seventy five feet (75') of the zone line, if
in the determination of the planning commission the parking will be necessary
only during the normal daytime weekday working hours.
         b.   Where parking within the front or side setback areas is
adequately separated from public rights of way with continuous landscaping at
least twenty feet (20') wide, less areas for curb inlets and drive entrances.
(1985 Code § 19-35-11)
      7.   Location: Required off-street parking shall be provided on the site
of the use served, or on an alternate site within the same zone. Where parking
is provided on other than the site concerned, a recorded document shall be
filed with the planning commission and city recorder and signed by the owners
of the alternate site, stipulating to the permanent reservation of use of the
site for said parking. The parking setback restrictions set forth above shall
also apply to contiguous or alternate parking sites. (1985 Code § 19-35-11;
amd. 2001 Code)
      8.   Separation Of Parking Facilities: Parking facilities need not be
located in one consolidated area of a particular site, but may be separated by
landscaping or building elements.
   C.   Commercial Vehicle Parking:
      1.   Prohibitions: Vehicles that display any form of advertising of a
commercial enterprise, including names, phone numbers, logos or associated art
work, are prohibited from parking in street rights of way or private parking
lots within public view (visible from a public roadway).
      2.   Areas Approved: Parking for commercial vehicles is limited to
properly screened loading areas and other approved off-street parking that is
properly screened from public view.
      3.   Included Commercial Vehicles: Commercial vehicles include, but are
not limited to, cars, trucks, vans, trailers, fork lifts and motorized cycles.
   D.   Landscaping Of Parking Areas:
      1.   Reduction Of Impact: Where possible, siting of parking areas lower
than adjacent roadways and continuing streetscape grading, berms, hedges and
other landscape treatment into parking areas is encouraged, with intent to
reduce their visual impact and to screen the parking from the adjacent roadway.
All parking areas adjacent to roadways shall require a landscaped berm of width
and height specified in section
10-13C-10 of this article.
      2.   Landscape Strip: A ten foot (10') wide landscape strip may be
required between every double loaded row of parking. Planting islands shall be
provided throughout the lot at the ends of parking rows. These strips and
islands are to be planted with shade trees, low shrubs and ground cover.
Landscaping shall be used to define circulation routes and separate traffic on-
site for safety as well as aesthetic purposes.
      3.   Protection: Protection to landscaping shall be provided.
      4.   Screening Of Parking Areas: A landscaped berm at least five feet
(5') high (maximum slope of 1:2.5), or massed plants of sufficient height,
shall be utilized to screen and buffer parking and loading areas from adjoining
access streets and lots.
   E.   Other Considerations:
      1.   Circulation: Circulation within the parking areas shall provide for
free flow of vehicular traffic. The on-site parking and traffic circulation
plan shall be a part of the traffic impact analysis required as a part of the
preliminary site plan review required by section
10-13C-29 of this article.
      2.   Bicycle Parking Areas: Bicycle parking areas with suitable racks
shall be provided in convenient locations.
      3.   Public Transportation; Car Pooling: The park covenants, conditions
and restrictions may include policies for a traffic and parking management plan
aimed at encouraging the use of public transportation and car pooling among the
park entity employees.
      4.   Structured Parking: Any structured parking above the finished ground
elevation shall have the same setback requirements as outlined for buildings,
and shall be architecturally integrated through use of the same or similar
materials, colors, rhythm, landscaping, etc. (1985 Code § 19-35-11)
10-13C-12: LOADING:
The following articles apply to the loading and/or unloading of materials in an
Office Park Zone:
   A.   On-Site: All loading and unloading operations shall be performed on the
site. Off-street berths shall be provided in addition to required off-street
parking and shall not be located within driveways.
   B.   Size Of Loading Berth: Each loading berth shall not be less than twelve
feet (12') wide, twenty five feet (25') long, and if enclosed and/or covered,
fourteen feet (14') high. Adequate turning and maneuvering space to be provided
within the lot lines.
   C.   Location: Such loading areas shall be located away from the public
street to which the use is oriented.
   D.   Screening: Loading areas should be screened from all public streets.
This shall be accomplished through careful site planning, and the use of screen
walls and landscaping.
   E.   Distance To Property Line Fronting Street: In no event shall a loading
dock be closer than seventy five feet (75') from a property line fronting upon
a street.
   F.   Berth Requirements: Loading berths may be required as follows:
      1.   Office park and service uses with over ten thousand (10,000) square
feet floor area to be determined by the city council upon recommendation of the
planning commission.
      2.   The hours of loading and unloading, including trash removal, for any
business that uses building entrances that face an adjacent residential zone
shall be restricted to the hours between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. (1985 Code § 19-35-12)
10-13C-13: DRIVEWAY AND CURB OPENINGS:
   A.   Required: Unobstructed and direct driveways of sufficient width to
safely accommodate projected twenty (20) year turning volumes as determined by
the traffic impact analysis required by subsection 10-13C-29C3 of this article
shall be provided. Loading driveways may coincide with driveways to parking
facilities.
   B.   Considerations In Establishing: In establishing permissible curb
openings and sidewalk driveway crossings for access to private property, they
shall not be authorized where they are unnecessary or where they would
reasonably interfere with the movement of vehicular traffic, with public
improvements, or with the rights of the public in the adjacent street or alley,
and in no case shall any curb opening be of greater length than necessary for
reasonable access to the property to be served thereby. In determining the
length of curb openings and spacing of driveways, the end transitions in each
case will be considered a part of the length of the curb opening.
   C.   Design And Location: Unless otherwise specified by this article, design
and location of access drives shall comply with "Guidelines For Driveway
Location And Design, A Recommended Practice Of The Institute Of Transportation
Engineers", 1987, or as revised.
   D.   Standards: The following standards shall apply in determining the size
of curb openings and location of driveways: (Ord. 859, 9-2-2014)
      1.   Access shall be by not more than one driveway opening for each two
hundred feet (200'), or fraction thereof, of frontage on any interior street
constructed within the OP zone.
      2.   Driveway openings shall be offset a minimum of three hundred fifty
feet (350') from the centerline of major arterials at intersections, but in no
case shall they be located within the operational area of the intersection
(which includes turning lanes with associated tapers) as defined in the
"guidelines" referred to in subsection C of this section.
      3.   In order to minimize the number of access points from adjacent
interior streets, driveway openings and driveways shall be shared at property
lines between parcels whenever possible.
      4.   Driveway design shall incorporate reservoir space or "throat area"
at entrances to provide sufficient queue storage for exiting vehicles and
adequate deceleration distance for entering vehicles, as well as separating
conflict points on site.
      5.   Where the construction of more than one curb opening is required, a
concrete safety curb between driveway openings, along and inside the property
line, shall be provided when the property located between two (2) driveways is
used for the purpose of movement, storage or parking vehicles.
      6.   No driveway opening will be approved which results in vehicles
encroaching on any portion of the street right of way for loading, standing or
unloading.
      7.   Driveway openings must serve only legal off street parking spaces or
loading zones.
      8.   Curb openings shall be entirely within the extension of the side
property lines extended perpendicular to the street centerline.
      9.   Driveway openings and driveways shall be paved and shall provide for
adequate storm drainage.
      10.   Curb returns for driveway approaches shall be of the radius type
and be provided with wheelchair ramps and shall meet all applicable state and
federal regulations pertaining to access for the handicapped.
      11.   Any unused or abandoned driveway openings or portion thereof shall
be restored to the original curb section at the expense of the abutting
property owner. Upon refusal or neglect of the owner or agent to restore the
curb and gutter to their original section, the city shall proceed to do such
work, and all expenditures so incurred shall be charged against the owner or
agent.
      12.   Improvements within the public right of way shall be designed and
constructed in conformance with the applicable specifications. All driveway
geometries shall be selected to provide for passage of the American Association
Of State And Highway Transportation Officials (AASHTO) design vehicle deemed to
be appropriate to the development. As a minimum, this shall be an AASHTO single
unit truck.
      13.   No object shall be so situated as to interfere with the required
sight distance at intersections, on or off site, including driveway openings,
and intersecting driveways, as set forth in the "AASHTO Policy On Geometric
Design Of Highways And Streets", latest edition, hereinafter referred to as the
AASHTO policy on geometric design. (1985 Code § 19-35-13)
      14.   Circulation roadways shall also conform to the requirements of the
international fire code with regard to providing emergency vehicle access.
(Ord. 859, 9-2-2014)
      15.   Street cuts on or along dedicated city streets for driveways or any
other purpose are strictly prohibited in the OP zone. (1985 Code § 19-35-13)
10-13C-14: LANDSCAPING:
The following guidelines for landscaping shall apply to all developments within
the office park (OP) zone. All landscaping shall be installed and maintained in
conformance with a landscape plan which has been approved by the planning
commission and city council. The following minimum standards have been
established to ensure quality and consistent development throughout the park:
   A.   Plan Required: At the time of preliminary project plan submittal to the
planning commission, an overall landscape plan shall also be submitted showing
typical landscaping (including type, size, number and location of plant
materials) for the following areas: park entrances, perimeter buffers, open
space easements and common areas, and streetscape landscaping. Detailed
landscape plans for individual lots shall be submitted at the time of project
plan approval for individual buildings. Landscape improvements for common open
space features shall be developed at each phase of the project. A minimum of
forty percent (40%) of the park and individual lots shall be maintained in
landscaped open space.
   B.   Internal Circulation Roads: Internal circulation roads shall be
landscaped with street trees and street-side planters. A minimum twenty foot
(20') width shall be landscaped adjoining the right of way of any such street
or road. The streetscape planting shall be consistent throughout the park to
provide a unifying landscape theme. Details for these areas shall be submitted
with the overall landscape plan at the time of plan approval.
   C.   Existing Landscaping: Existing significant tree stands, natural
vegetation and wildlife habitat shall be integrated into the site landscape
plan to the maximum extent possible. Preliminary plans shall identify all trees
five inch (5") caliper or larger. No existing trees or natural vegetation shall
be removed prior to approval of the development plans. Removal of any existing
trees or natural vegetation prior to approval of the development plan may
result in a requirement that the same be restored or replaced by trees or
vegetation of equal size and maturity as a condition precedent to issuance of a
building permit by the city.
   D.   Perimeter Access Street Frontages: Perimeter street trees and large
mature trees shall be planted along perimeter access street frontages.
      1.   These trees shall be three inch to five inch (3" - 5") caliper
trees, planted at least ten feet (10') from the sidewalk. The city must
preapprove the planting locations of the trees.
      2.   Possible species include: shademaster honey locust, sunburst honey
locust, little leaf linden or Norway maple planted thirty five feet (35') on
center. The city must preapprove each tree that will be planted.
   E.   Number Of Trees Per Acre: In order to maintain the park-like atmosphere
intended for an office park, thirty (30) trees to the acre shall be used as a
minimum standard in developing the planting plans.
      1.   Tree Size:
         a.   One-third (1/3) of the deciduous trees shall be three inch (3")
caliper or greater;
         b.   One-third (1/3) of the deciduous trees shall be two and one-
tenths inch (2.1") to two and one-half inch (2.5") caliper; and
         c.   One-third (1/3) of the deciduous trees shall be one and one- half
inch (1.5") to two inch (2") caliper.
      2.   No deciduous trees less than one and one-half inch (1.5") caliper
will be accepted, nor will evergreen trees less than six feet (6') in height be
accepted. No bare root stock will be accepted.
      3.   The following mix of shrub sizes shall be used to ensure a quality
landscape: seventy percent (70%) of the shrubs planted shall be at least five
(5) gallon size stock. Thirty percent (30%) of the shrubs planted shall be at
least one gallon size stock.
   F.   Enhancement Of Visual Appearance: Landscaping shall enhance the overall
visual appearance of the development.
   G.   Contents Of Plan: A fully comprehensive landscaping plan shall include,
but not be limited to:
      1.   List of plants; and
      2.   Size; and
      3.   Location; and
      4.   Irrigation plan; and
      5.   Hardscape.
   H.   Certification: The city requires that landscaping plans be certified by
a registered landscape architect.
   I.   Inorganic Ground Cover: When inorganic ground cover is used, it shall
be in combination with live plants.
   J.   Irrigation; Removal Of Dead Materials: All plants shall be serviced by
an acceptable automatic irrigation or sprinkler system and maintained in a
healthful living condition. Dead plant materials shall be replaced as necessary
in the first year of planting in accordance with the approved landscaping plan.
   K.   Required Landscaping; Bond: All required landscaping shall be properly
installed, irrigated and maintained or adequate bonding shall be posted prior
to use inauguration or occupancy.
   L.   Maintenance: Maintenance of approved landscaping shall consist of
regular watering, pruning, fertilizing, clearing of debris and weeds, the
removal and replacement of dead plants in accordance with the approved
landscape plan. Repair and replacement of irrigation systems and integrated
architectural features shall be completed as needed, so that landscaping is
properly maintained.
   M.   Front Setback Area: Front setback area landscaping shall consist of an
effective combination of street trees, trees, ground cover and shrubbery at
least twenty feet (20') wide continuously along all public rights of way, less
area for drive entrances.
   N.   Other Setback Areas: Other setback areas between the side and rear
property lines and a point ten feet (10') in back thereof shall be landscaped,
except for any access driveway in said area.
   O.   Intersections; Height Limitation: Landscaping at intersections along
all streets and boundaries shall be limited to a height of not more than three
feet (3') within the area required for minimum sight distance as specified in
the AASHTO policy on geometric design for the following intersections:
      1.   A vehicular traffic way or driveway and a street;
      2.   A vehicular traffic way or driveway and a sidewalk;
      3.   Two (2) or more vehicular trafficways, driveways or streets.
   P.   Unpaved Nonparking Areas: All unpaved nonparking areas, not utilized
for parking and storage, shall be landscaped utilizing ground cover shrub and
tree materials, and/or dry landscaped materials.
   Q.   Parking Areas; Separation: Landscaping in parking areas shall be
separated from the parking area by wall or curb at least six inches (6") higher
than the parking area.
   R.   Total Landscaping Requirement: In all cases of office park (OP)
development, the total landscaping shall occupy no less than forty percent
(40%) of the total land area under development.
   S.   Consideration Of Existing Trees, Vegetation: Existing trees and
vegetation on the site shall be included in the landscape plan and may by
considered toward the forty percent (40%) total landscape requirement.
   T.   Perimeter Landscape Strip: A perimeter landscape strip at least twenty
feet (20') wide shall be placed around all buildings.
   U.   Xeriscape Landscaping: A limited amount of xeriscape landscaping is
encouraged to provide an orderly visual transition to the natural habitat.
Plans for such shall be presented to the planning commission for approval along
with the master landscape plan. (1985 Code § 19-35-14)
10-13C-15: HARDSCAPE:
   A.   Scope: Hardscape should be used in coordination with architecture and
landscaping to provide a link between the street edge and individual
developments. Attention to hardscape details can create visual unity by
relating different developments to a unifying theme. In addition, proper
hardscaping can improve pedestrian safety and movement, and the visual
enjoyment of public areas.
   B.   Included Items; Plan: Hardscape can include such items as benches,
sculptures, water fountains, enriched paving treatments, cobblestone walkways,
etc. A detailed plan of hardscape design shall accompany landscape plans and
shall be subject to review by the planning commission to determine continuity
with overall development plan and harmony with the development of surrounding
properties. (1985 Code § 19-35-15)
10-13C-16: SUBSTRUCTURES; STORAGE, REFUSE COLLECTION:
   A.   Screening And Location Requirements: The following articles shall
relate to the screening and location of storage and refuse collection areas:
      1.   All outdoor storage, including vehicle storage, shall be visually
screened from access streets, freeways and adjacent property. Said screening
shall form a complete opaque screen six feet (6') in vertical height.
      2.   No storage shall be permitted between a street and the building
line. Furthermore, no outdoor storage shall be located within one hundred feet
(100') of any residential use.
      3.   All outdoor refuse collection areas shall be visually screened from
access streets and adjacent property by a complete opaque screen. Property
owners and/or managers in an Office Park Zone shall be responsible for the
abatement, cleanup and removal of all garbage or refuse thrown, placed or blown
on surrounding property or streets or rights of way. Every effort shall be made
by said owner and/or manager to avoid the spread of such refuse or garbage to
the surrounding area. Violations of this subsection will be prosecuted pursuant
to the nuisance provisions provided at title 4, chapter 5 of this code.
      4.   No refuse collection areas shall be permitted between a frontage
street and the building line. No refuse collection area shall be located within
one hundred feet (100') of any residential use.
      5.   Refuse removal, trash collection 1  and lot sweeping shall occur
between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
      6.   Freestanding flagpoles may not exceed forty feet (40') and the flag
shall be a standard size outdoor flag.
   B.   Storage:
      1.   All substructures erected for the purpose of screening storage areas
shall be accomplished with materials and architecture which are compatible with
that of the primary building structure.
      2.   There shall be no visible storage of motor vehicles, trailers,
airplanes, boats or their composite parts; loose rubbish, garbage, junk or
their receptacles; tents or building materials.
      3.   Building materials for use in the same premises may be stored on the
parcel during the time that a valid building permit is in effect for
construction.
   C.   Refuse:
      1.   Every parcel with a building or structure shall have a trash
receptacle on the premises. The trash receptacle shall be of sufficient size to
accommodate the trash generated.
      2.   The refuse collection area shall be located upon the lot so as to
provide clear and convenient access to refuse collection vehicles.
      3.   The receptacle shall be screened from public view on at least three
(3) sides by a solid wall six feet (6') in height and on the fourth side by a
solid gate not less than five feet (5') in height. The gate shall be maintained
in working order and shall remain closed except when in use. The wall and gate
shall be architecturally compatible with the surrounding buildings and
structures.
      4.   Freestanding refuse containers in retail or public areas which are
intended for public use shall be constructed of cast concrete, ceramic or
wrought iron, with an inset for a trash can and shall be constructed so as not
to allow dispersal of the container or trash by the strong winds common to the
area. The containers shall be natural in color and/or of a design commensurate
with surrounding architectural themes. (1985 Code § 19-35-16)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 4, chapter 4 of this code for garbage and refuse
  regulations.
10-13C-17: SIGNS; ILLUMINATION:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to:
      1.   Appearance: Maintain and enhance the city's appearance by regulating
the design, character, location, size, color, illumination and maintenance of
signs in an Office Park (OP) Zone; and
      2.   Minimize Adverse Effects: Minimize the possible adverse effects of
signs on nearby public and private property.
   B.   General Regulations: The following articles shall serve as guidelines
for any sign erected in the Office Park Zone:
      1.   Standards: All signage shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with the standards contained herein and with the standards included
in the park's private covenants, conditions and restrictions. The owners of the
park shall submit a signage plan to the planning commission and city council
for approval prior to installation of any signs.
      2.   Safe, Secure Manner: All signs shall be constructed, mounted or
attached in a safe and secure manner.
      3.   Permitted Types: Only the following types of signs shall be
permitted:
         a.   Identification Signs: Only one sign displaying the name and
address may be installed at each entrance to the park. Such signs shall not
exceed sixty four (64) square feet in sign copy area, although the monument may
be larger. Such signs shall be set back from street right-of-way lines at least
twenty five feet (25'). This sign is to be a monument sign on footings and
foundation, and shall be an integrated architectural feature of the park. Pole
mounted signs shall not be permitted. Back lighting or spot lighting of the
sign face is permissible.
         b.   Monument Signs: Only one freestanding monument identification
sign shall be permitted per lot frontage on interior streets. Such signs shall
not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in area. Their maximum height above
street grade shall not exceed five feet (5'). Such signs shall be set back from
street right-of-way lines at least twenty five feet (25').
         c.   Building Wall Signs: Only one building identification sign shall
be permitted for each building and shall be installed below the roof line. Such
signs shall not exceed forty eight (48) square feet in total area as measured
by a rectangle around the outside of the lettering and/or the pictorial symbol
and calculating the area enclosed by such a line. The sign shall not project
more than twelve inches (12") from the face of the building. Painted wall signs
shall not be permitted. Only back- lit electronic signs shall be permitted.
         d.   Real Estate Signs: Real estate signs shall be in compliance with
chapter 16 of this title.
         e.   Construction Project Signs: Construction project signs shall be
in compliance with the directives of the building inspector.
         f.   Directional Signs: Directional signs may be erected for the
purpose of facilitating or controlling the efficient or safe movement of
pedestrians or vehicles on or into private property, and shall be located on
the properties to which they pertain. No such sign shall exceed six (6) square
feet in area and three feet (3') in height.
      4.   Standards Of Wording, Pictures: All signs shall include wording and/
or pictures that conform to high community standards. Lettering shall be
sufficiently large to be read at posted maximum speeds so as not to cause a
traffic hazard.
      5.   Permit Required: Signs shall not be allowed on any property in the
Office Park (OP) Zone without a current sign permit.
      6.   Approval Required: Signs in an Office Park Zone are prohibited
except as outlined in this article and which have been specifically approved by
the planning commission.
      7.   Flag Flying: No flag flying from a flag pole shall be used as an
identifying sign or business advertisement.
      8.   Window Sign; Size: Window signs shall not be placed in or upon any
window of any structure in the Office Park Zone that obscures more than five
percent (5%) of the total transparent area of any window.
      9.   Lighting:
         a.   Lighting of a wall-mounted business identification sign is
allowed only from the rear of the sign.
         b.   The brightness shall not exceed a reasonable level, to be
determined by the planning commission.
      10.   Relationship To Buildings: Signs shall be compatible with the
predominant visual elements of the building, including, but not limited to,
construction materials, color or other design features. Signs in the Office
Park Zone, offices and other similar facilities shall be part of a sign program
and shall provide a compatible visual design common in theme to all applicable
buildings and uses.
      11.   Relationship To Other Signs: Where there is more than one sign, all
signs shall be complementary to each other in the following ways:
         a.   Type of construction materials; and
         b.   Letter size, color and style of copy; and
         c.   Method used for supporting sign (wall or ground base); and
         d.   Shape of signs and related components; and
         e.   Method of illumination.
      12.   Landscaping: Each monument sign shall be located within a planted
landscaped area which is of a shape and design that will provide a compatible
setting and ground definition to the sign, incorporating the following ratio of
landscape area to total sign area: four (4) square feet of landscaped area for
each square foot of sign area (1 side only).
      13.   Relationship To Streets: Signs shall be designed to provide an
unobstructed clear view of the public right of way to any pedestrian, bicyclist
or motor vehicle driver. Signs shall not interfere with the intersection sight
distance requirements of city ordinances.
      14.   Tower, Monopole Or Antenna: Any permitted tower, monopole or
antenna shall conform with chapter 17 of this title. (1985 Code § 19-35-17)
10-13C-18: LIGHTING:
The following articles shall relate to guidelines for exterior lighting of all
office park development. These articles relate to parking lighting, sign
lighting, architectural lighting, safety lighting and landscape lighting.
   A.   Stationary: Lighting shall be stationary. No lighting shall blink,
flash or be of unusually high intensity or brightness.
   B.   Direction: Lighting shall be directed away from all adjacent properties
and public streets and rights of way.
   C.   Shielding: Lighting shall be shielded or recessed so that direct glare
and reflections are contained within the boundaries of the parcel.
   D.   Height: Parking light standards shall not exceed thirty feet (30') in
height or the height of the primary building, whichever is less.
   E.   Scope; Interference: Street lighting and parking lot lighting
contribute to the safety and security of each development, improving night
visibility. Unique lighting fixtures may provide easy identification of
entrance and exit ways for motorists. Such lighting shall be encouraged,
however, lighting potentially visible from adjacent properties shall be subdued
and shall not interfere with vehicular traffic.
   F.   Mercury Vapor, Exposed Fluorescent: Use of mercury vapor or exposed
fluorescent lights is discouraged. Energy efficient warm, white lighting, such
as high pressure sodium or quartz halogen, is encouraged.
   G.   Automatic Timers: Automatic timers on lighting shall be encouraged.
Well designed systems can maximize personal safety during nighttime use while
saving energy.
   H.   Enhancement Of Landscaping, Architecture: Lighting may be used to
enhance landscaping and reinforce architecture, with dramatic up-lighting or
wall-shadow effects with plant materials encouraged.
   I.   Parking Lot Light Fixtures: Parking lot light fixtures shall be
consistent in styling with the design theme proposed for that development.
   J.   Service Area Lighting: Service area lighting shall be contained within
service yard boundaries, with light sources concealed.
   K.   Glare Causing Decrease In Safety: Lighting shall not cast any glare
onto adjacent lots and streets in such a manner as to decrease the safety of
pedestrian and vehicular movement.
   L.   Building Illumination, Architectural Lighting: Building illumination
and architectural lighting shall be creative and must reinforce the design
theme. Indirect wall lighting or "wall washing", overhead down-lighting, or
interior illumination which spills outside, is encouraged.
   M.   Effects Of Architectural Lighting: Architectural lighting is encouraged
to articulate the particular building design. Rim lighting of eaves, bending,
up-lighting, and other effects shall be used in harmony with design theme.
   N.   Visibility Of Architectural Lighting: Architectural lighting shall be
integrated with building elements and concealed flush with grade wherever
possible so that it is not visually apparent during the daytime. (1985 Code §
19-35-18)
10-13C-19: PROJECTIONS:
The following list represents the only projections/construction that shall be
permitted within the required setback areas:
   A.   Front Setback: Roof overhangs.
   B.   Rear, Side Setbacks: Roof overhangs and any projection/substructure
which is determined by the planning commission to substantially contribute to
public safety. (1985 Code § 19-35-19)
10-13C-20: GRADING:
The following guidelines shall apply to grading of office park zoned
properties:
   A.   Conform To Natural Topography: Grading shall conform to natural
topography as much as possible and result in a harmonious transition of the
manmade grades with the natural terrain.
   B.   Manmade Land Forms: Manmade land forms shall be graded to avoid
unnatural sharp or straight edges and planes. The top and toe of graded slopes
shall be rounded to avoid a harsh machine- made appearance.
   C.   Parking Lots:
      1.   Parking lots shall be graded for proper drainage with surface water
diverted in such a way as to keep the parking area free of accumulated water,
snow or ice. All surface drainage shall be contained within development site
and approved by city engineer.
      2.   Parking lots shall have minimum and maximum percent grades as set
forth by the city engineer.
   D.   Berms: Berms are to be graded in gentle, undulating naturalistic forms.
No straight, steep or erodible slopes are permitted. Provisions are to be made
for drainage around or through berms as necessary. Generally, a berm height of
thirty six inches (36") from top of adjacent curb is the maximum desired. (1985
Code § 19-35-20)
10-13C-21: UTILITIES; EQUIPMENT:
The following articles shall relate to the installment, location and screening
of utilities and other exterior equipment:
   A.   Underground Installation: All utilities, including drainage systems,
sewer, gas and water lines, electrical, telephone and communications wires, and
related equipment, irrigation ditches and/or pipes, shall, where possible, be
installed and maintained underground.
   B.   Visibility Of Mechanical Equipment: No mechanical equipment (including,
but not limited to, components of plumbing, processing, heating, cooling and
ventilating systems) shall be visible on site or from adjacent property.
   C.   Exterior Components Mounted On Building: No exterior components of such
mechanical equipment (e.g., piping, stacks and ductwork, fans, compressors,
antenna and satellite dishes) shall be mounted on any building wall unless they
are an integrated architectural design feature. Any such components shall only
be permitted with the written approval of the planning commission.
   D.   Roof Mounted Mechanical Equipment: Roof mounted mechanical equipment,
antenna and satellite dishes shall be hidden from view by building parapets of
equal height.
   E.   Screening: If building parapets do not provide adequate screening of
mechanical equipment from the upper floors, screening shall be installed as an
integral part of the overall architectural design, and painted such a color as
to allow its blending with its visual background.
   F.   Location Within Setback Area: Equipment and mechanical devices shall
not be located in any required setback area or side yard, except for electrical
or telephone equipment installed by the utility companies. Screening shall be
provided so that equipment located in the area is screened from view from all
adjacent streets and properties. Such screening shall be accomplished with
materials and designs that are compatible with the architectural character of
the building.
   G.   Utility Pads, Boxes: Electric transformers, utility pads, cable
television and telephone boxes shall be located out of public rights of way and
underground or screened with walls, fences or vegetation or otherwise enclosed
in a manner harmonious with the overall architectural theme. (1985 Code § 19-
35-21)
   H.   Restrooms: Each licensed business will provide public restrooms of
sufficient size to service potential customers including men and women. The
restrooms shall be designed in accordance with the international building code
to accommodate handicapped persons. (Ord. 847, 11-6-2013)
10-13C-22: ROOF DESIGN:
The following articles shall apply to roof structure and design in any office
park development:
   A.   Prohibited Materials: The following roofing materials are prohibited,
either because of their appearance, or because they are not likely to perform
satisfactorily in the climate of the city:
      1.   Untreated aluminum or metal (except that copper may be used);
      2.   Reflective materials;
      3.   Brightly colored roofing materials such as bright red, blue, yellow,
neon colors, or similar colors that are highly visible;
      4.   Windows, roofs and lights shall not conflict with overhead aircraft
operations.
   B.   Skylights, Solar Panels: Skylights and solar panels shall be designed
to fit flush with the roof's surface, or up to a maximum of two feet (2') above
the roof's surface. No reflective materials may be used unless thoroughly
shielded to prevent reflection into nearby properties. (1985 Code § 19-35-22)
10-13C-23: NUISANCES:
   A.   Prohibited: Property in an office park (OP) zone shall not be used in
such a manner as to create a nuisance to any adjacent sites, such as, but not
limited to, vibration, sound, electromechanical disturbance and radiation,
electromagnetic disturbance, air or water pollution, dust, emission of odorous,
toxic or noxious matter, or placement, dumping or blowing refuse, paper or
other garbage.
   B.   Noise Attenuation: All office park zones shall be subject to the
following noise limitations:
      1.   Noise from external sources may not exceed sixty five (65) dBA
during daylight operations.
      2.   Noise from external sources may not exceed forty five (45) dBA
during nighttime operations.
      3.   Office park developments shall incorporate site planning techniques
in order to reduce resident exposure to noise, and shall, if deemed needed by
the planning commission, provide adequate sound attenuation walls in
conformance with the standards set forth in these articles.
      4.   Outside speakers, pagers and sound systems of any kind or nature
whatsoever are strictly prohibited in the Office Park Zone.
      5.   All noise levels shall be measured at the source of the noise. (1985
Code § 19-35-23)
10-13C-24: CHANGE OF USE:
Any person who desires to occupy vacant floor space, or to change the use of
floor space, is required to first obtain a certificate of occupancy from the
city. Any person constructing or altering a building in the Office Park (OP)
Zone shall first obtain a building permit from the city for such construction
or alteration, and then shall obtain a certificate of occupancy from the city
before the building being constructed or altered is occupied. (1985 Code § 19-
35-24)
10-13C-25: RIPARIAN ENVIRONMENT:
All buildings and structures located in any OP zone established south of
Riverdale Road shall be positioned, separated and constructed in such a manner
as to allow for view of and protection of the riparian environment and the
Weber River channel. Setbacks shall be required that protect and preserve the
riparian environment of the Weber River.
   A.   Protection: All new developments shall be located and designed to
promote flood protection, fish and wildlife protection, recreation, and
protection of the riparian environment of the Weber River. (1985 Code § 19-35-
25.1)
   B.   Area Defined: The riparian environment of the Weber River shall begin
at and include the area of the high water mark of the Weber River bank and
extend inland fifty feet (50') from said mark. The riparian environment shall
be used for wetlands preservation, wildlife habitat, natural habitat and
integration into an urban trail system. The riparian setbacks and land and
water area are land strips of rooted vegetation (trees, grasses and shrubs)
used for protection of banks and/or wildlife habitat and shall be maintained
where in existence or where created where none existed. (1985 Code § 19-35-
25.1; amd. 2001 Code)
10-13C-26: WEBER RIVER PARKWAY:
The Weber River parkway is the 100-year flood plain boundary as modified and
identified by the city's land use master plan and such is established as the
Weber River parkway, and that it be used for potential wetlands preservation,
flood plain control, natural habitat preservation, and parkway preservation for
the urban trails system. The Weber River parkway could serve as the spine for
the urban trail system. Riparian setback lands shall be protected as follows:
   A.   Screening Requirements: Parking areas located between the structure and
the Weber River shall be screened from view from the Weber River parkway and
the Weber River.
   B.   Minimum Setbacks: The Weber River parkway setback shall be the modified
FEMA/FIRM flood plain map as adopted in the general plan and as established by
the city engineer as evidenced by an official map to be maintained at the
building and zoning office for public inspection and scale measurement during
normal business hours. Should the aforementioned flood plain line be less than
one hundred feet (100') from the high water mark of the river bank, then said
setback shall be no less than one hundred feet (100') from the said high water
mark. The setback shall be the greater of the flood plain line or the one
hundred foot (100') line. (1985 Code § 19-35-25.2)
10-13C-27: ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN:
Prior to the issuance of building permits for any permitted or conditional use
within the Office Park Zone, the planning commission shall review the proposed
development plans to ensure compliance with the architectural design guidelines
provided in this and other chapters of this title.
   A.   Overall Architectural Outline:
      1.   The proposed development shall be of a quality and character which
is consistent with the community design goals and policies, including, but not
limited to: scale, height, bulk, materials, cohesiveness, colors, roof pitch,
roof eaves, and the preservation of privacy.
      2.   The design shall improve community appearance by avoiding excessive
variety and monotonous repetition.
      3.   Proposed signage and landscaping shall be an integral architectural
feature which does not overwhelm or dominate the structure or property.
      4.   Lighting shall be stationary and deflected away from all adjacent
properties and public streets and rights of way.
      5.   Mechanical equipment, storage, trash areas and utilities shall be
architecturally screened from public view.
      6.   With the intent of protecting sensitive land uses, any proposed
design shall promote a harmonious and compatible transition in terms of scale
and character between areas of different land uses.
      7.   All building elevations shall be architecturally treated.
      8.   Parking structures shall be architecturally compatible with the
primary structure.
      9.   Both sides of all perimeter walls or fences shall be architecturally
treated. (1985 Code § 19-35-26)
      10.   The restrooms shall be designed in accordance with the
international building code to accommodate handicapped persons. (Ord. 847, 11-
6-2013)
   B.   Architectural Guidelines: The following architectural design guidelines
apply to all permitted and conditional uses in the office park zone:
      1.   Colors shall be limited to soft shades and/or earth tones. No bright
or neon colors shall be allowed on exterior of buildings or structures.
      2.   Glass exteriors of buildings shall be allowed as long as they are in
keeping with the overall professional appearance of the office park. (1985 Code
§ 19-35-26)
10-13C-28: SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS:
All buildings and structures proposed for development under this article shall
be subject to a site plan review process as adopted by the city. There shall be
submitted to the planning commission a master plan for the development of the
entire zone and for the development of each lot for the purposes of meeting the
requirements set forth in this article. Said plan shall be accompanied by
information concerning the number of persons to be employed, the effects on
surrounding property, and other physical conditions, including the effect of
the project on adjacent streets and shall include the following:
   A.   A site plan showing lot lines and defining the area to be occupied by
buildings, the areas and configurations to be used for parking, the location of
roads, driveways, signs and walks, the spaces for loading, and the character
and extent of landscaping, planting and other treatment for adjustment to
surrounding property.
   B.   Enough information on land areas adjacent to the proposed development
to indicate adjacent land uses, zoning classifications, circulation systems,
public facilities and unique natural features of the landscape.
   C.   Elevations and/or architectural renderings of building facades facing
public rights of way and zone boundaries where the premises abut areas zoned
for residential uses, said elevations or renderings being sufficiently complete
to show building heights and rooflines, the location and height of any walls,
signs and light standards, openings in the facade, and the general
architectural character of the building.
   D.   Any additional information as required by the planning commission to
evaluate the character and impact of the proposed development. (1985 Code § 19-
35-27)
   E.   Additional requirements associated with a conditional use permit
application, see chapter 19 of this title. (1985 Code § 19-35-27; amd. 2001
Code)
10-13C-29: SITE PLAN; DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL PROCEDURES:
   A.   Application Presentations: Site plan or zoning applications shall be
presented in the following order with no two (2) presentations receiving
approval on or at the same planning commission meeting:
      1.   Conceptual Approval:
         a.   A black and white master site plan is required. Said black and
white master site plan shall include a layout of the entire development,
building footprints, and black and white sketch drawings of landscape and
hardscape.
         b.   The conceptual master site plan shall be submitted to the
planning commission outlining the concept of the overall development. The
planning commission shall forward the conceptual master site plan with
recommendations to the city council for its consideration.
      2.   Preliminary Approval: This process is required for each phase of the
development. A colorized preliminary phase overlay site plan shall be required
and shall include the following:
         a.   A complete and accurate legal description of the real property
which is the subject of the development. If the developer is not the property
owner, he shall also provide written proof that he has sufficient legal claim
to the property, each parcel therein, to proceed with development plans. Such
proof may be in the form of options, deeds or contracts on which the developer
shall be entitled to black out confidential information such as the amount of
consideration paid or periodic payment amounts.
         b.   Phased overlay property must be held in single ownership or
control during development to provide for full supervision and control of said
development, and to ensure conformance with these provisions and all conditions
imposed upon the preliminary and final development plans. Proof of individual
ownership, partnerships, corporations and development agreements approved by
the city, shall satisfy these requirements.
         c.   A preliminary subdivision plat, if the site is being divided, or
a record of survey plat for condominium ownership. The size of each lot shall
be noted on the subdivision plat.
         d.   A preliminary utility plan showing the manner in which adequate
sewage disposal and water are to be provided to the site, including the point
from which said services are to be extended.
         e.   A preliminary grading and drainage plan, including drainage
detention basins.
         f.   A preliminary landscaping plan showing typical landscaping
(including type, size, number and location of plant materials) for the
following areas: entrances to the development, perimeter buffers, open space
easement and common areas, and streetscape landscaping.
         g.   Parks, common open spaces and other public or private recreation
facilities and improvements proposed within the development.
         h.   Proposed circulation pattern including private driveways, public
and private streets and pedestrian paths.
         i.   A draft declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions.
         j.   Topographic maps of the entire site, including contour intervals
no greater than two feet (2').
         k.   A traffic circulation study for both internal and external
traffic flow associated with the phase overlay plan.
         l.   A market study establishing demand in terms of floor space
requirements and number of employees.
         m.   Any other special study deemed necessary by the planning
commission to enable them to assess the merits of the request and its impacts
on the community.
         n.   If applicable, a phasing plan including a construction timetable
for all phases.
         o.   Failure to submit phase overlay plans within two (2) years of the
approval of the master conceptual plan shall be sufficient cause for the
planning commission to initiate a review of the phase overlay plan, at the
discretion of the planning commission, to consider action to reverse or modify
prior approvals.
         p.   The planning commission may hold a public hearing on the proposed
preliminary plan.
         q.   All preliminary approved plans shall run with the land. A new
owner of the lot may apply to the planning commission for plan revision.
However, revision application must establish to the satisfaction of the
planning commission that the revision furthers the goals and objectives of the
OP zone ordinance. (1985 Code § 19-35-28)
         r.   Proposed parking lot design showing regular and handicapped
parking stall dimensions, stall to building square foot ratio and parking lot
screening.
         s.   Location, size, height and type of all signage. (1985 Code § 19-
35-28; amd. 2001 Code)
      3.   Final Approval: Final phase overlay site plan approval shall be
required, and shall reflect all items approved at the preliminary plan stage
and shall be approved by the planning commission and city council before any
plats are recorded or building permits are issued.
   B.   Hearing Procedure: Any person may appear in person, by agent or
attorney, at any meeting of the planning commission. The order of procedure in
the hearing of each application shall be as follows:
      1.   Presentation by the planning staff of the application, including
recommendation. Presentation shall include the reading of pertinent written
comments or reports concerning the application.
      2.   Presentation by applicant or applicant's agent. Presentation time
may be limited by the planning commission prior to or during applicant's
presentation.
      3.   Witnesses in favor of application.
      4.   Witnesses against application.
      5.   Rebuttals by invitation of the chair. (1985 Code § 19-35-28)
   C.   Decisions; Findings: Decisions of the planning commission shall be
final at the end of the meeting at which the matter was decided. The site plan
then must be considered by the city council. Findings necessary to grant
approval for the site plan are:
      1.   The proposed use and development of land conforms to the provisions
of this article and recommendations of the city planner, community development
director and city engineer. (Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
      2.   The development is otherwise not detrimental to the public health,
safety, general welfare, or to adjacent property, or to the orderly development
of the city.
      3.   Approval of a traffic impact analysis (TA) for the proposed
development, to be completed by a competent transportation engineer at the
developer's expense. Said TA shall, at a minimum, address the suitability of
the proposed parking, street access, driveway, and on site traffic circulation
systems and the impact on the adjacent street system.
      4.   Demonstration that adverse impacts on neighboring residential
properties have been reasonably mitigated.
      5.   Demonstration that adverse impacts on the environment have been
reasonably mitigated. (1985 Code § 19-35-28)
10-13C-30: CONDITIONAL USE PROCESS:
The following shall be the conditional use approval process to be used in
determining whether or not a conditional use may be granted in the office park
(OP) zone:
   A.   Conditional Use Permit Required; Revocation: A conditional use permit
shall be required for all conditional uses provided for in section
10-13C-4 of this article. A conditional use permit may be revoked by the city
council after review and recommendation by the planning commission, upon
failure to comply with the conditions imposed with the original approval of the
permit. (1985 Code § 19-35-29)
   B.   Review Procedure:
      1.   Application for a conditional use permit shall be made to the city
planner for staff review and subsequent recommendation to the planning
commission.
      2.   Detailed location, site and building plans shall accompany the
completed application forms provided by the city. Following a review by city
staff, the city planner may make recommendation to the applicant as may be
appropriate.
      3.   The application, together with all pertinent information, may be
considered by the planning commission within a reasonable period of time
following the submission of the application to the city planner. (1985 Code §
19-35-29; amd. 2001 Code)
      4.   The planning commission may call a specific hearing on any
application after adequate notice if it is deemed in the public interest. A
record of the hearing, together with a recommendation for denial or approval of
the conditional use permit with conditions of approval or reasons for denial,
shall be forwarded to the city council prior to the consideration of the
application by the city council.
      5.   The planning commission may deny or recommend approval of a
conditional use to be located within the OP zone. In recommending approval of a
conditional use, the planning commission shall impose such requirements and
conditions necessary for the protection of adjacent properties and the public
welfare.
      6.   The planning commission shall recommend approval of a conditional
use permit when evidence is presented to establish that:
         a.   The proposed use of the particular location is necessary or
desirable to provide a service or facility which will contribute to the general
well-being of the community; and
         b.   Such use will not, under the circumstances of the particular case
and the conditions imposed, be detrimental to the health, safety and general
welfare of persons, nor injurious to property or improvements in the office
park, but will be compatible with and complementary to the existing surrounding
uses, buildings and structures when considering traffic generation, parking,
building design and location, landscaping and signs; and
         c.   The proposed use conforms to the goals, policies and conditions
specified in this article for such use; and
         d.   The proposed use conforms to the goals, policies and governing
principles and land use of the general plan for the city; and
         e.   The proposed use will not lead to the deterioration of the
environment, or ecology of the general area, nor will it produce conditions or
emit pollutants of such a type or of such a quantity so as to detrimentally
effect, to any appreciable degree, public or private property, including the
operation of existing uses thereon, in the immediate vicinity of the community
or area as a whole.
      7.   A denial of the application by the planning commission may be
appealed to the city council by filing such written appeal within ten (10) days
after the date of the notice of decision sent to the applicant. The city
council may uphold or reverse the decision of the planning commission and
impose any additional conditions that it may deem necessary in granting an
appeal. The decision of the city council shall be final.
      8.   Upon receipt of the record of the planning commission's
recommendation, the city council may reject, accept or modify the planning
commission's recommendation. The decision of the city council shall be final.
      9.   Upon receipt of final approval from the city council for a
conditional use permit, the developer shall take such permit to the building
inspector. The building inspector shall ensure that development is undertaken
and completed in compliance with said permit and conditions pertaining thereto.
      10.   Unless there is substantial action taken under a conditional use
permit within a period of one year of its issuance, as determined by the
planning commission, the conditional use permit shall expire. The planning
commission may grant a maximum extension of six (6) months under exceptional
circumstances. (1985 Code § 19-35-29)
10-13C-31: SECURITY; SITE IMPROVEMENTS:
The following articles shall apply to all office park developments within the
city:
   A.   Site Improvements:
      1.   Guarantee: To guarantee the construction, repair and/or replacement
of required public improvements in each phase, the permittee shall post a
guarantee either in the form of an escrow cash deposit or irrevocable letter of
credit. The amount of the guarantee shall be the greater of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) or one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the reasonable
construction or installation costs of each of the following that is applicable
to the project:
         a.   Curb, gutter and sidewalk;
         b.   Storm drainage system;
         c.   Asphalt paving;
         d.   Fire hydrants;
         e.   Fencing;
         f.   Landscaping and sprinkling systems;
         g.   Water and sewer lines;
         h.   Driveway approaches;
         i.   Any other required improvements.
      2.   Calculation: In calculating the amount of the guarantee, the city
engineer may accept the amount specified in a construction bid as the
reasonable cost of the improvements.
      3.   Damage: This site improvement guarantee shall also guarantee the
repair or replacement of any public improvements damaged by the contractor or
owner or their agents during construction. The city shall notify the owner and/
or contractor of any such damage and shall require repair or replacement of the
damaged public improvements within a reasonable time. Upon the failure of the
owner or contractor to make the specified repairs, the city may take whatever
legal action it deems appropriate, including foreclosure on the guarantee, to
secure the repairs.
      4.   Guarantee Release: A guarantee shall not be released until all
improvements are completed and accepted by the city and a final certificate of
occupancy is issued.
   B.   Project Completion:
      1.   Security Required: In order to protect the city from the financial
burdens resulting from damage to or increased maintenance cost for city
facilities that may occur as a result of incomplete or inadequate site
improvements on private construction projects, the city requires that
developers either complete all site improvements prior to occupancy or
inauguration of use, or, if that is not possible, that adequate financial
security for that completion, together with a right of entry to the property to
complete that work, be granted to the city.
      2.   Construction According To Approved Plans: All construction shall be
completed according to the approved plans on which the building permit was
issued. The approved plans shall also include the site improvements shown on
the site plan. Deviations from the approved plans must be approved in advance
by the planning commission. (1985 Code § 19-35-30)
      3.   Security For Completion: No certificate of occupancy will be issued
unless the building and all required site improvements are completed, or the
developer has provided adequate security to guarantee completion of the site
improvements. When the site improvements and the building cannot be completed
simultaneously due to weather conditions or other factors beyond the control of
the developer (excluding financial inability to complete the project), the city
may issue a certificate of occupancy for the project, provided the following
conditions are met: (1985 Code § 19-35-30; amd. 2001 Code)
         a.   The building, buildings, or portions thereof, to be occupied have
been constructed in accordance with the approved plans for those buildings and
are in full compliance with applicable building and fire codes, and are
completed to the extent that only exterior site improvement work remains
unfinished; and
         b.   The building inspector determines that occupancy of the
buildings, or portions thereof, prior to completion of required site
improvements, is safe and that access for emergency vehicles is adequate with
the site improvements unfinished; and
         c.   The developer posts adequate security for the benefit of the city
to ensure completion of the site improvements in full compliance with the
approved plans within one year from the date of occupancy or inauguration of
use.
      4.   Amount Of Security: The amount of security to be posted by the
developer shall be determined by the city engineer, and shall be equal to one
hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the amount reasonably estimated by the
engineer as being necessary to complete remaining site improvements as shown on
the approved plans. In the event that the developer disputes the cost estimate
of the city engineer, the developer may prove a lower construction cost by
providing binding contracts between the developer and contractor or
subcontractor appropriate to perform the required work at a stated, fixed
price. Bid proposals are not satisfactory for this purpose. If the contracts
submitted are acceptable in form, the amount of security required shall be one
hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the total contract price of all such
contracts submitted, plus one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the
estimated reasonable cost of performing any work not covered by the contracts.
Specifications in such contracts shall be sufficiently clear to identify the
work called for under the contract.
      5.   Terms Of Security: The terms of any security arrangement offered to
the city shall state a date certain by which the developer agrees to have site
improvement work completed in accordance with the plans, and further provide
that, in the event that the developer has not completed required site
improvement work by that date, the city may, at its option and on its schedule,
draw on the funds escrowed, or credit established, or such other security
device by its own act, and shall not be required to obtain consent of developer
to withdraw funds for completion of the work shown on approved plans. The
city's actual costs in administering the completion of work in the event of a
default by the developer shall be reimbursed from the escrow or other security
arrangements.
      6.   Form Of Security: Security arrangements offered in lieu of
simultaneous completion of buildings and site improvements shall be in one or
more of the following forms:
         a.   An irrevocable letter of credit from a bank authorized to do
business in the state, naming the city as the payee of funds drawn against that
letter of credit and guaranteeing the availability of funds for one year; or
         b.   A deposit of cash with a third party escrow acceptable to the
city.
      7.   Payment Of Interest: Any interest accruing on escrow funds shall,
unless expended for completion of site improvements required, inure to the
benefit of the developer upon release and the use of land, not to the city.
      8.   Preparation Of Development Agreement: A development agreement shall
be prepared between the city and the developer outlining the terms and
conditions of the site plan approval. (1985 Code § 19-35-30)
10-13C-32: GUARANTEES AND COVENANTS:
   A.   Required: Prior to or in conjunction with submission of a final
development plan for the first building or first phase of any office park (OP)
development, a declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions for said
development shall be submitted to and be approved by the planning commission
and shall be recorded with the County Recorder. Said declaration shall contain
guarantees for the perpetual maintenance of all common open spaces within the
office park (OP) development, and shall assure compliance with the following
standards to promote the health, safety and general welfare and property value
within the development and in the general area.
   B.   Assurances, Standards: The following assurances and standards shall be
included within the declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions
recorded in conjunction with any office park (OP) development:
      1.   The declaration shall include management policies for any common
open spaces within the development setting forth the quantity of maintenance to
be performed and what entity will be responsible for the perpetual maintenance
of said space. These management policies, at a minimum, shall contain the
following:
         a.   The establishment of an association or corporation responsible
for all maintenance, which shall levy the cost thereof as an assessment to each
of the owners of land parcels or units within the office park (OP) development.
         b.   The establishment of a management committee with provisions
setting forth the number of persons constituting the committee, the method of
selection and the owners and duties of said committee; and including the
person, partnership or corporation with the property management expertise and
experience who shall be designated to manage the maintenance of the common area
and facilities in an efficient and quality manner.
         c.   The method of calling a meeting of the members of the corporation
or association with the members thereof that will constitute a quorum
authorized to transact business.
         d.   The method for maintenance, repair and replacement of common
areas and facilities, and distribution of costs thereof.
         e.   The method for maintenance of all private streets and private
utilities and acknowledgment that such maintenance is the responsibility of the
owners' corporation or association.
         f.   The manner of collection from property or unit owners for their
share of common expenses, and the method of assessment.
         g.   Provisions as to percentage of votes by property or unit owners
which shall be necessary to determine whether to rebuild, repair, restore or
sell property in the event of damage or destruction of all or part of the
project.
      2.   There shall be a conveyance in the declaration of an open space
easement over all common open spaces, restricting the area against any future
building or use, except as approved in the preliminary project plan.
   C.   Landscaping Installation: The declaration shall contain provisions
requiring owners of individual parcels of land or condominium units with the
office park (OP) development to install landscaping to a standard at least
equivalent to that established within the typical landscaping plan approved as
an element of the preliminary project plan. Said landscaping must be installed
within one year of the issuance of certificates of occupancy for condominium
units or buildings on individual parcels of property. Common area landscaping
shall be installed with each phase.
   D.   Architectural Committee: The declaration shall provide for the creation
and perpetual provision for an architectural committee, the numbers of members
and composition of which shall be clearly stipulated. At least one member of
this committee shall be selected from the surrounding neighborhood by the
planning commission. (To accomplish this, the neighborhood shall submit a list
of at least 6 names of area residents to choose from.) The provision shall
provide for the approval by said architectural committee for all schematic
project plans and elevations of all buildings and signs to be erected in the
office park (OP) development prior to submission for project plan approval by
the city. The declaration shall also establish design guidelines governing the
appearance of the site, buildings, signs, lighting, landscaping, street
furniture, fencing and mechanical equipment.
   E.   Amendments: The declaration shall stipulate the method and procedure by
which the declaration may be amended.
   F.   Area Of Building Occupancy: The declaration shall specify the maximum
percentage of lot area which will be occupied by building in the areas of each
of the general land use categories as set forth in the approved preliminary
projects plan.
   G.   Building Height: The declaration shall specify the maximum building
height approved by the planning commission.
   H.   Traffic And Parking Management Plan: The declaration shall contain a
traffic and parking management plan.
   I.   Use Restrictions: The declaration may also contain use restrictions
which are more restrictive than the city's zoning provisions, but in no case
shall they be more permissible.
   J.   Statement Of Ownership: The declaration shall state that:
Riverdale City, by virtue of ownership of streets, utilities, rights of way and
easements in and through the project, shall be deemed to be an owner with full
voting privileges, under the terms of this declaration and shall have authority
and standing to initiate actions for enforcement of the provisions and
standards herein which are deemed to be in the public interest.
   (1985 Code § 19-35-31)
ARTICLE D.  LOW-IMPACT TRANSITION OVERLAY ZONE (C-L)
SECTION:
10-13D-1: Purpose
10-13D-2: Objectives And Intent
10-13D-3: Planned Uses
10-13D-4: Site Development Standards
10-13D-5: Screening
10-13D-6: Parking
10-13D-7: Landscaping
10-13D-8: Signs; Illumination
10-13D-9: Lighting
10-13D-10: Architectural Design
10-13D-11: Use Regulations
10-13D-12: Submittal Requirements
10-13D-13: Security; Site Improvements, Project Completion
10-13D-14: Guarantees And Covenants
10-13D-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to describe certain overlay zones to impose
special development guidelines on identified areas; establish locations within
the city which will accommodate low- impact transition developments; and
establish regulations for use and development of land within the city which
govern uses, density, open spaces, structures, buildings, energy efficiency,
light and air quality, transportation, infrastructure, public facilities,
vegetation, trees and other landscaping. (Ord. 592, 8-1-2001)
10-13D-2: OBJECTIVES AND INTENT:
   A.   The objectives of this article are:
      1.   To define a range of services and uses which may be offered by
planned low-impact transition entities within the community; and
      2.   To establish guidelines for the physical development of such low-
impact transition entities and uses; and
      3.   To preserve and enhance the residential character of the city.
   B.   The intent of these regulations is to establish a standard for low-
impact transition development and maintenance which:
      1.   Minimizes any adverse effect of the low-impact transition zone on
nearby properties by achieving maximum compatible integration of the area, and
provide for safe and efficient use of the low- impact transition zone itself;
and
      2.   Minimizes traffic congestion on public streets in the vicinity; and
      3.   Promotes the overall functionality, safety and visual attractiveness
of low-impact transition buildings, accompanying substructures and surrounding
landscape; and
      4.   Promotes development and uses that are in harmony with the goals and
direction of the city; and
      5.   Promotes the quality of architecture and the use of quality building
materials to encourage creativity of design; and
      6.   Promotes the successful completion of the development of a low-
impact transition project, and of the ability of low-impact transition entities
to succeed; and
      7.   Provides for diversity in the tax base of the city. (Ord. 592, 8-1-
2001)
10-13D-3: PLANNED USES:
All uses in the low-impact transition overlay zone shall be planned uses. The
approval of planned uses shall be reviewed and approved by the planning
commission prior to issuance of a business license. Planned uses shall include,
but are not limited to, the following: professional office; real estate office,
insurance office; elderly care facilities and high-tech repair. (Ord. 592, 8-1-
2001)
10-13D-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
 
Minimum yard setbacks
 Front                            50 feet
 Side                             None, except 20 feet adjacent to residential
                                  boundary
 Rear                             None, except 20 feet adjacent to residential
                                  boundary
 Side facing street on corner lot 30 feet
Building height
 Minimum                          1 story
 Maximum                          2 stories or 35 feet
Maximum building size             Not over 40 percent of the lot
                                  area by building or accessory buildings
 
(Ord. 592, 8-1-2001)
10-13D-5: SCREENING:
An opaque screen shall be installed and maintained along all residential
boundaries. The type of screening shall be approved by the planning commission,
such screening shall be approved based on geographical reasoning. The following
are acceptable means of providing such screening:
   A.   Walls: A wall shall consist of stone, brick, tile or similar type of
solid masonry material of sound barrier quality to a minimum of eight inches
(8") thick. All such walls must be landscaped with vegetation in front and
shall be a buffer between the low-impact transition zone and adjacent
residential zones. The wall shall be a minimum of six feet (6') in height.
   B.   Berms: Berms of varying height and width, which will be determined by
the size of the landscaped areas.
   C.   Natural Vegetation/Growth: If natural vegetation/growth exists on the
property and said natural vegetation/growth would have to be removed for the
construction of a wall for the purpose of screening between the low-impact
transition zone and adjacent residential zones, the planning commission may
waive the construction of that portion of the wall to preserve the natural
vegetation/growth. Said natural vegetation/growth shall be maintained and
allowed to be calculated as a part of the required landscaping. (Ord. 592, 8-1-
2001)
10-13D-6: PARKING:
On-site parking in the low-impact transition zone shall not be impacted by any
use so as not to have a sufficient number of parking stalls for all uses within
the low-impact transition zone. A minimum of one space per five hundred (500)
square feet of floor area is required. (Ord. 592, 8-1-2001)
10-13D-7: LANDSCAPING:
All landscaping shall be installed and maintained in conformance with a
landscape plan, which has been recommended by the planning commission and
approved by the city council.
   A.   Plan: At the time of the preliminary site plan submittal to the
planning commission, a detailed landscape plan shall also be submitted showing
typical landscaping. Twenty percent (20%) of a low-impact transition area shall
be maintained in landscaped open space. The twenty percent (20%) does not
include nonbuildable on- site areas and nonbuildable and parkstrip areas in
dedicated road right of way.
   B.   Trees: A minimum of two inch (2") caliper trees shall be required as
part of all landscape requirements. There shall be a minimum of one tree per
five thousand (5,000) square feet of lot area, and not more than thirty three
percent (33%) of all newly planted trees may be of the same variety. Existing
significant tree stands and natural vegetation shall be integrated into the
site landscape plan to the maximum extent possible.
   C.   Dumpsters, Service Areas: No dumpster areas or service areas shall be
visible from any roadway or residence, or abut any residence or residential
area. Dumpsters shall be in an enclosure constructed out of the same material
as the building or wall and designed such that refuse cannot blow from the
dumpster.
   D.   Berms: Where any nonresidential development abuts any residence or
residential area, there shall be undulated landscaped berms with a minimum
width equal to that of the setback requirements (20 feet) for said area and
development.
   E.   Plan Preparation: The city requires that landscaping plans be designed
by a registered landscape architect. (Ord. 592, 8-1-2001)
10-13D-8: SIGNS; ILLUMINATION:
Sign design and illumination themes shall also be included for review and
approved by the planning commission and city council. A total sign plan package
for development is required.
   A.   Monument Signs: Freestanding monument identification signs shall be
permitted per lot frontage. Such signs shall not exceed thirty two (32) square
feet in area. Their maximum height above the street grade shall not exceed five
feet (5'). Such signs shall be set back from the street right-of-way lines at
least ten feet (10').
   B.   Building Wall Signs: Only one building identification sign shall be
permitted for each building and shall be installed below the roofline. Such
signs shall not exceed twenty four (24) square feet in total area as measured
by a rectangle around the outside of the lettering and/or the pictorial symbol.
The sign shall not project more than twelve inches (12") from the face of the
building. Painted wall signs shall not be permitted. Only nonilluminated
cabinet signs shall be permitted. (Ord. 592, 8-1-2001)
10-13D-9: LIGHTING:
Site and security lighting shall be designed to enhance the architectural
quality of the development and screened to protect the residential areas from
glare. Site lighting shall be achieved by wall packs and/or light poles not to
exceed the height of twelve feet (12') and designed so as not to flood onto
adjacent properties. A lighting plan for all exterior lighting is required.
(Ord. 592, 8-1-2001)
10-13D-10: ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN:
At the time of the preliminary site plan submittal to the planning commission,
as part of review of proposed development, the developer is required to provide
building profiles for review and comments by the planning commission.
   A.   Overall Architectural Outline:
      1.   The proposed development shall include architectural renderings and
elevations of the proposed buildings. Relationships to surrounding uses shall
be considered in respect to scale and massing of the proposed uses.
Architectural style, colors and materials will be assessed in order to maintain
a consistent quality throughout the zone.
      2.   The design shall improve community appearance by avoiding excessive
variety and monotonous repetition.
      3.   All building elevations shall be architecturally treated with the
same materials on all faces of the building.
   B.   Architectural Guidelines: The following architectural design guidelines
apply to all planned uses in the low-impact overlay zone:
      1.   Detailed architectural guidelines are attached to the ordinance
codified herein as exhibit A and on file in the city office.
      2.   All architectural treatments may be reviewed by a registered
architect chosen by the city and paid for by the developer.
      3.   The height of buildings shall be determined at the time of
development review. (Ord. 592, 8-1-2001)
10-13D-11: USE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Animals may not be used for security purposes.
   B.   As a part of the submittal of the development plan, a traffic plan will
be submitted by the applicant addressing any traffic issues to the surrounding
area and on the site.
   C.   Property in a low-impact transition zone shall not be used in such a
manner as to create a nuisance to any adjacent sites, such as, but not limited
to: vibration, sound, electromechanical disturbance and radiation, air or water
pollution, dust, emission of odorous, toxic or noxious matter, or placement
dumping or blowing refuse, paper or other garbage.
   D.   No business operating after the hour of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.
shall, in any way, create a nuisance to the surrounding residential area.
   E.   Deliveries and pickups in a low-impact transition zone shall be between
the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M., Monday
through Sunday.
   F.   No trash collection or parking lot sweeping is allowed in a low-impact
transition zone between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M.
   G.   Overhead delivery doors shall remain closed except for deliveries or
pickups.
   H.   It is prohibited to use any outdoor area for commercial use in any way
for all businesses in the low-impact transition zone.
   I.   Outside speakers, pagers and sound systems of any kind or nature
whatsoever are strictly prohibited in the low-impact transition zone.
   J.   Exterior audible security notification is prohibited. (Ord. 592, 8-1-
2001)
10-13D-12: SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS:
All buildings and structures proposed for development under this article shall
be subject to a site plan review process as adopted by the city. (Ord. 592, 8-
1-2001)
10-13D-13: SECURITY; SITE IMPROVEMENTS, PROJECT COMPLETION:
All low-impact transition developments within the city shall comply with the
city's bonding requirements. (Ord. 592, 8-1-2001)
10-13D-14: GUARANTEES AND COVENANTS:
Guarantees and covenants for the development shall be included in the project
development agreement. Prior to issuance of building permits, the city council
shall adopt a resolution authorizing a developer's agreement between the city
and the developer. (Ord. 592, 8-1-2001)
ARTICLE E.  LANDMARK DEVELOPMENT ZONE (LM)
SECTION:
10-13E-1: Purpose
10-13E-2: Objectives And Intent
10-13E-3: Planned Uses
10-13E-4: Site Development Standards
10-13E-5: Screening
10-13E-6: Parking
10-13E-7: Landscaping
10-13E-8: Signs; Illumination
10-13E-9: Lighting
10-13E-10: Architectural Design
10-13E-11: Submittal Requirements
10-13E-12: Security; Site Improvements
10-13E-13: Guarantees And Covenants
10-13E-1: PURPOSE:
The purposes of this article are:
   A.   To move forward with the goals and objectives of the Riverdale City
general plan for better, balanced development; and
   B.   To utilize the locations identified by the Riverdale City general plan
within the city which will accommodate landmark developments; and
   C.   To impose special development guidelines on the identified areas; and
   D.   To establish regulations for use and development of land within the
identified areas, which govern uses, density, open spaces, structures,
buildings, energy efficiency, light and air, air quality, transportation,
infrastructure, public facilities, vegetation, and trees and landscaping. (Ord.
596, 12-5-2001)
10-13E-2: OBJECTIVES AND INTENT:
   A.   The objectives of this article are:
      1.   To create a zone that allows for the establishment of a well
designed and refined development; and
      2.   To promote development quality that enhances the prominent location
in the city and creates a "visual signature" and "landmark" for the city.
      3.   To establish guidelines for the physical development of such
landmark development (LM) entities and uses; and
      4.   To define a range of uses, which are planned, and are not limited
to, a defined listing; but shall be reviewed on a case by case basis.
   B.   The intent of these regulations is to establish a standard for landmark
development (LM) which:
      1.   Designs a regional based zone for the purpose of providing personal,
cultural, recreational and incidental retail services for the entire region;
and
      2.   Promotes development and uses that are in harmony with the goals and
direction of the city; and
      3.   Establishes building architecture, landscaping, hardscaping,
lighting, fencing, and sign development with an emphasis on excellence and
quality so that its distinction surpasses design and development occurring in
any other zone; and
      4.   Promotes a quality development by excluding the use of exterior open
space, landscaping and parking for display, storage, sale or repair of any
commodity; and
      5.   Provides for diversity in the tax base of the city. (Ord. 596, 12-5-
2001)
10-13E-3: PLANNED USES:
All requests for development in an area designated on the city general plan
land use map as "Landmark" shall be reviewed conceptually by the planning
commission to determine if the proposed use is relevant to the intent of the
landmark development (LM) zone. Retail may be allowed only as "incidental" to
main landmark uses. (Ord. 596, 12-5-2001)
10-13E-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Site coverage regulates the area of the site that may be covered by buildings.
Covered walkway, roof structure overhangs and other solar/weather protection or
aesthetic structural elements shall not be included in building coverage
calculations. Required parking and landscape ratios shall not be impaired by
nonbuilding structures.
 
Minimum Lot Area:      None.
Maximum Lot Area:      None.
Minimum Yard Setbacks:
                       70 feet; unless all of the parking is located in the
 Front                 rear of the building, then a 50 foot front setback is
                       permitted. The 50 foot setback would allow for
                       landscaping, driveway and drop off area in the front.
 Side                  20 feet minimum; this area must be landscaped.
 Side facing street    50 feet; unless the parking is located a minimum of 50
 on corner lot         feet back from the side property line, then a 20 foot
                       setback is permitted.
 Rear                  20 feet minimum; this area must be landscaped.
Building Height:
 Minimum               1 story.
 Maximum               Unlimited.
Lot Coverage:          The aggregate area of all buildings shall not exceed 50
                       percent of the entire site.
 
(Ord. 596, 12-5-2001)
10-13E-5: SCREENING:
If it is the determination of the planning commission that boundary line
screening is required or if it is the desire of the developer to install
screening, said screening shall consist of the following:
   A.   Walls: A wall shall consist of stone, or a similar type of solid
masonry material a minimum of eight inches (8") thick.
   B.   Fences: A fence shall be constructed of ornamental iron or a material
review and approved by the planning commission.
   C.   Standards: Since walls and fences are a main visual feature in any
development, regulations related to the placement, size and appearance of such
structures must be enacted. The following standards shall apply to the
installation of all fences and walls, or other visual obstructions used for the
purpose of screening, either around the perimeter of the development site or
within the development site:
      1.   All screening shall complement the architectural components of the
buildings.
      2.   The height of the walls and fences shall be reviewed by the planning
commission and approval shall be based on screening that is necessary to
enhance and protect the development from adjacent property.
      3.   If fencing/walls are not required or permitted, landscaping must
blend with and complement adjacent developments. (Ord. 596, 12-5-2001)
10-13E-6: PARKING:
   A.   Spaces Required: The planning commission shall determine the number of
parking spaces for staff and customers for each use. The number of required
spaces may be derived from the list in section
10-15-3 of this title (parking space for nondwelling buildings), but in no case
shall the parking ratio be less than 4.5 spaces per one thousand (1,000) square
feet of building area.
   B.   Parking Lot Characteristics: Each parcel of land developed for off
street parking in response to the requirements of this article shall provide
the following characteristics:
      1.   Surfacing: Surfacing shall be hard surfaced and maintained in good
condition and kept clear and in an unobstructed and usable condition at all
times during business hours. Responsibility for maintenance of the lot shall
rest with the property owner. The lot shall provide adequate access to a street
or alley.
      2.   Grading: Parking lots shall be graded for proper drainage with
surface water diverted in such a way as to keep the parking area free of
accumulated water or ice. All surface drainage shall be detained within
development site and approved by city engineer.
      3.   Lighting: Lots shall be properly illuminated, with luminaries
arranged so as to baffle and direct light away from any adjoining residential
buildings and not adversely impact any adjacent properties.
      4.   Size Of Spaces: Each parking space shall be a minimum of ten feet
(10') wide by twenty feet (20') long. (Ord. 596, 12-5-2001)
      5.   Handicapped Parking: All structures which are regulated by the
provisions of the international building code shall have adaptations which
assist access by handicapped persons and shall, in addition, provide off street
parking for handicapped persons as required by applicable state or federal
regulations. (Ord. 847, 11-6-2013)
10-13E-7: LANDSCAPING:
All landscaping shall visually enhance and complement the overall development
and be installed and maintained in conformance with a landscape plan, which has
been approved by the planning commission and city council. The following are
the minimum standards (see subsection 10-13E-5C3 of this article):
   A.   Plan Required: A detailed landscape plan shall be submitted at the time
that the project plan for the entire development is reviewed and approved.
   B.   Open Space And Front Of Property: A minimum of twenty percent (20%) of
the entire developed land area shall be maintained in landscape open space.
Fifty percent (50%) of all of the landscaping shall be visible from dedicated
roads fronting the property.
   C.   Hardscape: The use of hardscaping will not be counted as a part of the
landscape ratio unless the hardscaping is designed to visually enhance the
appearance of the landscaping as determined by the planning commission and city
council, but in no case can this ratio exceed a deduction of more than three
percent (3%) of the landscape ratio.
   D.   Xeriscape: Xeriscape principles may be used to serve as the primary
means in landscaping, but desert and natural type landscape concepts shall not
be utilized as total approved landscaping.
   E.   Plan Preparation: The landscape plan shall be drafted by a landscape
architect or a designer who is employed by a landscape company.
   F.   Landscape Trees: There shall be a minimum of one tree per two thousand
five hundred (2,500) square feet of land area and not more than twenty five
percent (25%) of all newly planted trees may be of the same variety.
   G.   Dumpsters, Service Areas: No dumpster areas or service areas shall be
visible from any roadway or residence. Dumpsters shall be in an enclosure
constructed out of the same material as the building or wall and designed such
that refuse cannot blow from the dumpster.
   H.   Maintenance: The landscaping shall be maintained through perpetuity.
All plants shall be serviced by an acceptable automatic irrigation or sprinkler
system and maintained in a healthful living condition. Dead plant materials
shall be replaced as necessary during the life of the project and in accordance
with the approved landscaping plan.
   I.   Water: Water saving methods shall be implemented and utilized for all
landscaping. (Ord. 596, 12-5-2001)
10-13E-8: SIGNS; ILLUMINATION:
Sign design and illumination themes shall also be included for review by the
planning commission and city council. The planning commission and city council
shall not approve a development proposal without a sign plan. Architectural
themes shall be carried into the sign plan. (Ord. 596, 12-5-2001)
10-13E-9: LIGHTING:
Subtle building and site lighting to enhance the landmark use is required. Site
and security lighting shall be designed to enhance the architectural quality of
the development. Screening of lights from residential areas and glare from
traffic areas shall be minimized. Lighting consistency utilizing a design
approved for the entire area shall be required in the parking lots. (Ord. 596,
12-5-2001)
10-13E-10: ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN:
As part of review of proposed development, the planning commission shall review
the proposed development plans to ensure compliance with the architectural
design guidelines intended to promote the "visual signature" and "landmark"
concepts.
   A.   Overall Architectural Outline:
      1.   The proposed development shall include architectural renderings and
elevations of the proposed buildings. Relationships to surrounding uses shall
be considered in respect to scale and massing of the proposed uses.
Architectural style, colors and materials will be assessed in order to maintain
a consistent quality throughout the development.
      2.   The design shall improve community appearance by avoiding excessive
variety and monotonous repetition.
      3.   All building elevations shall be architecturally treated and with
the same materials on all faces of the building.
   B.   Architectural Guidelines: The following architectural design guidelines
apply to uses in the landmark development zone:
      1.   Detailed architectural guidelines are attached to the ordinance
codified herein as exhibit A and on file in the city office.
      2.   All architectural treatments may be reviewed by a registered
architect chosen by the city and paid for by the developer. (Ord. 596, 12-5-
2001)
10-13E-11: SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS:
All buildings and structures proposed for development under this article shall
be subject to a site plan review process as adopted by the city. There shall be
submitted to the planning commission a master plan for the entire development
for the purpose of meeting the requirements set forth in this article. (Ord.
596, 12-5-2001)
10-13E-12: SECURITY; SITE IMPROVEMENTS:
The following articles shall apply to all landmark developments within the
city:
   A.   Site Improvements:
      1.   Guarantee: To guarantee the construction, repair and/or replacement
of required public improvements in each phase, the permittee shall post a
guarantee either in the form of an escrow cash deposit or irrevocable letter of
credit. The amount of the guarantee shall be the greater of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) or one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the reasonable
construction or installation costs of each of the following that is applicable
to the project:
         a.   Curb, gutter and sidewalk;
         b.   Storm drainage system;
         c.   Asphalt paving;
         d.   Fire hydrants;
         e.   Fencing;
         f.   Landscaping and sprinkling systems;
         g.   Water and sewer lines;
         h.   Driveway approaches;
         i.   Any other required improvements.
      2.   Calculation: In calculating the amount of the guarantee, the city
engineer may accept the amount specified in a construction bid as the
reasonable cost of the improvements.
      3.   Damage: This site improvement guarantee shall also guarantee the
repair or replacement of any public improvements damaged by the contractor or
owner or their agents during construction. The city shall notify the owner and/
or contractor of any such damage and shall require repair or replacement of the
damaged public improvements within a reasonable time. Upon the failure of the
owner or contractor to make the specified repairs, the city may take whatever
legal action it deems appropriate, including foreclosure on the guarantee, to
secure the repairs.
      4.   Guarantee Release: A guarantee shall not be released until all
improvements are completed and accepted by the city and a final certificate of
occupancy is issued.
   B.   Project Completion:
      1.   Security Required: In order to protect the city from the financial
burdens resulting from damage to or increased maintenance cost for city
facilities that may occur as a result of incomplete or inadequate site
improvements on private construction projects, the city requires that
developers either complete all site improvements prior to occupancy or
inauguration of use, or, if that is not possible, that adequate financial
security for that completion, together with a right of entry to the property to
complete that work, be granted to the city.
      2.   Construction According To Approved Plans: All construction shall be
completed according to the approved plans on which the building permit was
issued. The approved plans shall also include the site improvements shown on
the site plan. Deviations from the approved plans must be approved in advance
by the planning commission.
      3.   Security For Completion: No certificate of occupancy will be issued
unless the building and all required site improvements are completed, or the
developer has provided adequate security to guarantee completion of the site
improvements. When the site improvements and the building cannot be completed
simultaneously due to weather conditions or other factors beyond the control of
the developer (excluding financial inability to complete the project), the city
may issue a certificate of occupancy for the project, provided the following
conditions are met:
         a.   The building, buildings, or portions thereof, to be occupied have
been constructed in accordance with the approved plans for those buildings and
are in full compliance with applicable building and fire codes, and are
completed to the extent that only exterior site improvement work remains
unfinished; and
         b.   The building inspector and fire marshal determine that occupancy
of the buildings, or portions thereof, prior to completion of required site
improvements, is safe and that access for emergency vehicles is adequate with
the site improvements unfinished; and
         c.   The developer posts adequate security for the benefit of the city
to ensure completion of the site improvements in full compliance with the
approved plans within one year from the date of occupancy or inauguration of
use.
      4.   Amount Of Security: The amount of security to be posted by the
developer shall be determined by the city engineer, and shall be equal to one
hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the amount reasonably estimated by the
engineer as being necessary to complete remaining site improvements as shown on
the approved plans. In the event that the developer disputes the cost estimate
of the city engineer, the developer may prove a lower construction cost by
providing binding contracts between the developer and contractor or
subcontractor appropriate to perform the required work at a stated, fixed
price. Bid proposals are not satisfactory for this purpose. If the contracts
submitted are acceptable in form, the amount of security required shall be one
hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the total contract price of all such
contracts submitted, plus one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the
estimated reasonable cost of performing any work not covered by the contracts.
Specifications in such contracts shall be sufficiently clear to identify the
work called for under the contract.
      5.   Terms Of Security: The terms of any security arrangement offered to
the city shall state a date certain by which the developer agrees to have site
improvement work completed in accordance with the plans, and further provide
that, in the event that the developer has not completed required site
improvement work by that date, the city may, at its option and on its schedule,
draw on the funds escrowed, or credit established, or such other security
device by its own act, and shall not be required to obtain consent of developer
to withdraw funds for completion of the work shown on approved plans. The
city's actual costs in administering the completion of work in the event of a
default by the developer shall be reimbursed from the escrow or other security
arrangements.
      6.   Form Of Security: Security arrangements offered in lieu of
simultaneous completion of buildings and site improvements shall be in one or
more of the following forms:
         a.   An irrevocable letter of credit from a bank authorized to do
business in the state, naming the city as the payee of funds drawn against that
letter of credit and guaranteeing the availability of funds for one year; or
         b.   A deposit of cash with a third party escrow acceptable to the
city.
      7.   Payment Of Interest: Any interest accruing on escrow funds shall,
unless expended for completion of site improvements required, inure to the
benefit of the developer upon release and the use of land, not to the city.
      8.   Preparation Of Development Agreement: A development agreement shall
be prepared between the city and the developer outlining the terms and
conditions of the site plan approval.
Riverdale City reserves the right for the developer to pay costs for reviews
and recommendations pertaining to consulting in areas of architectural,
engineering, traffic, geology, financial or any consultation the city deems
necessary for information regarding purposed development. (Ord. 596, 12-5-2001)
10-13E-13: GUARANTEES AND COVENANTS:
Guarantees and covenants for the development shall be included in the project
development agreement. (Ord. 596, 12-5-2001)
ARTICLE F.  HILLSIDE AND SLOPE PROTECTION
SECTION:
10-13F-1: Purpose And Intent
10-13F-2: Definitions
10-13F-3: Study Requirements
10-13F-4: Slope Protection Requirements
10-13F-5: Enforcement, Penalty Clause And Recovery
10-13F-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
This article is to protect public health, safety and general welfare, reduce
man-made hazards, protect property and water quality by implementing management
practices, criteria, and provisions included herein for land use activities,
construction and earth disturbance activities, and to achieve the following
throughout the City. Furthermore, to establish the required process to
determine whether property on or adjacent to certain critical slopes can be
maintained or protected and used in a safe, orderly and beneficial manner.
Due to the nature of the property located in certain hillside and slope areas,
the following are requirements that are in addition to noncritical hillside
building requirements. The requirements imposed by this article shall take the
place or supersede any other building or review requirements that have been
previously adopted by the City. Noncritical hillside development matters, defer
to the City's standard subdivision ordinance development requirements. (Ord.
907, 3-19-2019)
10-13F-2: DEFINITIONS:
All definitions set forth in chapter 2 of this title are applicable to this
article.
CRITICAL HILLSIDE: Any hillside or slope equal to or greater than a twenty
percent (20%) slope or angle.
DEVELOP, DEVELOPED, DEVELOPMENT: Any construction, proposed construction,
modification or remodel, following the initial enactment date of this article,
of any building, structure, facility or appurtenance on a critical hillside or
slope for which a City building permit, license, or grant is required pursuant
to the provisions of this title, this Code, City adopted Building Codes,
Plumbing Codes, and Fire Codes.
EXCAVATION: Removal of earth, sand, gravel, rock or other similar material
through uncovering, digging, cutting into, grading, quarrying, extraction or
displacement.
FILL: Deposit or placement of soil, sand, gravel, rock or other similar
material.
SITE/SLOPE DISTURBANCE: Slope disruption caused by human activities upon the
land; removal of vegetation or trees, grading, excavation, fill, water
discharge, excretion, redirection, or introduction of water or directed
drainage or any combination thereof, and/or site conditions resulting from such
human-induced actions.
SLOPE: Slope is the relationship of vertical rise to horizontal run, expressed
as a percentage from the "toe" to "top" of a slope. The topographic gradient of
any area of land, whether or not located on a single parcel, as determined by
the change in vertical distance or elevation (rise) over a horizontal distance
(run) which, for the purposes of these regulations is expressed as a percentage
(e.g., 20-ft gain/100-ft distance = 0.20 or 20%). For construction and grading
purposes slope also may be expressed as the ratio of the horizontal to vertical
distance (e.g., 2:1). For purposes of these regulations, a "slope" is a natural
(pre-development) slope of twenty percent (20%) to twenty five percent (25%). A
"very steep slope" is a natural (pre-development) slope of twenty five percent
(25%) or more. (Ord. 907, 3-19-2019)
10-13F-3: STUDY REQUIREMENTS:
The following shall be provided to Riverdale City to determine whether a
proposed critical hillside or slope of a property or development will be
considered by the City. Submission of said information does not guarantee that
a critical hillside or slope development will be allowed.
   A.   During Conceptual Discussion:
      1.   Identify the area to be developed. In the event the proposed
development is in a sloped area greater than twenty percent (20%) the
development requires a geotechnical report, paid for by the applicant, to be
submitted to the City Engineer for review, prior to proceeding to a preliminary
review of the development.
      2.   Name of the developer.
      3.   Location of the development.
      4.   Type of development.
      5.   Acreage of the property.
      6.   Current ownership of the property.
      7.   The property boundaries and the names of the adjacent property
owners.
      8.   Geotechnical study including soil and soil constraints, water and
seismic concerns, erosion control and development recommendation to include
items specified by the City Engineer.
      9.   If it is deemed necessary to remove vegetation from the hillside or
slope in order to complete a study prior to preliminary review, the developer
shall submit a vegetation removal plan to the Riverdale City Department of
Community Development for review and approval. The vegetation removal plan
shall be a thorough plan showing what the site will look like when completed.
   B.   During Preliminary Review:
      1.   Topographic contours no greater intervals than two feet (2'). If the
property is steep (greater than 30 percent), five feet (5') contour intervals
shall be used. If engineering needs are greater than what is specified, defer
to engineering for topographic specifications.
      2.   Location of existing natural features on hillside or slope (springs,
wetlands, ditches, etc.).
      3.   Location of rights-of-way and easements.
      4.   Detailed outline of vegetation proposed to be removed and potential
impact.
      5.   Detail disposal of on-site water and sediment control.
   C.   Final Review: Any additional engineering requirements must be completed
prior to request for final review and determination by Riverdale City Planning
Commission. The Riverdale City Engineer shall review all items and make a
recommendation prior to final approval review by the Planning Commission.
   D.   Geotechnical Report: At any point during the consideration of any
development application or request of or upon a hillside or slope, the City may
obtain their own Geotechnical Report to be used as consideration for approval
or denial of the development application. (Ord. 907, 3-19-2019)
10-13F-4: SLOPE PROTECTION REQUIREMENTS:
Slopes are naturally unstable and sensitive to change from gravity, vibration,
wind, water or disturbance, either natural or man-made, can cause mass earth
slope movement, soil erosion, soil slippage or slide. The characteristics that
influence the stability of slope include geology, slope drainage, slope
topography, soil type, and changes to the slope. Slopes are vulnerable to
damage resulting from site disruption, primarily related to soil erosion or
man-made influences. The City is empowered to regulate land use activities that
affect slope protection, soil stability, stormwater runoff, and surface and
groundwater quality and quantity by authority of adopted building regulations
and the Land Use, Development, and Management Act, title 10, chapter 9a of the
Utah Code.
   A.   Compliance: All uses, activities and development occurring within any
slope area shall be undertaken only in strict compliance with the provisions of
this article, along with all Federal and State laws, and with all other
applicable geo-technical studies, codes, and ordinances.
   B.   Activity: Any non-regulated or regulated activity (including but not
limited to new development, redevelopment, or earth disturbance) that is to
take place incrementally or in phases, or occurs in sequential individual
projects on the same parcel or property, shall be subject to regulation by this
chapter. The following activities are prohibited by this chapter:
      1.   Discharge of water from any source over, upon, near, or onto a
hillside or slope.
      2.   Excessive infiltration or redirection of water caused from man-made
sources such as irrigation, roof down spout drainage, irrigation, draining of
swimming pools or hot tubs, or water collection or conveyance upon slope areas
from structures, property, or any water collection system.
      3.   Land use activities that scour, erode or cause sedimentation upon
sensitive slope areas.
      4.   Removal of vegetation upon any hillside or slope.
      5.   Placement of any material upon the hillside or slope area(s).
Including, but not limited to: soil, earth-like materials, yard waste, debris,
trash, or any deleterious substance or item.
      6.   Alteration, grading of, excavation, or undercutting of slope area by
removal or disturbance of slope soil(s); or disturbance of the natural
hydrologic regime of the land or slope.
      7.   Land use activities or interface activities that endanger the
vegetation of the slope area or disturbance of the soil within the slope areas
of the City of Riverdale.
   C.   New Development: When new development is proposed which involves land
disturbing activity near or upon slope areas within the City, or if geological
hazard indicators are observed on the land which will be disturbed by
development, the City will require that the applicant obtain investigation(s)
by a licensed geologist(s) and/or licensed geotechnical engineer, as
appropriate, before allowing development to proceed. If the City requests
additional investigation(s), the City Administrator shall designate in writing
the geological hazard indicator observed that requires more analysis and study
by professional geologist or engineer. When the Administrator requires
additional study, this requirement may be appealed to the City Council. The
developer shall be required by the City to implement and comply with all
recommendations of the Geotechnical Study or analysis as submitted to the City
prior to development and during construction activities.
   D.   Conflicting Regulations: In cases of conflict between this chapter and
the provisions of existing zoning classifications, Building Code, subdivision
ordinance, or any other ordinance of the City or applicable law, the most
restrictive provision shall apply. (Ord. 907, 3-19-2019)
10-13F-5: ENFORCEMENT, PENALTY CLAUSE AND RECOVERY:
   A.   Enforcement Authority: The City building official or designees shall
have the authority to inspect work within critical slope areas. The building
official may issue notices of violation, stop work orders, and citations, and
to pursue civil and criminal penalties provided by law for violations of this
Code. The City building official shall be permitted to enter and inspect
facilities subject to this article at all reasonable times and as often as
necessary to determine compliance. Failure to comply with the terms of this
article may result in punitive actions by the City of Riverdale Ordinance
Enforcement, by the Weber County Health Department, Utah State Division of
Water Quality, EPA or by other means identified in permits or terms set forth
in development or permit applications.
   B.   Violations: Any person who shall commit any act declared unlawful under
this article, who violates any provision of this article, who violates the
provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this article, or who fails or
refuses to comply with any lawful communication or notice to abate or take
corrective action by the City, shall be subject to: criminal prosecution
punishable as a Class B misdemeanor; or administrative enforcement pursuant to
the procedures set forth in title 1, chapter 13 of this Code. The City shall
have sole discretion in deciding whether to file a civil or criminal case or
pursue administrative enforcement action.
   C.   Recovery Of Damages And Costs: In addition to the penalties set forth
in this article, the City may recover:
      1.   All damages caused by the violator to the City, which may include
any reasonable expenses incurred in investigating violations of, and enforcing
compliance with, this article, or any other actual damages or hours of work
caused by the violation.
      2.   The costs of legal action to enjoin the continuing violation of this
article, and the existence of any other remedy, at law or equity, shall be no
defense to any such actions.
      3.   Cumulative remedies set forth in this section shall be relative, not
exclusive, and it shall not be a defense to any action, civil or criminal, that
one or more of the remedies set forth herein has been sought or granted. (Ord.
907, 3-19-2019)
ARTICLE G.  MIXED USE ZONE (MU)
SECTION:
10-13G-1: Purpose
10-13G-2: Site Development Standards
10-13G-3: Special Regulations
10-13G-4: Uses
10-13G-5: Hours Of Operation
10-13G-6: Businesses And Uses
10-13G-7: Fencing
10-13G-8: Landscaping
10-13G-9: Lighting
10-13G-10: Noise
10-13G-11: Odor
10-13G-12: Screening
10-13G-13: Signage
10-13G-14: Access
10-13G-15: Design Consideration
10-13G-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   The purpose of the mixed use zone (MU) is to encourage the development
of areas as a mix of compatible residential and commercial uses. The district
is to provide for commercial use opportunities while preserving the
attractiveness of the area for residential use and to ensure compatibility. The
district is intended to provide a higher level of control over nonresidential
uses to ensure that the use and enjoyment of residential properties is not
substantially diminished by nonresidential redevelopment. The intent of this
district shall be achieved by designating development and redevelopment to
comply with established standards for compatibility and buffering as set forth
in this article. It also encourages the assembly of properties in a unified
plan to create a coordinated and harmonious development. This will promote
outstanding design without unsightly and unsafe development. Specific measures
to mitigate negative impacts of mixed use developments include standards for
fencing, landscaping, lighting, noise, odor, screening, signage, vehicular
access and design consideration which will be required at the time of design
and site approval. (Ord. 647, 7-19-2005)
10-13G-2: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
 
A. Commercial:
   Minimum lot area       None
   Minimum lot width      None
   Minimum yard setbacks:
    Front                 50 feet, except if planning commission deems a
                          different setback is necessary
    Corner side           20 feet, except if planning commission deems a
                          different setback is necessary
    Interior side         None, except if planning commission deems a
                          reasonable setback is necessary
    Rear                  None, except if planning commission deems a
                          reasonable setback is necessary
   Building height:
    Minimum               1 story
    Maximum               None, except if planning commission deems a height
                          restriction is necessary
   Maximum lot coverage   Not over 45 percent of the lot area by buildings or
                          accessory buildings
B. Residential:
   Density                No more than 13 dwelling units per acre including
                          townhouses and condominiums
   Lot area               Single-family or two-family dwelling a minimum of
                          12,000 square feet
                          Other dwelling types, including townhouses and
                          condominiums, no minimum lot area but the density
                          requirement listed above must be adhered to in all
                          cases
                          Each lot shall have a minimum width of 100 feet,
   Lot width              which includes single-family, two-family, townhouses
                          and condominiums
   Setbacks:
    Main buildings:
      Front              30 feet from front property line
      Side               10 feet minimum for each side except 20 feet minimum
                          for side fronting on a street
      Rear               30 feet from rear property line
   Detached accessory
   buildings and
   garages:
    Front                 30 feet from all front lot lines
                          Same as for dwelling, except when the structure is at
                          least 10 feet behind the main building or 10 feet
                          behind a line extending from the rear corners of the
                          main building to the side lot lines parallel to the
    Side/rear             rear lot line(s); the side and rear setbacks may be
                          reduced to 1 foot; provided, that the structure must
                          be at least 20 feet from main buildings on adjacent
                          lots; and on corner lots the minimum setback for a
                          side facing a street is 20 feet and minimum rear
                          setback adjacent to a side lot line is 10 feet
 
(Ord. 658, 4-18-2006)
10-13G-3: SPECIAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Per the planning commission discretion, at the preliminary review stage
commercial and residential ratios may be imposed for the uses on the property.
   B.   Per the planning commission discretion open space and trail connections
throughout the project site may be required.
   C.   Approval of uses shall be reviewed and approved by the planning
commission prior to issuance of a business license. (Ord. 647, 7-19-2005)
10-13G-4: USES:
   A.   All uses in a mixed use zone shall be reviewed or considered by the
planning commission. Uses deemed inappropriate because of being adverse or
having a potential negative impact on people, uses or property in the
development area shall not be allowed. Possible potential uses would include:
Accessory retail sales and services when located within a principal building.
Adult daycare centers.
Amusement enterprises including:
Bowling alley.
Dance studio.
Gymnasium.
Park and playground.
Recreation facilities (private and public).
Roller skating rink.
Theater:
Movie, indoor.
Performing arts production facility with live performance.
Animal service including:
Doggie daycare, conducted in a completely enclosed building.
Grooming for cats and dogs.
Hospital, small animal only and services conducted in a  completely enclosed
building.
Art galleries.
Assisted living facility.
Bed and breakfast.
Car wash, manual and professional.
Child daycare/preschool centers.
Church, place of worship.
Cleaning:
Dry cleaning/laundromat.
Clinics:
Medical and dental offices/clinics.
Optometrist, optician or oculist.
Physician or surgeon.
Community gardens.
Day spa (bath and massage establishment).
Dwelling unit above first floor commercial or office.
Financial institutions with or without drive-through facilities.
Hotel/motel.
Library.
Multi-family dwellings (condo/townhouse).
Museum.
Nature preserves/conservation areas.
Nursery school and preschool.
Office, research related.
Offices:
Accountant.
Employment agency.
Government offices.
Legal.
Medical.
Professional.
Real estate agency.
Travel agency.
Parking (park and ride lots not allowed):
Off site parking.
Structure.
Public/private utility buildings and structures.
Public/private utility transmission wires, lines, pipes and poles.
Reception center/wedding chapel.
Restaurant (with or without drive-through facilities):
Cafe or cafeteria.
Catering establishment.
Delicatessen.
Ice cream parlor.
Retail goods establishments.
Retail service establishments.
Single-family attached/detached dwellings.
Transportation terminals (bus and rail).
Vending carts on private property. (Ord. 658, 4-18-2006; amd. Ord. 802, 4-3-
2012)
   B.   Not permitted in this zone would be sexually oriented business (SOB)
per subsection 3-5-11B of this code or clubs, lounges, taverns or any
establishment whose primary propose is the sale of alcoholic beverage. (Ord.
658, 4-18-2006)
10-13G-5: HOURS OF OPERATION:
Hours of operation are to be set by the planning commission after considering
the impact to surrounding areas. General guidelines could include, but are not
limited to, businesses not to be open before six o'clock (6:00) A.M. or after
eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. (Ord. 647, 7-19-2005)
10-13G-6: BUSINESSES AND USES:
The uses in this article shall be permitted only under the following
conditions: no outside storage except for two (2) business delivery vehicles,
three-quarter (3/4) ton or smaller (unless otherwise specified by the planning
commission). (Ord. 647, 7-19-2005)
10-13G-7: FENCING:
Fencing may be required per the planning commission discretion for use as a
buffer to adjacent properties. Fences shall be decorative, durable and of a
height set forth in the site plan approval. (Ord. 647, 7-19-2005)
10-13G-8: LANDSCAPING:
All front, corner side, and rear (that abuts a public street) yards shall be
maintained as landscaped yards. Twenty percent (20%) of the total site
excluding parking area shall be landscaped with landscaping plans approved by
the planning commission.
   A.   Parking area landscaping shall be ten percent (10%) of the parking
surface with plans approved by the planning commission.
   B.   All landscaped areas planted with live plant material shall include an
appropriate automatic irrigation system. The owner, tenant and any agent shall
be jointly and individually responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping
in good condition and free from refuse and debris so as to present a healthy,
neat and orderly appearance. (Ord. 647, 7-19-2005)
10-13G-9: LIGHTING:
Lighting shall be low intensity, shielded from uses on adjoining lots and
directed away from adjacent property in a residential zone or an adjacent
residential use. Lighting cannot impact residential uses. All parking
luminaries except those required for security must be extinguished one hour
after the end of business hours. The exception for security lighting applies to
twenty five percent (25%) of the total luminaries used. A higher percentage of
security lighting may be approved at the discretion of the planning commission.
(Ord. 647, 7-19-2005)
10-13G-10: NOISE:
The noise level emanating from any use or operation shall not exceed the state
health department standards of the area measured at the property line. (Ord.
647, 7-19-2005)
10-13G-11: ODOR:
No use shall be permitted which creates an objectionable odor in such quantity
as to be readily detectable beyond the boundaries of the site. (Ord. 647, 7-19-
2005)
10-13G-12: SCREENING:
Screening shall be approved by the planning commission to minimize noise and
visibility from on site parking areas, adjacent public streets and adjacent
residentially zoned property. (Ord. 647, 7-19-2005)
10-13G-13: SIGNAGE:
Signage shall be approved by the planning commission. (Ord. 647, 7-19-2005)
10-13G-14: ACCESS:
The number of access points along public streets shall be minimized by sharing
and linking parking areas with adjacent properties. Reciprocal ingress and
egress, circulation and parking agreements shall be required to facilitate the
ease of vehicular movement between adjoining properties. On corner sites,
access points shall be located as far from the corner as reasonably possible
per discretion of the public works director from the point of intersection of
the property lines. Vehicular circulation shall be designed to limit the
intrusion of traffic into residential areas and minimize access on streets used
by schoolchildren. (Ord. 647, 7-19-2005; amd. Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
10-13G-15: DESIGN CONSIDERATION:
Per the planning commission discretion, the development shall provide on site
amenities and appropriate buffering to adjacent properties and uses. The scale
of the development shall be in character with the surrounding land uses and the
development shall have a residential character if adjacent to residential
areas. Any properties currently abutting a residential street or residents
shall create and maintain the residential nature. (Ord. 647, 7-19-2005)
ARTICLE H.  MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL OVERLAY ZONE (MFROZ)
SECTION:
10-13H-1: Purpose And Intent
10-13H-2: Permitted Uses
10-13H-3: Conditional Uses
10-13H-4: Site Development Standards
10-13H-5: General Requirements
10-13H-6: Financial Ability
10-13H-7: Development Agreement
10-13H-8: Review And Action Process
10-13H-9: Time Limitations
10-13H-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of the multiple-family residential overlay zone is to provide
attractive, individually owned townhomes/condominiums with open space and
common area amenities. The development should be designed as a single complex
land use with flexible development guidelines and future control regulations by
means of a development agreement. (Ord. 797, 1-17-2012)
10-13H-2: PERMITTED USES:
Dwelling units, not to exceed twelve (12) units per acre.
Support amenities associated to this type of dwelling units. (Ord. 797, 1-17-
2012)
10-13H-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Home occupation with approval of the homeowners' association and city. (Ord.
797, 1-17-2012)
10-13H-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The final approved site and engineering plan shall depict the following as
approved by the planning commission and council:
   A.   A landscape architect's design of the landscaping for the entire site
with a legend showing quantity, size and ratio percentage of all planting
material, decorative nonliving material and decorative hardscape.
   B.   The site plan shall be prepared and stamped by a Utah licensed engineer
or architect.
   C.   All building setbacks in relationship to roads and property lines and
in conformance with city adopted building and fire codes.
   D.   The elevation of all buildings.
   E.   Building lot coverage percentage.
   F.   Each dwelling unit shall be recorded with Weber County as an individual
unit with its own property tax ID number.
   G.   All exterior lighting with an accompanying photometric plan.
   H.   Overlay flood hazard area on site plan (if applicable).
   I.   Location, type of lighting, height and size of all signs.
   J.   Common/recreational areas.
   K.   Site screening, wall or fencing.
   L.   Location of trash facilities and enclosures.
   M.   Tenant and visitor parking.
   N.   Covered/enclosed parking and storage areas.
   O.   Engineering plan for water, sewer, stormwater design and detention,
subsurface water design, access points from dedicated roads, soil and
geotechnical study, traffic impact study and infrastructure utility study.
(Ord. 797, 1-17-2012)
10-13H-5: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Each individual dwelling unit shall be provided with utility services
independent from any other dwelling unit.
   B.   All streets fronting the development shall be built to city standards
and following completion dedicated to the city.
   C.   Sewer main trunk lines and manholes shall be dedicated to and
maintained by Riverdale City. All service lateral lines are owned and
maintained by each individual property owner.
   D.   All water meters, water main lines, service lines on the street side of
the meters and fire hydrants will be owned and maintained by Riverdale City.
   E.   No rear yard setback of any dwelling unit shall be closer than twenty
feet (20') to the adjacent zone boundary or property outside of the
development. All other building setbacks shall comply with the minimum
requirements of the building code unless it is the determination of the
planning commission that greater setbacks are necessary to provide for open
space areas or for access or aesthetic reasons. All building setbacks shall be
reviewed and approved by the planning commission.
   F.   All common/recreational areas shall be owned and maintained by the
homeowners' association.
   G.   Visitor parking will be evaluated and requirements imposed by the
planning commission. (Ord. 797, 1-17-2012)
10-13H-6: FINANCIAL ABILITY:
   A.   Provide ability to financially carry out the proposed project within
the time limit established.
   B.   Provide an escrow for all the city improvements and no escrow will be
released until the project is completed.
   C.   An independent finance person or company shall be responsible for the
association dues assessed by the association for maintenance and improvements
to common areas. (Ord. 797, 1-17-2012)
10-13H-7: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT:
Riverdale City and the development petitioner shall enter into a development
agreement that will outline specific details and requirements pertaining to
building architecture, maintenance and appearance of the entire site,
management of each facility, tenant standards, and reasonable conditions,
covenants and restrictions that are necessary to the current and future
viability of the development. (Ord. 797, 1-17-2012)
10-13H-8: REVIEW AND ACTION PROCESS:
Following the review, discussion and acceptance of the conceptual plan for the
development of a new MFROZ the petitioner shall prepare a preliminary site
plan. Following the approval of the preliminary site plan with planning
commission conditions and possible amendments the petitioner and city will
create the development agreement followed by the planning commission setting a
public hearing allowing for comments regarding the final site plan, development
agreement and the assignment of the MFROZ to the property. The planning
commission shall then make a recommendation to the city council regarding the
amendment to the zoning map to the proposed MFROZ, the final site plan and the
development agreement. The council shall then accept or reject the amendment to
the zoning map and accept, modify or reject the final site plan and development
agreement. (Ord. 797, 1-17-2012)
10-13H-9: TIME LIMITATIONS:
A building permit shall be secured and construction begun in accordance with
the approved final development plan within eighteen (18) months from the
effective date of the ordinance establishing this specific overlay area zone or
of a time as determined by the city council.
In the event that construction is not started within the specified time limits,
the planning commission shall proceed with proceedings to revoke and remove the
overlay area from the zoning map. With the approval of the city council the
property will revert back to the underlying zone designation. (Ord. 797, 1-17-
2012)
CHAPTER 14
REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL ZONES
SECTION:
10-14-1: Applicability
10-14-2: Use Regulations
10-14-3: Main Building Regulations
10-14-4: Yard Regulations
10-14-5: Height Regulations
10-14-6: Water Supply; Sewage Disposal
10-14-7: Fence Height; Obstruction Of View
10-14-8: Lighting
10-14-9: Private Park, Playground Or Recreational Area
10-14-10: Public Utility Substations
10-14-11: Swimming Pool, Swim Spa And Hot Tub, Family
10-14-12: Nonresidential And Residential Development Landscape Requirements
10-14-13: Property Line Adjustments
10-14-1: APPLICABILITY:
The regulations hereinafter set forth in this chapter qualify or supplement, as
the case may be, the zone regulations contained elsewhere in this title. (1985
Code § 19-3-1)
10-14-2: USE REGULATIONS:
The requirements of this title as to minimum site development standards shall
not be construed to prevent a use as permitted in a respective zone of any
parcel of land in the event such parcel was held in separate ownership prior to
the effective date hereof. Each such parcel to be developed must have not less
than sixteen feet (16') of frontage on a street, or as approved by the board of
adjustment, and the density of development may not exceed that permitted by
area requirements in the respective zone. (1985 Code § 19-3-2)
10-14-3: MAIN BUILDING REGULATIONS:
Every main building shall be located and maintained on a "lot", as defined in
section
10-2-2 of this title, and every lot shall have required frontage on a "street",
as defined in section
10-2-2 of this title, except as follows:
   A.   Where a parcel of land was in separate ownership prior to the effective
date hereof, as described in section
10-14-2 of this chapter; and
   B.   Where under special circumstances of design of a parcel of land, the
board of adjustment approves a variance to create a lot which may or may not
have the required frontage as provided for in this title. Under no
circumstances may the frontage be less than sixteen feet (16') or as approved
by the board of adjustment. (1985 Code § 19-3-3)
10-14-4: YARD REGULATIONS:
   A.   No required yard or other open space around an existing building or
which is hereafter provided around any building for the purpose of complying
with the provisions of this title, shall be considered as providing a yard or
open space for any other building, nor shall any yard or other required open
space on an adjoining lot be considered as providing a yard or open space on a
lot whereon a building is to be erected or established.
   B.   On any lot under a separate ownership from adjacent lots and of record
at the time of the initial enactment of this title and such lot having a
smaller width than required for the zone in which it is located, the following
regulations shall apply:
      1.   For interior lots, each side yard may be equal to but not less than
the same percentage of the required side yard width as the lot is of the
required lot width; provided, that in no case shall the smaller of the two (2)
side yards be less than five feet (5') or the larger less than eight feet (8').
      2.   On corner lots, each side yard may be equal to but not less than the
same percentage of the required side yard width as the lot is of the required
lot width; provided, that in no case shall the side yard on the street side be
less than fifteen feet (15') in R-1-10, R-1-8, R-1-6, R-2 and R-3 zones, or
less than ten feet (10') in R-4 and R-5 zones, and the other side yard shall be
not less than five feet (5') in all residential zones.
   C.   On any interior lot where a private attached garage containing a
sufficient number of parking spaces to meet the requirements of this title has
a side yard equal to the minimum side yard required for a dwelling in the same
zone, the width of the other side yard for the dwelling may be reduced to equal
that of the minimum required side yard.
   D.   Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky unobstructed
except for accessory buildings in a rear yard, and except for the ordinary
projections of skylights, sills, belt courses, cornices and other ornamental
features.
   E.   Open or lattice enclosed fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways, and
balconies opening upon fire towers, may project into a yard not more than five
feet (5'), and the ordinary projections of chimneys and flues are permitted.
   F.   No accessory building nor group of accessory buildings in any
residential zone shall cover more than twenty five percent (25%) of the rear
yard.
   G.   Detached garage or accessory building that is placed a minimum of six
feet (6') behind the main dwelling and that has an area greater than two
hundred (200) square feet shall not be located closer than two feet (2') to the
side and rear property line. The two feet (2') includes the wall and/or roof
eave.
   H.   No space needed to meet the width, yard, area, coverage, parking or
other requirements of this title for a lot or building may be conveyed away
from such lot or building, except as permitted by the board of adjustment, and
any attempted conveyance or lease in violation hereof shall be void.
   I.   No parcel of land which has less than the minimum width and area
requirements for the zone in which it is located may be cut off from a larger
parcel of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of building or
development as a lot, except by permit of the board of adjustment.
   J.   One zero side yard may be permitted when approved by the planning
commission and city council, and only if the following requirements are met:
      1.   The remaining one side yard is equal to the combined total of the
required two (2) side yards of the zone in which it is located for all parallel
side zero lot lines. The remaining side yard for all (duplex-type) alternate
side zero lot lines may be reduced to a minimum of not less than ten feet
(10'); provided, that the lot adjacent to it is also built as a duplex-type
zero lot line or conventional single-family home;
      2.   No window or other similar opening shall be installed in the
building or any accessory building along the side having a zero side yard;
      3.   No zero side yard will be permitted on the lot side bordering on a
nonresidential zone or on a residential lot not utilizing zero side yard
provisions;
      4.   Use of the zero side yard provision is contingent upon development
of or commitment to development of a zero side yard on an adjoining lot.
   K.   Utility substations, communication towers and dishes, water tanks,
water well and pump buildings, sewer lift stations, electric transformers,
power and telephone poles/towers, water reservoirs, and structures which house
equipment for utilities and communications which serve the general public and
are of a public utility nature, are allowed only as a conditional use in any
zone. (Ord. 772, 10-19-2010)
   L.   When a patio roof cover is attached to a dwelling in the rear yard, the
edge of the roof shall not be closer than twenty feet (20') to the rear
property line; and the roofline of the patio roof cover cannot exceed the
height of the existing roofline of the dwelling. Any attached patio roof that
is lower than thirty feet (30') to the rear property lot line shall not be
enclosed with walls in any manner so as to make the patio interior habitable
space. (Ord. 577, 5-24-2000; amd. Ord. 772, 10-19-2010)
   M.   Zoning regulations pertaining to minimum lot area, minimum lot width,
minimum yard setback and required frontage on a street shall be determined by
the planning commission's approval of the site development plan, but shall not
adversely affect the adjacent property. (1985 Code § 19-3-4; amd. Ord. 772, 10-
19-2010)
10-14-5: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
   A.   Penthouse or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways,
tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment required to operate and maintain a
building, and fire or parapet walls, skylights, towers, steeples, flagpoles,
chimneys, smokestacks and water tanks, wireless or television masts, theater
lofts, silos or similar structures may be erected above the height limits
prescribed in the zone height regulations, but no space above the height limit
shall be allowed for the purpose of providing additional floor space, and no
heights are permitted above the maximum allowed under airport area height
provisions. Prior to the construction or erection of flagpoles, towers,
wireless or television masts (not including typical roof TV antennas) and any
similar structure over thirty five feet (35') in total height, including any
supporting structures in or adjacent to any residential zone, a conditional use
permit must be applied for and reviewed and approved by the planning commission
and city council.
   B.   No dwelling shall be erected to a height less than ten feet (10'), and
no accessory building in a residential zone shall be erected to a height
greater than twenty feet (20'), nor greater than one thousand (1,000) square
feet in area unless the residential lot has a minimum lot area of forty
thousand (40,000) square feet, then the accessory building shall not exceed two
thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet and shall not exceed twenty five feet
(25') in height to the peak of the roof. (Ord. 823, 12-4-2012)
10-14-6: WATER SUPPLY; SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
Domestic water supply and sewage disposal shall comply with the Weber County
health department requirements in all applications for a building permit where
either an approved supply of piped water under pressure, or a sewer, is not
available. (1985 Code § 19-3-7)
10-14-7: FENCE HEIGHT; OBSTRUCTION OF VIEW:
   A.   Purpose:
      1.   Fences, walls, hedges, trees, bushes or other obstructions serve
properties by providing privacy and security, define private space and enhance
the design of individual sites. Fences also affect the public by impacting the
visual image of the streetscape and the overall character of neighborhoods.
The purpose of these regulations is to achieve a balance between the private
concerns for privacy and site design and public concerns for enhancement of the
community appearance, and to ensure the provision of adequate light, air and
public safety.
   B.   Fence Regulations:
      1.   Permit Required: In all cases, a permit is required from the
community development department.
      2.   Front Yards (From The Front Setback Line Of The Zone To The Front
Property Line):
         a.   Fences or other similar structures, walls, hedges, trees, or
bushes shall not exceed four feet (4') in height except as regulated in the
sight triangle area requirements. See subsection C1, "Sight Triangle Area", of
this section.
      3.   Interior Lots, Rear And Side Yards (Behind The Front Setback Line Of
The Zone To The Rear Property Line):
         a.   Fences or other similar structures, walls, or hedges can be
erected up to a height of six feet (6'). Any fence over six feet (6') up to a
maximum height of seven feet (7') must have engineering by the contractor
installing the fence or from the supplier of the fencing materials.
      4.   Corner Side Yards:
         a.   On corner lots, the side yard adjacent to the street may have a
fence, wall, or hedge that is allowed up to a height of six feet (6'). All
fences may be placed on the edge (private property side) of the sidewalk.
         b.   Sight triangle area requirements must be met in all cases. (Ord.
692, 11-7-2007)
      5.   Access:
         a.   No fences, whether of wood, metal, masonry or concrete, nor other
obstruction, including shrubbery (hedges, trees, bushes), nor any combination
of materials, shall be erected or maintained which blocks the access from a
front yard through both sides to the rear yard unless a gate approved by the
community development director is installed in at least one side. (Ord. 854, 5-
6-2014)
      6.   Retaining Wall:
         a.   Where a retaining wall protects a cut below or a fill above the
natural grade and is located on the separating lots, such retaining walls may
be topped by a fence, wall or hedge of the same height that would otherwise be
permitted at that location if no retaining wall existed.
      7.   Maintained:
         a.   All fences and retaining walls must be maintained in a state of
good repair. Hedges and bushes must be kept trimmed and maintained not to
exceed height of fence regulated at that location on the property.
      8.   Location:
         a.   All fences, walls or hedges shall be erected entirely within the
property lines of the property they are intending to serve, except all fences
shall be allowed to be placed against the edge (private property side) of the
sidewalk.
      9.   Exceptions:
         a.   Fences required by state law to surround or enclose public
utility installations, public schools or other public buildings.
         b.   Fences for uses such as tennis or sports courts which may be a
maximum of fifteen feet (15') high if the fence meets all of the required
setbacks for an accessory building in the zone in which it is located.
   C.   Obstruction Of View:
      1.   Sight Triangle Area:
         a.   Defined as that portion of a corner lot lying within a triangle
area formed by measuring back along the property lines adjacent to the
intersecting streets to a point on each property line twenty feet (20') from
the intersection of said property lines and then connecting the two (2) points
and continuing through the park strip, curb and gutter to the edge of the
street line where the gutter meets with the asphalt or if there is not a curb
and gutter to the street edge thus establishing a third line.
      2.   Maintenance In Sight Triangle Area:
         a.   It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or person in control
of any corner lot in the city to erect, maintain or permit to grow any
obstruction to the view of drivers of motor vehicles over a height of three
feet (3') and all trees shall be trimmed so that no foliage hangs down closer
than seven feet (7') to the ground within the "sight triangle area" of said
lot, as defined in subsection C1a of this section.
      3.   Park Strips:
         a.   Only trees listed on the public works department's list of
approved trees may be planted in the park strip and a permit must be obtained
from the public works department before said trees may be planted.
   D.   Violations:
      1.   The mayor or his appointee shall have the authority to order removal
of any tree, plant, shrub, fence or other object that violates the provisions
of this section. (Ord. 692, 11-7-2007)
10-14-8: LIGHTING:
No spotlight or floodlight shall be installed in any way which will permit the
direct rays of such light to penetrate into any residential zone or onto any
property used for residential purpose. (1985 Code § 19-3-9)
10-14-9: PRIVATE PARK, PLAYGROUND OR RECREATIONAL AREA:
In all residential zones, a private park, playground or recreational area, with
or without a swimming pool, shall meet the following requirements:
   A.   Ownership: The lands and facilities used for such purpose shall be
owned or leased and operated by a nonprofit corporation for the exclusive
benefit of the members, their immediate families and nonpaying guests.
   B.   Restrooms; Sanitary Facilities: Adequate restrooms and sanitary
facilities shall be provided and kept available for use by members, their
families and guests, and shall be maintained in proper working order and in a
clean and sanitary condition and in full compliance with the reasonable
standards, rules and regulations established by the Weber County health
department.
   C.   Parking: Twenty five (25) off street parking spaces, or one off street
parking space for each four (4) memberships in the operating corporation,
whichever is greater, shall be provided on the lot devoted to the principal
use.
   D.   Hours Regulated: Operation or use of the recreational facilities
provided is forbidden between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. to six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. next following.
   E.   Setbacks: All facilities, equipment and buildings shall be set back not
less than twenty feet (20') from any property line and shall be located not
less than fifty feet (50') from any main building on an adjoining lot and from
any area upon which any such main building is in existence.
   F.   Lot Size: The minimum size of the lot or site used for such
recreational or other purposes shall be one acre.
   G.   Lighting: Any lights used to illuminate the premises shall be installed
in such manner that the source of light shall be suitably screened to avoid
annoying illumination of lands outside said premises. (1985 Code § 19-3-10)
10-14-10: PUBLIC UTILITY SUBSTATIONS:
In all residential zones, public utility substations shall meet the following
requirements:
   A.   Lot Size: Each public utility substation in a residential zone shall be
located on a lot not less than two thousand (2,000) square feet in area.
   B.   Yard Requirements: Each public utility substation in a residential zone
shall be provided with a yard on each of the four (4) sides of the building not
less than five feet (5') in width, except that for such stations located on
lots fronting on a street abutted by one or more residential lots, the front
yard, side yards and rear yard shall equal those required for a single-family
residence in the same zone.
   C.   Access: Each public utility substation in a residential zone shall be
located on a lot which has adequate access from a street, alley or easement.
   D.   Location Subject To Approval: The location of a public utility
substation in a residential zone shall be subject to approval by the planning
commission. (1985 Code § 19-3-11)
10-14-11: SWIMMING POOL, SWIM SPA AND HOT TUB, FAMILY:
A family above or in ground swimming pool, swim spa and hot tub shall be
permitted in the rear yard of a dwelling as an accessory use, provided the
following requirements are met:
   A.   Location: The location of such family swimming pool, swim spa, hot tub
or accessory machinery shall not be less than five feet (5') from any interior
property line, as measured to the water's edge, or if an easement exists on the
property the pool, spa or tub must be completely off the easement. On corner
lots, the distance from said pool to the property line facing on a street shall
not be less than the required side yard for an accessory building in that zone.
   B.   Enclosure; Lighting: An outside family swimming pool shall be
completely enclosed by a substantial fence of not less than six feet (6') in
height and any lights used to illuminate said pool or its accessories shall be
so arranged as to reflect the light away from the adjoining premises.
   C.   Pool Covers: In addition to the setback and fencing requirements set
forth herein, it is strongly recommended that pool owners utilize pool covers
that comply with the most current personal liability insurance standards.
   D.   Side Yard Location: If a property has sufficient side yard to
accommodate a pool, spa or hot tub in meeting all of the above requirements
while also maintaining the required side yard setback (from property line to
any portion of the structure) for the zone it is located in, then the pool, spa
or hot tub may be located in the side yard. (Ord. 818, 10-2-2012; Ord. 912, 9-
17-2019)
10-14-12: NONRESIDENTIAL AND RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Residential: All new and refurbished or remodeled single- family and
two-family homes, apartments, condominiums and townhouses shall be required to
improve and maintain, as landscape yards, the front, corner street side yard
and park strip and install an appropriate permanent irrigation system, so that
the landscaping will receive the appropriate amount of water in order to
flourish in good health, before final approval or certificate of occupancy is
issued. An escrow agreement may be issued with a temporary certificate of
occupancy which includes a time certain for installation of the landscaping and
irrigation system by the owner/developer. Failure to install landscaping by the
end of the next planting season (October of the following year) shall lead to
forfeiture of the escrow funds and may lead to revocation of the temporary
certificate of occupancy. Landscaping may include a combination of grass, plant
cover and xeriscape.
   B.   Nonresidential: All new or refurbished development in any
nonresidential zone shall satisfy all of the following minimum landscape
requirements, any other development standards or requirements notwithstanding:
The planning commission shall require a combination of plant cover, xeriscape
and other drought tolerant landscape features which will include plant material
that can survive on low or minimal water usage and decorative hardscape which
will enhance the look and feel of the property that is nonliving, including,
but not limited to: water features, benches, planters, decorative walls,
decorative ornaments, stamped concrete, small decorative rocks as well as
boulders, mulch, and decorative curbing.
      1.   Refurbished Existing Developments: The refurbishing of any existing
development that, in any manner whatsoever, is expanding, reducing or otherwise
changing a building footprint, structure or parking lot, shall provide new
landscaping equal to twenty percent (20%) of the new footprint of the expanded
or reduced development area, no less than fifty percent (50%) of which shall be
in the form of xeriscape and other drought tolerant landscape features
including, but not limited to: water features, benches, planters, decorative
walls, decorative ornaments, stamped concrete, small decorative rocks as well
as boulders, mulch, and decorative curbing.
         a.   Landscaping Requirements: The landscaping requirement for
refurbished existing developments may be satisfied under the conditions set
forth below. Options A and B are preferred over option C. Option C shall only
be permitted when options A and B cannot, in the determination of the planning
commission, reasonably be accomplished by the developer/owner:
            (1)   Option A: Landscaping on site or off site within the city;
            (2)   Option B: Other beautification efforts of equal value,
including, but not limited to, planters, hardscape, xeriscape, etc.;
            (3)   Option C: Funds, equal in value to the required twenty
percent (20%) landscaping as determined in the landscaping plan, contributed to
the city to allow the city to install landscaping elsewhere within the city
limits.
         b.   Landscaping Plan: The developer/owner shall submit to the
planning commission a landscape plan for the expansion, reduction or other
changes of the building/development. The planning commission shall direct where
and what type of landscaping, beautification or funds shall be allowed to
satisfy this landscaping requirement.
      2.   New Development: Twenty percent (20%) of all lot area, including
parking areas, shall be landscaped, no less than fifty percent (50%) of which
shall be in the form of xeriscape and other drought tolerant landscape features
including, but not limited to: water features, benches, planters, decorative
walls, decorative ornaments, stamped concrete, small decorative rocks as well
as boulders, mulch, and decorative curbing. At the planning commission
recommendation, floodways (with an appropriate expert opinion), wetlands and
undisturbed hillsides on the lot area may be counted for up to five percent
(5%) of the required twenty percent (20%) as part of the landscape requirement,
unless it is the determination of the planning commission that the landscaping
in the area adds to the overall aesthetic value of the entire site, in such
case, the allotted percentage credit may be increased. The following
requirements shall be satisfied as part of any new development landscaping
plan:
         a.   Placement of decorative landscaping shall be required based on
the size of the entire parking area, at a rough proportionality of the
exterior/interior parking area. The proportions will be reviewed by the
planning commission in regards to design.
         b.   Landscape screening shall be required for parking or storage
areas visible from any roadway. Said screening shall be in the form of a gentle
berm. Berms shall be graded to appear as smooth, rounded, natural forms. All
planting areas shall be protected to prevent damage by vehicles and vehicle
overhang.
         c.   At the planning commission recommendation, loading docks,
dumpster areas or service areas visible from any roadway or residence, or
abutting any residence or residential area shall be appropriately landscaped to
reduce the impact to surrounding areas. Dumpsters shall be placed in the rear
of the property or the most inconspicuous location on the site, in such a
manner that it will still allow the area to be properly accessed and
maintained.
         d.   All areas not used for parking, drives or structures shall be
landscaped. All areas along roadways shall be landscaped with landscape
features that strengthen and enhance the aesthetic appeal of the development
throughout and viewable from the roadway corridors.
         e.   A minimum of two inch (2") caliper trees shall be required as
part of all landscape requirements. There shall be a minimum of one tree per
five thousand (5,000) square feet of lot area, and not more than thirty three
percent (33%) of all newly planted trees may be of the same variety. All
species of trees need approval from the planning commission.
         f.   Owners/developers shall enter into an escrow agreement with the
city wherein the owner/developer shall deposit sufficient funds to ensure
installation of the required landscape, which amount shall include an
additional fifteen percent (15%) of the total amount required. The escrow
agreement shall include a time certain for installation of the landscaping by
the owner/developer. Upon default of the owner/developer of any of the
conditions of this section, or the escrow agreement, the city shall receive the
escrowed funds and use said funds to complete the required landscaping and
appropriate irrigation system.
         g.   Where any nonresidential development abuts any residence or
residential area, the planning commission may require a landscape strip for
said area and development. This may be separate from, and not be included in,
the overall required percentage amount of landscape required for the specific
area.
         h.   The planning commission shall review the landscape site plan
following the certification of the correct landscape ratios by the owner's/
developer's engineer and after review of the certification by the city staff. A
landscape plan shall accompany, or be a part of, the final site plan. The
planning commission shall then forward its recommendations to the city council.
         i.   It is the intent of this section to promote water conservation
through proper plant selection, installation and maintenance practices. The
following xeriscape principles shall serve as the primary means of achieving
this goal:
            (1)   Appropriate planning and design;
            (2)   Limiting turf to locations where it provides functional
benefits;
            (3)   Efficient irrigation systems;
            (4)   Use of soil amendments and mulches to improve water holding
capacities;
            (5)   Use of drought tolerant plants;
            (6)   Decorative hardscape; and
            (7)   Appropriate and timely maintenance.
         j.   All areas landscaped with living plant material shall be serviced
by an acceptable underground sprinkling or irrigation system.
         k.   For xeriscape and nonliving ground cover landscaping, the
following standards shall be utilized in establishing the landscaping and
landscaping design:
            (1)   The overall landscaping on the property enhances the visual
environment by:
   (A) Adding visual interest through texture, color, size and shape, etc., and
   (B) Enhancing perspective by framing views complementing architecture,
screening and creating points of interest and activity;
            (2)   The design includes elements which work with existing
topography and is designed in such a way as to make softened transitions from
the landscaping of adjoining properties to the property in question;
            (3)   Plant species that are a public nuisance or that cause excess
litter shall be avoided;
            (4)   The other aspects of waterwise design are included on the
property which are:
   (A) An overall landscape design for the entire property,
   (B) Mulches are used in planting bed areas,
   (C) Turf areas are used in high use areas of the lot,
   (D) Plants are selected and installed which are appropriate for the physical
condition of site specific locations, and
   (E) The landscaping is kept free of weeds and junk materials.
         l.   The landowner, his successors and/or assigns, or agent, if any,
shall be jointly and severally liable for the installation, regular maintenance
and repair or replacement of any landscaping required by this section.
   C.   General Maintenance: All landscaped areas, whether required or
otherwise, shall be kept and maintained in accordance with all of the following
standards:
      1.   Landscaped areas shall be kept free of litter and debris.
      2.   Landscaped areas shall be weeded on a regular basis.
      3.   Trees and shrubs shall be pruned so as to avoid damage to other
improvements, structures or utility lines.
      4.   Dead branches or dead trees, shrubs or other plant materials are
removed from the property.
      5.   Lawns are mowed on a regular basis according to the growth habit of
the type of turf grass used.
      6.   All plant materials shall be adequately watered to maintain a
healthy condition as by the typical color of the plant under normal growing
conditions; provided that when water use restrictions are imposed by the city
or applicable secondary water provider during times of drought, no violation
shall occur as long as the owner or occupant is watering within such
restrictions.
      7.   Required trees, shrubs or other plant materials that have died and
been removed shall be replaced. (Ord. 885, 3-7-2017)
10-14-13: PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENTS:
   A.   A property line adjustment may be approved by the community development
director, if the director determines that:
      1.   No new lot, dwelling unit, or remnant parcel will result from the
property line adjustment;
      2.   All affected property owners have agreed to the property line
adjustment through means of a recorded agreement and a survey suitable for
recording; and
      3.   The adjustment does not result in violation of applicable zoning
requirements.
   B.   The conveyance document for the property line adjustment shall recite
the descriptions of both the original parcels or lots and the parcels or lots
created by the adjustment or exchange of title, and be signed and acknowledged
by the owners.
   C.   If the community development director approves a property line
adjustment, a letter of approval will be issued and may be recorded in the
Weber County recorder's office.
   D.   The city attorney shall review and approve the conveyance/adjustment
documents for compliance with the requirements of state law. (Ord. 761, 7-6-
2010)
CHAPTER 15
PARKING, LOADING SPACE; VEHICLE TRAFFIC AND ACCESS
SECTION:
10-15-1: Purpose And Intent
10-15-2: Parking Space For Dwellings
10-15-3: Parking Space For Nondwelling Buildings
10-15-4: Computation Of Parking Requirements
10-15-5: Parking Lot Design And Maintenance
10-15-6: Off Street Truck Loading Space
10-15-7: Businesses Requiring Motor Vehicle Access
10-15-8: Vehicular Traffic To Commercial Or Manufacturing Zones
10-15-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate parking and loading spaces, vehicle
traffic and access in order to provide orderly and adequate development of
these needed amenities, and in so doing, promote the safety and well being of
the citizens of the city. Consequently, there shall be provided at the time of
the erection of any main building or at the time any main building is enlarged
or increased, minimum off street parking space with adequate provisions for
ingress and egress by standard sized automobiles. (1985 Code § 19-4-1)
10-15-2: PARKING SPACE FOR DWELLINGS:
In all zones there shall be provided the following number of parking spaces:
   A.   For a single-family dwelling, two (2) parking spaces.
   B.   For a two-family dwelling, four (4) spaces.
   C.   For a three-family dwelling, six (6) parking spaces.
   D.   For a four-family dwelling, eight (8) parking spaces.
   E.   For other multiple-family dwellings:
      1.   Standard multiple-family dwelling, one and three-fourths (13/4)
parking spaces per dwelling unit;
      2.   Multiple-family dwelling designed to accommodate exclusively
bachelor and/or bachelorette (presence of resident manager does not make this
type a standard multiple-family dwelling), one parking space for each person in
each unit. Building permit will stipulate maximum number of persons per unit
and number and type of unit;
      3.   Housing exclusively for elderly and/or handicapped, one parking
space per unit.
   F.   If any dwelling unit is increased by occupant use after the original
building permit is issued, the parking requirements shall reflect that
increase.
   G.   In addition to the above parking space requirements, one parking space
shall be provided for every two (2) paying guests residing in such dwelling
units. Such paying guests refers to the rental of sleeping rooms within the
dwelling unit. (Ord. 819, 10-2-2012)
10-15-3: PARKING SPACE FOR NONDWELLING BUILDINGS:
For new buildings or for any enlargement or increase in seating capacity, floor
area or guestrooms of any existing building, there shall be provided:
 
Apartment hotel                     1 space per 2 sleeping units.
Auditor's office                    1 space per staff member, plus 3 spaces for
                                    clients.
Auto repair shop                    1 space per employee, plus 5 spaces for
                                    client use.
Bank                                1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor
                                    space in building.
Barber                              2 spaces per staff member.
Beautician shop                     3 spaces per staff member.
Boarding house                      3 spaces per 4 persons to whom rooms will
                                    be rented.
Business office                     1 space per employee on highest shift.
Cafe                                1 space per eating booth and table, plus 1
                                    space per 3 stools.
Cafeteria                           1 space per eating booth and table, plus 1
                                    space per 3 stools.
Car wash                            4 spaces per professional staff, plus 1
                                    space per subordinate staff.
Chiropractor office                 4 spaces per professional staff, plus 1
                                    space per subordinate staff.
Church                              1 space per 5 fixed seats.
Clinic                              4 spaces per professional staff, plus 1
                                    space per subordinate staff.
Club, private                       At least 20 client spaces.
Dance hall                          1 space per 200 square feet of floor space.
Daycare/preschool center            1 space per employee, plus 4 spaces for
                                    client use.
Dental office                       4 spaces per professional staff, plus 1 per
                                    subordinate staff.
Drive-in food establishment         1 space per 100 square feet of floor space,
                                    but not less than 10 spaces.
Dry cleaner                         1 space per employee, plus 5 spaces for
                                    client use.
                                    Elementary and junior high schools (K - 9
                                    grades): 2 spaces per classroom and other
Educational institution, public and teaching stations; high schools and trade
private                             schools: 4 spaces per classroom and other
                                    teaching stations; colleges and
                                    universities: 2 spaces per 3 student
                                    capacity, plus 1 space per staff member.
Employment office                   1 space per employee, plus 6 spaces for
                                    client use.
Finance office                      1 space per staff member, plus 3 spaces for
                                    client use.
Fraternity                          2 spaces per 4 persons whom the building is
                                    designed to accommodate.
Furniture store                     1 space per 300 square feet of sales floor
                                    space in building.
Hospital                            1 space per 2 bed capacity.
Hotel                               1 space per 2 sleeping units.
Insurance office                    1 space per staff member, plus 4 spaces for
                                    client use.
Laboratory                          1 space per employee on highest shift.
Laundromat                          1 space per 3 coin operated machines.
Legal office                        1 space per professional staff, plus 4
                                    spaces for client use.
Library                             At least 30 spaces.
Liquor store                        At least 20 spaces.
Lodging house                       3 spaces per 4 persons to whom rooms will
                                    be rented.
Lounge                              At least 20 client spaces.
Medical office                      4 spaces per professional staff, plus 1
                                    space per subordinate staff.
Mortuary                            At least 30 spaces.
Motel                               1 space per sleeping or living unit.
Museum                              At least 30 spaces.
Nightclub                           At least 20 client spaces.
Nursing home                        1 space per 2 bed capacity.
Optometrist office                  4 spaces per professional staff, plus 1
                                    space per subordinate staff.
Photo studio                        At least 6 spaces.
Post office                         At least 20 client spaces.
Psychiatric office                  4 spaces per professional staff, plus 1
                                    space per subordinate staff.
Real estate office                  1 space per employee, plus 4 spaces for
                                    client use.
Reception center                    At least 30 spaces.
Recreation center                   1 space per 200 square feet of recreation
                                    area.
Rental establishment                At least 4 client spaces.
Restaurant                          1 space per eating booth or table.
Retail store                        1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor
                                    space in building.
                                    1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor
Retail store with drive-in window   space in building, plus storage capacity of
                                    4 cars per window on the property.
Sanatorium                          1 space per 2 bed capacity.
Service repair shop, general        At least 4 client spaces.
Sorority                            2 spaces per 4 persons whom the building is
                                    designed to accommodate.
Stadium                             1 space per 5 fixed seats.
Tavern                              At least 15 spaces.
Terminal, transportation            At least 30 spaces.
Theater                             1 space per 5 fixed seats.
Travel agency                       1 space per employee, plus 4 spaces for
                                    client use.
Upholstery shop                     1 space per employee, plus 3 spaces for
                                    client use.
Used car lot                        1 space per employee, plus 4 spaces for
                                    client use.
Warehouse                           2 spaces per 3 employees.
Wedding chapel                      At least 30 spaces.
Wholesale business                  2 spaces per 3 employees, plus 3 spaces for
                                    client use.
                                    Where use is not listed above, the parking
                                    requirements shall be established by the
For other uses not listed above     planning commission based on a reasonable
                                    number of spaces for staff and customers
                                    and similar requirements of like
                                    businesses.
 
When a property or properties are part of a business/retail center development
that has a reciprocal agreement that pertains to parking and cross access, the
city may consider the entire development's parking availability rather than
calculating the parking requirement for individual business uses. Parking/land
that is not part of the individual businesses' property may be included as
meeting the parking requirement if there is a reciprocal agreement for parking
within the business center. (Ord. 881, 7-20-2016)
10-15-4: COMPUTATION OF PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
When measurements determining number of required parking spaces result in a
fractional space, any fraction up to one-half (1/2) shall be disregarded, and
fractions including one-half (1/2) and over shall require one parking space.
(1985 Code § 19-4-4)
10-15-5: PARKING LOT DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Location: Parking space as required in sections
10-15-2 and
10-15-3 of this chapter shall be on the same lot with the main building or in
the case of buildings other than dwellings, may be located no further than five
hundred feet (500') therefrom.
   B.   Surface; Drainage: Every parcel of land hereafter used as a public
parking area shall be paved with an asphalt or concrete surface and shall have
appropriate bumper guards or curbs where needed, as determined by the building
inspector, to protect adjacent property owners or persons using a sidewalk.
Catch basins and drains shall be provided to collect surface drainage of all
paved areas at a minimum rate of one inch (1") an hour rainfall. Surface
drainage is not allowable across pedestrian walkways.
   C.   Access: Access across and over the required front yard is allowed to
the side yard or rear yards. In the case of multiple- family dwellings, not
more than fifty percent (50%) of the required side and rear yards shall be used
for parking or vehicular access lanes. In such cases where it is deemed
necessary to utilize more than fifty percent (50%) of the required side and
rear yards, any said yard area used in excess of said limits shall be provided
in an equivalent amount of land area elsewhere on the same lot as the building
as open green space, patios, play areas or courts.
   D.   Design, Maintenance: The design and maintenance of off street parking
facilities shall be subject to the following provisions:
      1.   Each parking space shall encompass not less than one hundred eighty
(180) square feet, with a minimum width of nine feet (9'), the width being
measured at a right angle to the side lines of the parking space.
      2.   Adequate automobile access to and from parking areas for interior
block developments shall be provided. Minimum size of the access strip shall be
as follows based on the number of units to be served:
         a.   Up to and including four (4) dwelling units, sixteen feet (16');
         b.   From five (5) to eleven (11) dwelling units, one 24-foot two- way
access strip or two (2) 16-foot one-way access rights of way;
         c.   Twelve (12) or more dwelling units, one 36-foot two-way access
strip, or two (2) 18-foot one-way access strips;
         d.   A greater size of access right of way may be required as deemed
necessary by the planning commission, especially in cases where access right of
way will create corner lots from otherwise interior lots.
      3.   All off street parking spaces and associated access lanes shall be
effectively screened on any side adjoining any property in a residential zone
by a masonry wall or fences not less than four feet (4') nor more than seven
feet (7') high, except that some type of hedgerow shrubs may be used in place
of a wall or fence, provided the hedge is continuous along adjoining property
and at maturity is not less than five feet (5') nor more than seven feet (7')
high. Hedgerow shrubs shall be maintained and replaced where necessary in order
that the hedge may become an effective screen from bordering property within a
maximum five (5) year period. Front yard and corner lot fences or hedgerow
plantings shall maintain height requirements of their respective zones and
shall be compatible with the requirements of section
10-14-7 of this title.
      4.   Lighting and signs shall conform to the requirements set forth in
this title.
      5.   Parking spaces for dwellings will be located on the same lot with
the dwelling. (1985 Code § 19-4-5)
10-15-6: OFF STREET TRUCK LOADING SPACE:
On the same premises with every building or use involved in the receipt of
distribution by vehicles of materials or merchandise, there shall be provided
and maintained on the lot adequate space for standing, loading and unloading
services in order to avoid undue interference with public use of streets or
alleys. Such space, unless otherwise adequately provided, shall include a ten
foot by twenty five foot (10' x 25') loading space with fourteen foot (14')
height clearance, for every twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or fraction
thereof in excess of three thousand (3,000) square feet of land use for the
above mentioned purposes. (1985 Code § 19-4-6)
10-15-7: BUSINESSES REQUIRING MOTOR VEHICLE ACCESS:
Service stations, roadside stands, public parking lots and all other business
needing motor vehicle access shall meet the following requirements:
   A.   Access to the station or other structure or parking lot shall be by not
more than two (2) roadways for each one hundred feet (100') or fraction thereof
of frontage on any street; no two (2) said approaches shall be closer to each
other than twelve feet (12'); each of said approaches shall be not more than
fifty feet (50') in width. Location of approaches shall be as approved by the
planning commission as part of the site plan; and a curb, hedge or fence of not
more than two feet (2') in height shall be provided by the owner to limit
access to the permitted roadway.
   B.   Gasoline pumps shall be set back at least twenty feet (20') from any
property line bordering a street; provided, that a pump island parallel to an
adjoining street may be located not less than fifteen feet (15') from the
property line bordering said street. (1985 Code § 19-4-7)
10-15-8: VEHICULAR TRAFFIC TO COMMERCIAL OR MANUFACTURING ZONES:
Privately owned land within an area zoned for residential purposes shall not be
used as a regular means of vehicular passage to and from property in commercial
or manufacturing zones. (1985 Code § 19-4-8)
CHAPTER 16
SIGN REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-16-1: Major Sign Types
10-16-2: General Provisions
10-16-3: Special Provisions
10-16-4: Exempt Signs
10-16-5: Design Standards
10-16-6: Specialty Signs
10-16-7: Off Premises Signs
10-16-8: Sign/Zone Regulations
10-16-9: Penalty
10-16-10: Electronic Signs
10-16-1: MAJOR SIGN TYPES:
Business signs, identification and information signs, and specialty signs are
considered as major sign types for the purpose of this chapter. All signs will
be classified as belonging to one of the major sign types for regulatory
measures. (Ord. 702, 5-6-2008)
10-16-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Conformity And Safety: If a sign installed after May 6, 2008, does not
conform with the requirements of this chapter or if the construction, design,
manner of use, or method of anchoring or supporting any sign makes such sign
unsafe, the community development director shall proceed in any manner he deems
necessary to cause the removal of the sign or the rebuilding of the sign to
conform with the requirements of this chapter or to remedy the defects herein.
All signs must meet the requirements of the international building code for
wind loads, seismic loads and working stresses and safety regulations of the
city.
   B.   Clearance: There shall be a minimum clearance of ten feet (10') between
the ground or sidewalk and any part of a projecting sign, with the exception of
public necessity signs and nameplates.
   C.   Copy Area: Copy area of building facade signs or multiple copy signs
shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the background facing to which it is
applied.
   D.   Height Of Signs: No sign shall exceed the height limitations
established for each zone as set forth in section
10-16-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 702, 5-6-2008)
   E.   Lighting Of Signs: Signs may be illuminated the following ways:
internally, floodlights (except pole/pylon signs), luminous tubes, cathode ray,
light emitting diode (LED) display and plasma screen, liquid crystal display
(LCD), fiber optic. No lighting shall be installed in any way which will permit
direct rays of such light to penetrate onto any adjoining property used for
residential purposes, or in any manner constituting a nuisance. Animated signs
are prohibited. (Ord. 812, 8-21-2012)
   F.   Location Of Signs: No part of any sign shall be permitted to extend
across any property line nor be located in any required front or side yard
except as follows:
      1.   Business and identification signs attached to a building may project
into a required front or side yard not more than two feet (2') and not less
than ten feet (10') above the ground or sidewalk.
      2.   Ground business (monument) and pole (pylon) signs, including all
portable type signs for conforming uses only, shall not be located closer than
one foot (1') to a front or side property line.
Ground signs shall not be placed in such a way that it may obstruct a vehicle
operator's visibility.
Ground business signs for new developments shall be placed in landscaped or
decorative hardscaped areas.
   G.   Maintenance Of Signs: Signs regulated by this chapter shall be
maintained in good visual appearance and structural conditions at all times.
The city, its community development director, and its other agents, shall in no
way be liable for negligence or failure of the owner, or the person responsible
for maintaining any sign, to keep such sign in good condition, or be
responsible for any damage caused by defective conditions.
   H.   Types Of Prohibited Signs: No signs shall be erected or maintained, or
be permitted to remain publicly displayed, which are misleading, fraudulent,
obscene, immoral, indecent or of unsightly character, including sniper signs.
"Sniper sign" means a sign for which approval for placement of a sign has not
been granted by Riverdale City which is attached to a public utility pole,
service pole, supports for another sign, fences, trees or place in a landscaped
or parking area. These signs are typically used for off premises advertising of
a sale, service or event.
   I.   Noise Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to use in connection with any
sign or to use for advertising purposes any radio, phonograph, whistle, bell or
any other sound or noisemaking or transmitting device or instrument for the
purpose of commercial advertising.
   J.   Pasting Or Gluing Prohibited: No sign shall be pasted or glued directly
on any wall or roof or affixed directly on any wall or roof by means of any
similar adhesive substance.
   K.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to erect or remodel any sign upon
or over public or private property within the city until a sign permit with
respect to such sign has been obtained from the community development director.
The community development director may, at his discretion, request the planning
commission to review a sign application.
   L.   Refusal Of Owner To Remove Dangerous Signs; Removal By Community
Development Director: Where immediate action is deemed necessary to protect
limb, life or property and where the owner of a sign or the owner of the
property on which the sign is erected fails to remove such sign pursuant to
notice from the community development director within a specified time fixed in
such notice, the community development director may proceed in any manner
deemed necessary to cause the immediate removal of such sign. The community
development director shall certify a statement of the expenses incurred in such
removal to the city treasurer who in turn shall assess and charge the same
against the real estate upon which the sign was erected, and unless said
assessment is paid within ninety (90) days after and from the date of notice
thereof, the same shall, when recorded in the offices of the county clerk and
city recorder, become a lien upon the real estate whereon the sign is erected
and collectible in the same manner as general taxes.
   M.   Removal Of Conforming Signs: Any person occupying a building or portion
of a building who owns or maintains a sign in connection therewith shall, upon
vacating the premises, or discontinuing the business advertised, cause the sign
to be removed. Any person who owns and maintains a sign which is maintained for
the benefit of another person who occupies a building or part of a building
whereon the sign is located shall cause the sign to be removed if the person
for whom the sign is maintained vacates the premises. Failure of the owner of
the sign or of the person responsible for maintaining the same to remove the
sign within thirty (30) days after notice from the community development
director shall be considered as a violation of this chapter and shall subject
the owner of the sign and the owner of the property to the penalties herein
specified.
   N.   Removal Of Nonconforming Signs:
      1.   Any sign not in conformance with the provisions of this chapter and
which was erected or installed without a permit shall be removed within thirty
(30) days upon notification from the community development director.
      2.   Signs for which permits were previously issued and which are made
nonconforming by the provisions of this chapter shall be permitted to remain in
accordance with this title. Under no circumstances shall such nonconforming
signs be remodeled or replaced. The provisions of this section shall apply to
such nonconforming signs.
      3.   Any existing sign conforming to the provisions of this chapter
relative to size and location, but nonconforming as to structural requirements
and considered a danger to persons or property shall be removed or replaced
upon written notice from the city.
   O.   Sign Inspection: The community development director shall inspect each
sign for which a permit has been issued and shall require the proper
maintenance of all signs subject to the provisions of this chapter. No sign or
other advertising structure measuring less than ten feet (10') to the bottom of
the sign face, as regulated by this chapter, shall be located on a corner lot
at the intersection of any streets within a triangular area formed by the
street property lines and a line connecting them at points forty feet (40')
from the intersection of the street line. (Ord. 702, 5-6-2008)
   P.   Sign Not To Cover Windows, Doors Or Similar Openings: No sign shall
cover a window, doorway or other opening providing light, ventilation or exit
facilities which are required by the building code or which are deemed by the
fire department to be necessary to give the fire department access to the
building, or to afford fire protection in the event of a fire. (Ord. 815, 9-25-
2012)
   Q.   Signs On Private Property: It shall be unlawful for any person to
fasten or attach, paint or place any "sign", as defined in this title, upon any
private wall, window, door, gate, fence or sign, or upon any other personal
property, without the consent of the owner or lessee, or someone authorized to
act on behalf of such owner or lessee.
   R.   Signs On Public Property: It shall be unlawful for any person to fasten
or attach, paint or place any sign, handbill, poster, advertisement or notice
of any kind or sort, whether political or otherwise, or to cause the same to be
done in or upon the curbstone, lamppost, telephone pole, electric light or
power pole, hydrant, bridge or tree, or in or upon any portion of any sidewalk
or street. It shall be unlawful to paste, place, paint or attach any "sign", as
defined in this title, on any building, street or property of the city. No sign
shall be erected on or project over public property.
   S.   Signs Over Streets Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to erect and/or
maintain any sign over any street or alley, except as herein expressly
provided.
   T.   Sign Setback: For the purposes of this chapter, the entire sign must
comply with the specified setback regulations.
   U.   Zones Permitted And Controls: It is unlawful for any person to erect or
otherwise install a sign having a size or height greater than allowed in this
chapter. It is unlawful for any person to erect or otherwise install a sign
located on a site or in a zone in violation of the regulations specified in
this title.
   V.   Intersections; Location: No light, sign or other advertising structure
as regulated by this title shall be erected at the intersection of any street
in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision; or at any location
where, by reason of the position, shape or color, it may interfere with,
obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or
device or which makes use of the words "stop", "look", "drive-in", "danger", or
any other word, phrase, symbol or character in such manner as to interfere
with, mislead or confuse traffic. Any revolving or flashing light that mimics
an emergency vehicle to attract attention to a business is prohibited.
   W.   Tethered Devices: The use of tethered devices such as balloons,
banners, flags, windsocks or other items that are affected by wind or weather,
and are tethered in such a manner that allows the device to cross property
lines or to come into contact with power lines or telephone lines, light poles,
fences, signs, buildings, vehicles or people are prohibited. Inflated ground
figure displays that exceed ten feet (10') in height are regulated in the same
manner as above and may be used temporarily not to exceed two (2) consecutive
weeks and not more than ten (10) times per year. (Ord. 702, 5-6-2008)
10-16-3: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Blanketing: To prevent blanketing, no wall or marquee type sign shall
be erected to project more than eighteen inches (18"). Projection shall be
measured from the facing of the building and/or structure to which the sign is
attached. All sign placement shall be reviewed by the community development
department to endeavor the prevention of obscuring signs.
   B.   Cloth Or Banner Signs: These types of signs are considered temporary
and may not be used as a permanent advertising. Approval may be granted by the
community development director. The public works director may permit signs to
be hung over public streets or walks after review and consideration of any
potential safety concerns. Approvals pursuant to this subsection may be granted
without charge of any fee, but shall specify a period of time during which such
signs shall be permitted to be used.
   C.   Electric Signs: All signs which utilize or are illuminated by
electricity shall comply with the adopted electrical code and fire prevention
code of the city. (Ord. 812, 8-21-2012)
   D.   Political Or Campaign Signs:
      1.   Political or campaign signs are permitted in accordance with the
following provisions; provided, that any such sign shall be removed within
fifteen (15) days after such final election, campaign or event.
      2.   No political or campaign sign shall be placed within one hundred
fifty feet (150') from a public polling place. "Polling place" shall mean the
physical public location in a community where multiple ballots and absentee
ballots are cast or deposited.
      3.   No political or campaign sign may be placed in such a manner as to
create a safety hazard or constitute a public nuisance of any kind or nature
whatsoever. The community development director, public works director or police
chief shall determine whether the placement of a political or campaign sign
constitutes a safety hazard or public nuisance, and upon such determination
shall remove said sign so that the safety hazard or public nuisance no longer
exists.
      4.   Political signs cannot be placed: a) on public Riverdale City
property, or b) on private property without the property owner's permission.
(Ord. 871, 9-1-2015)
   E.   Shopping Center Signs: In shopping centers, frontage for each separate
store shall be based on the width of the front of each business, and signs for
such businesses shall be attached to the front of each store. One detached or
attached sign for each street frontage may be used to designate the name of the
shopping center and names of individual businesses in the center. Shopping
center signs may be approved as depicted on the approved site plan when
accompanied with a developer's agreement.
   F.   Time Limitation For Construction Project Or Land Development Signs: No
construction project or land development sign shall be erected more than thirty
(30) days prior to construction and shall be removed not more than thirty (30)
days after completion. (Ord. 812, 8-21-2012)
10-16-4: EXEMPT SIGNS:
The following signs shall be exempt from zoning regulations:
   A.   Memorial tablets, or tablets containing the names of buildings and date
of the erection and use of the building, when built into the walls of the
building and constructed of bronze, brass, marble, stone or other
noncombustible material.
   B.   Nameplates not to exceed two (2) square feet.
   C.   Nonilluminated and nonfloodlighted flat signs, wall signs and
freestanding signs having an area not in excess of thirty six (36) square feet,
announcing the enterprise to be located in a building under construction or
announcing the name and address of the architect or contractor of the building,
or the owner thereof; provided, that no more than one such sign shall be
erected on each street frontage; and also provided, that said signs are not
erected more than thirty (30) days prior to construction and are removed not
more than thirty (30) days after completion.
   D.   Interior illuminated and nonfloodlighted religious, charitable and
educational ground signs having an area not in excess of fifty (50) square
feet, except those located in a commercial area.
   E.   Interior illuminated and nonfloodlighted signs having an area not in
excess of twenty (20) square feet that advertise the place of business of a
doctor, dentist or other profession, except those located in a commercial area.
   F.   Traffic and other municipal signs, house numbers, legal notices,
railroad crossing signs, and danger signs and warning signs.
   G.   Painting, repainting or cleaning of an advertising structure, or the
changing of the advertising copy of the message thereon shall not be considered
erection or alteration which requires a sign permit unless a structural change
is made thereto, except signs painted on a building shall be reviewed by the
Riverdale City design review committee. (Ord. 702, 5-6-2008)
10-16-5: DESIGN STANDARDS:
All design standards shall be in accordance with the adopted sections of the
international building code. (Ord. 702, 5-6-2008)
10-16-6: SPECIALTY SIGNS:
Portable, illuminated specialty signs are prohibited in the city. All other
temporary portable signs, A-frame signs and wind signs are prohibited unless
they are securely anchored and five feet (5') back from the property line.
Specialty signs shall not exceed a maximum of twelve (12) square feet of
display area on each side and shall not exceed one sign per one hundred (100)
linear feet on each street facing each business. Portable signs that are
carried and used for soliciting are not permitted in the "road right of way"
meaning: street, curb, gutter, sidewalk and any additional property that is
part of the right of way. This form of soliciting shall not obstruct or impede
traffic or in any way be a nuisance and may be performed only on the property
where the business exists. (Ord. 812, 8-21-2012)
10-16-7: OFF PREMISES SIGNS:
   A.   Definitions:
    OFF PREMISES ADVERTISING SIGN, BILLBOARD: A detached or attached sign
designed or intended to direct attention to a business, product, service, event
or attraction, that is not sold, offered, or existing on the property where the
sign is located. A form of an off premises sign.
   OFF PREMISES RIVERDALE CITY BUSINESS SIGN: A sign for Riverdale City
businesses which is placed on property directly adjacent to the business
location and advertises only for that business. A form of an off premises sign.
   B.   Off Premises Advertising Sign Regulations: The installation of
additional off premises advertising signs is prohibited. Existing off premises
advertising signs may continue as a conditional use as long as they are
maintained in good repair and are free from damage per applicable Utah state
codes, specifically as found in the Utah outdoor advertising act.
      1.   Existing off premises advertising signs are allowed to have routine
maintenance and advertising copy changes including the repair or replacement of
the advertising imagery, but shall only be allowed to increase the height,
size, or the location thereof per Utah Code Annotated 10-9a-513 and in
compliance with regulations found within the Utah outdoor advertising act.
      2.   Existing off premises advertising signs may be allowed to be
converted to digital display advertising signs and shall be required to comply
with all of the applicable provisions of this code (specifically as found under
section
10-16-10, "Electronic Signs", of this chapter) and applicable Utah state codes,
specifically as found in the Utah outdoor advertising act.
      3.   Only existing off premises advertising signs located adjacent to a
Utah department of transportation controlled route may be allowed to be
converted to digital display advertising signs. An existing off premises
advertising sign that is oriented toward and located within two hundred feet
(200') of any residential dwelling may not be converted to a digital display
advertising sign.
      4.   Any enlargement, modification, upgrade, or conversion of an existing
off premises advertising sign shall require approval as a conditional use.
   C.   Off Premises Riverdale City Business Sign Regulations: Off premises
Riverdale City business signs shall require approval as a conditional use.
Permitted off premises Riverdale City business signs shall be counted as
allowable sign area for the applying business, and may be installed upon
recommendation and approval by the planning commission and the city council.
(Ord. 864, 3-3-2015)
10-16-8: SIGN/ZONE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Residential Districts: In residential districts RE-20, RE-15, A-1, R-1-
4.5, R-1-10, R-1-8, R-1-6, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 and Rmh-1, the following
regulations apply:
      1.   Nameplates: One nameplate for each dwelling unit, not exceeding two
(2) square feet in area, indicating the name of the occupant and/or a permitted
home occupation.
      2.   Identification And Information Signs: One sign, not exceeding eight
(8) square feet in area, for conforming buildings or conforming uses other than
schools, churches, dwellings, boarding houses or lodging houses.
      3.   Development Signs:
         a.   One or more signs not exceeding eight (8) square feet in combined
total area for each street frontage of the lot. In addition, one or more signs
of a temporary nature for each approved subdivision under development and
located on said subdivision property; providing, that no more than one such
sign be located at each major approach to the subdivision, but not closer than
ten feet (10') to the street property lines. Signs on corner lots shall comply
with subsection 10-16-2O of this chapter. Said signs shall not exceed in
combined total area two hundred (200) square feet for any one subdivision and
no one sign shall exceed one hundred (100) square feet in area. The period for
display of such temporary signs shall be limited to one year; provided, that at
the expiration of this time, the community development director may grant an
appropriate extension of time for periods not to exceed one year, provided not
more than seventy five percent (75%) of the project has been developed.
         b.   Application for said extension shall be made at least thirty (30)
days before expiration of the original permit. In addition, one or more signs
of a temporary nature for main buildings or uses under development other than
dwellings, provided such signs shall not exceed in combined total area one
hundred (100) square feet.
      4.   Public Necessity Signs: One or more public necessity signs; provided
that no sign shall exceed twenty four (24) square feet in area.
      5.   Business Signs: One or more signs not exceeding in total area two
(2) square feet for each one linear foot of frontage occupied by a
nonconforming commercial or industrial use, but in no case shall the total area
of all signs exceed one hundred (100) square feet. Uses not occupying frontage
may each have one or more signs not exceeding forty (40) square feet.
      6.   Reader Board: One changeable letter reader board sign not exceeding
fifty (50) square feet in area for a governmental facility, church or school
for the purpose of displaying the name and character of services or activities
conducted therein. The height of the sign shall not exceed twenty five feet
(25') and, if illuminated, it shall be by internal lighting.
      7.   Projecting Signs: No signs that project onto or into adjacent
property or public right of way are permitted.
      8.   Yard And Height Regulations:
         a.   Front Yard Regulations: Business and identification signs shall
be located flat against the building. Nameplates may be located anywhere on the
property.
         b.   Side Yard Regulations: Business and identification signs shall be
located anywhere on the property.
         c.   Rear Yard Regulations: Business and identification signs shall be
located flat against the building. Nameplates may be located anywhere on the
property.
         d.   Height Regulations: No sign shall be erected to a height greater
than ten feet (10') or project above the height of the building to which it is
attached.
      9.   A-1 Zones: In an A-1 zone, ground or pole signs advertising the sale
of livestock, produce, or in conjunction with a home occupation, are permitted
as a conditional use. The property on which such signs are placed must meet
minimum width requirements for the A-1 zone.
   B.   Commercial And Manufacturing Districts: In commercial districts C-1, C-
2, C-3, and CP-1, CP-2, CP-3, and manufacturing districts M-1, M-2, MP-1 and
MP-2, the following regulations apply:
      1.   Development Signs: One or more signs of a temporary nature for main
buildings or uses under development provided such signs shall not exceed in
combined total area one hundred (100) square feet.
      2.   Public Necessity Signs: These signs are informational and not
advertising in nature. One or more public necessity signs are allowed, provided
that no such sign shall exceed twenty four (24) square feet in area.
      3.   Business Signs: One or more business signs not exceeding three (3)
square feet in combined total area for each linear foot of occupied frontage
(building width facing street), except that the maximum size of any single
business sign shall not exceed three hundred (300) square feet in area and the
total area of all commercial or industrial uses shall be six hundred (600)
square feet, if the linear building width is sufficient to allow this size of
sign. Each commercial or industrial use backing onto a freeway shall be
permitted not more than one business sign on the freeway side. New car sales
automobile dealerships that have multiple manufacturer makes of vehicles are
permitted three hundred (300) square feet of sign area for each new car line.
(Ord. 837, 6-4-2013)
      4.   Pole/Pylon Signs Height Regulations: No pole/pylon sign shall be
erected to a height exceeding forty feet (40') above the ground. All pole/pylon
type signs shall be positioned on the site in a landscaped area. All pole/pylon
signs shall be internally illuminated.
      5.   Existing Signs: Any lawful sign completely constructed, in
existence, and lawfully installed in the city at the time of the passage
hereof, shall be allowed to exist at its present height. At such time that the
existing sign structure or location is changed, in any manner whatsoever, then
said sign must come into compliance with the height limitation, as set forth in
subsection B4 of this section.
   C.   Temporary Signs:
      1.   Temporary signs, other than cloth/banner signs, when ten feet (10')
or more above the ground, may project not more than six inches (6") beyond the
building line.
      2.   Temporary signs may remain in place for a period determined by the
department of community development but not longer than forty five (45) days.
      3.   Temporary cloth/banner signs may extend over public property. Such
signs when extending over a public street shall maintain a clearance as
determined by the department of public works. Cloth/banner signs may extend
across a public street only by permission of the city council and shall be
subject to all related laws and ordinances.
   D.   O-1 Zone: Sign proposals are reviewed by the design review committee.
   E.   Applicability: The provisions of this chapter shall supersede any other
provisions of this title regarding signs. (Ord. 702, 5-6-2008)
10-16-9: PENALTY:
Any person who shall fail to comply with, or shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter, or any rules or regulations promulgated hereunder,
shall be deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor and upon conviction such person
shall be punished as is provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. However, any imprisonment shall be for not more than sixty
(60) days. The penalty provided herein shall be in addition to any suspension
or revocation of any license or permit issued hereunder. (Ord. 702, 5-6-2008)
10-16-10: ELECTRONIC SIGNS:
   A.   Definitions:
    DIGITAL DISPLAY: A sign face that may display changing content that is
allowed to be fully animated and is composed of electronically illuminated
segments and/or a series of grid lights, including cathode ray, light emitting
diode (LED) display, plasma screen, liquid crystal display (LCD), fiber optic,
video boards, or other electronic media or technology. A sign is considered to
be "on premises" if the sign is on the location of the business which is
advertised or promoted on the sign.
   ELECTRONIC SIGN: For the purpose of this section shall mean a digital
display sign.
   FOOT-CANDLE: A unit of light measurement equal to one lumen per square foot
and may be abbreviated "fc".
   B.   Zones Where Allowed: Digital display on premises signs are a
conditional use in all zones that allow advertising or informational signs
provided that such signs comply with all requirements of this chapter and all
other applicable sections of this code. Electronic on premises signs that
advertise or promote businesses, products, activities, services, or events not
located on the premises where the electronic sign is located are prohibited
except for the use of any on premises sign for the advertising of "not for
profit", "fundraising" events or philanthropic endeavors that do not give
attention to businesses that are not located in Riverdale City.
   C.   Number Of Signs Allowed: Only one on premises electronic sign may be
located on a lot but a lot may have an electronic sign and a nonelectronic sign
that are combined in one cabinet at one location (on a pole, monument, or
building) provided that the total square footage of all signage on a lot
complies with all aspects of this chapter.
   D.   Brightness: An electronic sign shall not be excessively intense or
brilliant. An electronic sign shall not display light of such intensity or
brilliance as to cause glare or otherwise impair the vision of the driver of a
motor vehicle on a public roadway or result in a nuisance to the driver of a
motor vehicle on a public roadway or a residential dwelling unit located within
two hundred feet (200') of an electronic sign. Any electronic sign that exceeds
the intensity levels in subsection D1 of this section shall constitute an
excessively intense or brilliant sign and such sign is prohibited.
      1.   All digital displays shall be illuminated at a level no greater than
0.3 foot-candle over ambient light levels and shall employ light cutoff devices
such as, but not limited to, louvers, in order to minimize light escaping above
the horizontal plane. Foot-candle readings shall be measured at ground level at
a distance shown in the intensity table.
      INTENSITY TABLE
 
Sign Size     Distance From Source
(Square Feet)
0 - 100       100 feet
101 - 300     150 feet
301 - 600     200 feet
601 +         250 feet
 
      2.   Notwithstanding the requirements of subsection D1 of this section,
under no circumstances shall the light emanation from a digital display on
premises sign be greater than 0.3 foot-candle as measured from the nearest
residential property line.
      3.   All digital display on premises signs must be equipped with both a
dimmer control and a photocell which automatically adjusts the display
intensity according to natural ambient light conditions.
   E.   Residential Areas: Residential areas shall not be adversely impacted by
any electronic sign or any other type of sign.
   F.   Sound: The use of sound is prohibited.
   G.   View Obstruction: Signs may not be constructed so as to obstruct the
view of drivers of motor vehicles on a public roadway or entering a public
roadway.
   H.   Public Property: Signs may not encroach on or project over public
property or a public right of way.
   I.   Portable Electronic Signs: Portable electronic signs are prohibited.
   J.   Resemblance To Traffic Signal: No electronic sign may resemble or
simulate any warning signal or any traffic lights or official traffic control
signage.
   K.   Sign Shutoff: The digital display shall contain a default mechanism to
turn the sign off in case of malfunction or shall be manually turned off within
twenty four (24) hours of a reported malfunction.
   L.   Maximum Area: This type of on premises sign shall be restricted to a
maximum area of three hundred (300) square feet. (Ord. 864, 3-3-2015)
CHAPTER 17
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS ZONING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-17-1: Title
10-17-2: Purpose
10-17-3: Findings
10-17-4: Applicability
10-17-5: Definitions
10-17-6: Procedure
10-17-7: Location
10-17-8: Antenna And Support Structure Regulations
10-17-9: Safety
10-17-10: Site Requirements
10-17-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as THE WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS ZONING
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 557, 2-3-1999)
10-17-2: PURPOSE:
The purposes of this chapter are to:
   A.   Regulate personal wireless services antennas, with or without support
structures, and related electronic equipment and equipment structures;
   B.   Provide for the orderly establishment of personal wireless services
facilities in the city;
   C.   Minimize the number of antenna support structures by encouraging the
colocation of multiple antennas on a single structure, and by encouraging the
location of antennas on preexisting support structures;
   D.   Establish siting, appearance and safety standards that will help
mitigate potential impacts related to the construction, use and maintenance of
personal wireless services facilities;
   E.   Comply with the Telecommunications Act of 1996 by establishing
regulations that:
      1.   Do not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of
personal wireless services;
      2.   Do not unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally
equivalent services; and
      3.   Are not based on the environmental effects of radio frequency
emissions to the extent that such facilities comply with the Federal
Communication Commission's regulations concerning such emissions. (Ord. 557, 2-
3-1999)
10-17-3: FINDINGS:
The city council makes the following findings:
   A.   Personal wireless services devices are an integral part of the rapidly
growing and evolving telecommunications industry, and present unique zoning
challenges and concerns for the city.
   B.   The city needs to balance the interests and desires of the
telecommunications industry and its customers to provide competitive and
effective telecommunications systems in the city, against the sometimes
differing interests and desires of others concerning health, safety, welfare
and aesthetics, and orderly planning of the community.
   C.   The city has experienced an increased demand for personal wireless
services facilities to be located in the city, and expects the increased demand
to continue into the future.
   D.   It is in the best interests of the city to have quality personal
wireless services available, which necessarily entails the erection of personal
wireless services facilities in the city.
   E.   The unnecessary proliferation of personal wireless services facilities
throughout the city creates a negative visual impact on the community.
   F.   The visual effects of personal wireless services facilities can be
mitigated by fair standards regulating their siting, construction, maintenance
and use.
   G.   Because of the height and appearance of personal wireless services
facilities, surrounding properties bear a disproportionate share of the
negative impacts of a telecommunications tower.
   H.   A private property owner who leases space for a personal wireless
services facility is the only one who receives compensation for the facility,
even though numerous other property owners in the area are adversely affected
by the location of the facility.
   I.   Personal wireless services may be located on city property at the
discretion of the city council, with lease payments paid to the city instead of
an individual property owner, which indirectly compensates all citizens of the
community for the adverse impacts of the facilities, and is therefore the
fairest method of distributing burden and benefit.
   J.   Locating antennas on existing buildings and structures creates less of
a negative visual impact on the community than the erection of towers.
   K.   Buildings and structures on public property are capable of being used
to provide support for antenna arrays, thus reducing the proliferation of
towers in all areas of the city.
   L.   The public policy objectives to reduce the proliferation of
telecommunication towers and to mitigate their impact can best be facilitated
by permitting the locating of wireless communication systems on
telecommunication towers and antenna support structures that are located on
property owned, leased or used by the city.
   M.   The requirements set forth in this chapter for the placement of
personal wireless services facilities on property owned, leased or used by the
city are necessary to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the
community. (Ord. 557, 2-3-1999)
10-17-4: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter applies to both commercial and private low power radio services
and facilities, such as "cellular" or PCS (personal communications system)
communications and paging systems. This chapter shall not apply to the
following types of communications devices, although they may be regulated by
other city ordinances and policies:
   A.   Amateur Radio: Any tower or antenna owned and operated by an amateur
radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission.
   B.   Satellite: Any device designed for over-the-air reception of television
broadcast signals, multi-channel, multi-point distribution service, or direct
satellite service.
   C.   Cable: Any cable television headend or hub towers and antennas used
solely for cable television services. (Ord. 557, 2-3-1999)
10-17-5: DEFINITIONS:
The following words shall have the described meaning when used in this title,
unless a contrary meaning is apparent from the context of the word:
ANTENNA: A transmitting device used in telecommunications that radiates or
captures radio signals.
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE: Any structure that can be used for the purpose of
supporting an antenna.
CITY: The city of Riverdale, Utah.
CITY-OWNED PROPERTY: Real property that is owned, leased or controlled by the
city.
COLOCATION: The location of an antenna on an existing structure, tower or
building that is already being used for personal wireless services facilities.
GUYED TOWER: A tower that supports an antenna or antennas and requires guy
wires or other stabilizers for support.
LATTICE TOWER: A self-supporting three- or four-sided, open steel frame
structure used to support telecommunications equipment.
MONOPOLE: A single, self-supporting, cylindrical pole, constructed without guy
wires or ground anchors, that acts as the support structure for antennas.
MONOPOLE ANTENNA WITH NO PLATFORM: A monopole with antennas and antenna support
structure not exceeding three feet (3') in width or ten feet (10') in height.
MONOPOLE ANTENNA WITH PLATFORM: A monopole with antennas and antenna support
structure exceeding three feet (3') in width, but not exceeding fifteen feet
(15') in width, or eight feet (8') in height.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES: Facilities for the provision of personal
wireless services. Personal wireless services facilities include transmitters,
antennas, structures supporting antennas and electronic equipment that is
typically installed in close proximity to a transmitter.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES: Commercial mobile telecommunications services,
unlicensed wireless telecommunications services and common carrier wireless
telecommunications exchange access services.
PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any real property not owned by the city, even if the property
is owned by another public or governmental entity.
ROOF-MOUNTED ANTENNA: An antenna or series of individual antennas mounted on a
roof, mechanical room or penthouse of a building or structure.
STEALTH FACILITIES: Personal wireless services facilities which have been
designed to be compatible with the natural setting and surrounding structures,
and which camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas and/or towers. The
term includes, but is not limited to, clock towers, church steeples, light
poles, flag poles, signs, electrical transmission facilities. City-owned water
tanks are expressly excluded from such uses.
TOWER: A freestanding structure, such as a monopole tower, lattice tower or
guyed tower, that is used as a support structure for antennas.
WALL-MOUNTED ANTENNA: An antenna or series of individual antennas mounted on
the vertical wall of a building or structure.
WHIP ANTENNA: An antenna that is cylindrical in shape. Whip antennas can be
directional or omnidirectional and vary in size depending on the frequency and
gain for which they are designed. (Ord. 557, 2-3-1999; amd. 2001 Code)
10-17-6: PROCEDURE:
   A.   Application Requirements: Any person desiring to develop, construct or
establish a personal wireless services facility in the city shall submit an
application for site plan approval to the city. The city shall not consider the
application until all required information has been included. The application
shall include the following: (Ord. 557, 2-3-1999)
      1.   Fee: The applicable fee in such amount as set by the city as
provided in the consolidated fee schedule set forth in title 1, chapter 12 of
this code. (Ord. 557, 2-3-1999; amd. 2001 Code)
      2.   Site Plan: A site plan consisting of one or more pages of maps and
drawings drawn to scale. The applicant shall submit five (5) copies of the
proposed site plan to the planning commission secretary. One of the copies
shall be eight and one-half inches by eleven inches (81/2" x 11"), and the
other copies shall be at least eight and one-half inches by eleven inches (81/
2" x 11"), but not larger than twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x
36"). The proposed site plan shall be drawn to a scale large enough to clearly
show all details and in any case not smaller than sixty feet to the inch (1" =
60'). The site plan for personal wireless services facilities shall include the
following information and items:
         a.   Name and street address of the site or location;
         b.   Name of applicant;
         c.   Name of owner of property;
         d.   North arrow;
         e.   Scale of drawing;
         f.   Area of lot in square feet;
         g.   Lot line dimensions;
         h.   A vicinity map containing sufficient information to accurately
locate the property shown on the plan;
         i.   Names and locations of fronting streets and locations and
dimensions of public streets, private streets and driveways;
         j.   Footprints of existing and proposed buildings and structures,
including a notation of each unit's height above the grade;
         k.   Location and size of existing and proposed antennas, with
dimensions to property lines;
         l.   Location of existing and proposed fire protection devices;
         m.   Location, dimensions and distance to property lines of existing
and proposed drive accesses;
         n.   Location and dimensions of existing and proposed curbs, gutters
and sidewalks;
         o.   Location and dimensions of off-street parking spaces;
         p.   Location and type of surface water drainage system;
         q.   Drawings of proposed structure elevations showing the height,
dimensions, appearance and materials proposed;
         r.   Location and description (height, materials) of existing and
proposed fences;
         s.   Location and description (dimensions, distance to property lines
and type of lighting [direct or indirect]) of existing and proposed signs;
         t.   A security lighting plan, if proposed;
         u.   Landscape plan to scale indicating size, spacing and type of
plantings;
         v.   A signed lease agreement with the city if the site is located on
city property;
      3.   Written Information: The following written information:
         a.   Environment: A full description of the environment surrounding
the proposed facility, including a description of adjacent uses, any adjacent
residential structures, and any structures and sites of historic significance.
         b.   Maintenance: A description of the anticipated maintenance needs
for the facility, including frequency of service, personnel needs, equipment
needs and traffic noise or safety impacts of such maintenance.
         c.   Service Area: A description of the service area for the antenna
or tower and a statement as to whether the antenna or tower is needed for
coverage or capacity.
         d.   Location: A map showing the site and the nearest or associated
telecommunications facility sites within the network. Describe the distance
between the telecommunications facility sites. Describe how this service area
fits into the service network.
         e.   Licenses And Permits: Copies of all licenses and permits required
by other agencies and governments with jurisdiction over the design,
construction, location and operation of the antenna.
         f.   Radio Frequency Emissions: A written commitment to comply with
applicable Federal Communications Commission radio frequency emission
regulations.
         g.   Liaison: The name of a contact person who can respond to
questions concerning the application and the proposed facility. Include name,
address, telephone number, facsimile number and electronic mail address, if
applicable.
      4.   Additional Information Requirements For Monopoles: If the applicant
desires to construct a monopole, the applicant shall also submit a detailed
written description of why the applicant cannot obtain coverage using existing
buildings or structures.
      5.   Additional Information Requirements For Facilities Not Located On
Highest Priority Site: If the applicant desires to locate antennas on a site
other than the highest priority site (as described in subsection 10-17-7A of
this chapter), the applicant shall provide the following information to the
approving authority:
         a.   Higher Priority Sites: The identity and location of any higher
priority sites located within the desired service area.
         b.   Reason For Rejection Of Higher Priority Sites: The reason why the
higher priority sites are not technologically, legally or economically
feasible.
         c.   Justification For Proposed Site: Why the proposed site is
essential to meet the service demands of the geographic service area and the
citywide network.
   B.   Approval Process: The application and site plan shall be reviewed by
the city pursuant to its standard site plan approval process. If the facility
requires a conditional use permit, the review shall be pursuant to the city's
standard conditional use permit approval process. The city shall process all
applications within a reasonable time and shall not unreasonably discriminate
among providers of functionally equivalent services. Any decision to deny a
request to place, construct or modify personal wireless service facilities
shall be in writing and supported by evidence contained in a written record.
(Ord. 557, 2-3-1999)
   C.   Building Permits:
      1.   General Requirements: No tower or antenna support structure shall be
constructed until the applicant obtains a building permit from the city. No
building permit shall be issued for any project for which a site plan, amended
site plan or conditional use permit is required, until the site plan, amended
site plan or conditional use permit has been approved by the appropriate
authority. If the design or engineering of the antenna support structure is
beyond the expertise of the community development director, the city may
require third party review by an engineer selected by the city prior to the
issuance of a building permit. The applicant shall pay an additional fee to
cover the cost of the third party review. (Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
      2.   Additional Requirements For Monopoles And Towers: If the applicant
is constructing a monopole or other tower type structure, the applicant shall,
if requested by the city, submit a written report from a qualified structural
engineer licensed in the state, documenting the following:
         a.   Height and design of the monopole and tower, including technical,
engineering, economic and other pertinent factors governing selection of the
proposed design.
         b.   Seismic load design and wind load design for the monopole or
tower.
         c.   Total anticipated capacity of the monopole or tower, including
number and types of antennas which can be accommodated.
         d.   Structural failure characteristics of the monopole or tower and a
demonstration that the site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain
debris.
         e.   Soils investigation report, including structural calculations.
(Ord. 557, 2-3-1999)
10-17-7: LOCATION:
   A.   Priority Of Antenna Site Locations: Personal wireless services antennas
shall be located as unobtrusively as is reasonably possible. To accomplish this
goal, the provider shall make a good faith effort to locate antennas on sites
in the following order of priority:
      1.   Stealth Facilities: "Stealth facilities", as defined in this
chapter.
      2.   Existing Structures: Lawfully existing buildings, structures and
antenna support structures; provided, that the buildings, structures or support
structures are:
         a.   Located in a nonresidential zone; or
         b.   Located in a residential zone on property that is being used for
nonresidential uses (e.g., government, school, church or utility); or
         c.   Located in a residential zone on a property that is being used
for a multi-family residential building having eight (8) or more dwelling units
and which is at least thirty five feet (35') in height.
      3.   Monopoles On City Owned Property: Monopoles constructed on city
owned property.
      4.   Monopoles On Nonresidential Private Property: Monopoles constructed
on private property; provided, that the private property is:
         a.   Located in a nonresidential zone; or
         b.   Located in a residential zone on property that is used for a
nonresidential use (e.g., government, school or church).
      5.   Other: Sites other than those listed above.
   B.   Other Sites; Burden Of Proof: The applicant shall attempt to locate its
antennas on sites in the order of priority set forth above. If the applicant
desires to locate antennas on a site other than the highest priority site, the
applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating to the approving authority why
it could not locate antennas on sites with a higher priority than the site
chosen by the applicant. To do so, the applicant shall provide the following
information to the approving authority:
      1.   Higher Priority Sites: The identity and location of higher priority
sites located within the desired service area.
      2.   Reason For Rejection Of Higher Priority Sites: The reason why the
higher priority sites are not technologically, legally or economically
feasible. The applicant must make a good faith effort to locate antennas on a
higher priority site. The city may request information from outside sources to
justify or rebut the applicant's reasons for rejecting a higher priority site.
      3.   Justification For Proposed Site: Why the proposed site is essential
to meet the service demands of the geographic service area and the city-wide
network.
   C.   Uses:
      1.   Permitted Uses: The following antenna locations are permitted uses;
provided, that the applicant complies with other applicable laws and
regulations:
         a.   Existing Structures On City-Owned Property: Existing buildings,
structures and antenna support structures located on city-owned property,
except water tanks.
         b.   Existing Structures On Private Property: Lawfully existing
buildings and structures located on private property; provided, that the
private property is:
            (1)   Located in a nonresidential zone; or
            (2)   Located in a residential zone on property that is used for a
nonresidential use (e.g., government, school, church or utility); or
            (3)   Located in a residential zone on property that is being used
for a multi-family residential building having eight (8) or more dwelling units
and which is at least thirty five feet (35') in height.
         c.   Colocation: Colocation on a lawfully existing antenna support
structure located on private property.
         d.   Monopoles In Industrial Areas: Monopoles constructed in
industrial or manufacturing zones, and existing utility areas as conditional
uses with approved conditional use permits.
         e.   Stealth Facilities In Nonresidential Zones: Stealth facilities
constructed in nonresidential zones, unless they are constructed as part of a
structure for which a conditional use permit is otherwise required, in which
case they shall be conditional uses.
      2.   Nonpermitted Uses: The following antenna types and antenna locations
are not permitted, except upon a showing of necessity (inability to achieve
coverage or capacity in the service area) by the applicant, in which case they
shall be considered as conditional uses:
         a.   Guyed Towers: Guyed towers and other nonstealth towers, with the
exception of monopoles, are not permitted in any zone.
         b.   Monopoles On Private Property In Residential Zone: Monopoles
located on residentially zoned private property, if the residentially zoned
property has a residential use (as opposed to a school, church or other
nonresidential use).
      3.   Conditional Uses: Antennas proposed for any other location shall be
considered as conditional uses; provided, that the applicant complies with
other applicable laws and regulations.
   D.   Colocation Requirement: Unless otherwise authorized by the approving
authority for good cause shown, every new monopole shall be designed and
constructed to be of sufficient size and capacity to accommodate at least one
additional wireless telecommunications provider on the structure in the future.
Any conditional use permit for the monopole may be conditioned upon the
agreement of the applicant to allow colocation of other personal wireless
providers on such terms as are common in the industry.
   E.   Lease Agreement: The city shall enter into a standard lease agreement
with the applicant for any facility built on city property. The mayor or
designee is hereby authorized to execute the standard lease agreement on behalf
of the city. The lease shall contain the condition that the site plan and/or
conditional use permit must first be approved by the approving authority before
the lease can take effect, and that failure to obtain such approval renders the
lease null and void. (Ord. 557, 2-3-1999)
10-17-8: ANTENNA AND SUPPORT STRUCTURE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Standards: Personal wireless services facilities are characterized by
the type or location of the antenna structure. There are five (5) general types
of antenna structures contemplated by this chapter: wall-mounted antennas;
roof-mounted antennas; monopoles with no platform; monopoles with a platform;
and stealth facilities. If a particular type of antenna structure is allowed by
this chapter as a permitted or conditional use, the minimum standards for that
type of antenna are as follows, unless otherwise provided in a conditional use
permit:
      1.   Wall-Mounted Antennas:
         a.   Maximum Height: Wall-mounted antennas shall not extend above the
roof line of the building or structure or extend more than four feet (4')
horizontally from the face of the building.
         b.   Setback: Wall-mounted antennas shall not be located within one
hundred feet (100') of any residence.
         c.   Mounting Options: Antennas mounted directly on existing parapet
walls, penthouses or mechanical equipment rooms are considered to be wall-
mounted antennas if no portion of the antenna extends above the roof line of
the parapet wall, penthouse or mechanical equipment room.
         d.   Color: Wall-mounted antennas, equipment and supporting structures
shall be painted to match the color of the building or structure or the
background against which they are most commonly seen. Antennas and the
supporting structure on the building shall be architecturally compatible with
the building. Whip antennas are not allowed on a wall-mounted antenna
structure.
      2.   Roof-Mounted Antennas:
         a.   Maximum Height: The maximum height of a roof-mounted antenna
shall be eighteen feet (18') above the roof line of the building.
         b.   Setback: Roof-mounted antennas shall be located at least five
feet (5') from the exterior wall of the building or structure, and at least
fifty feet (50') from any residence.
         c.   Mounting Options: Roof-mounted antennas may be mounted on top of
existing penthouses or mechanical equipment rooms if the antennas and antenna
support structures are enclosed or visually screened from view. The screening
structure may not extend more than eight feet (8') above the existing roof line
of the penthouse or mechanical equipment room.
         d.   Color: Roof-mounted antennas, equipment and supporting structures
shall be painted to match the color of the building or structure, or the
background against which they are most commonly seen. Antennas and supporting
structures shall be architecturally compatible with the building.
         e.   Combination Of Wall- And Roof-Mounted Antennas: Any building may
have a combination of wall- and roof-mounted antennas. The total area for all
wall- and roof-mounted antennas and supporting structures on any one building
shall not exceed the lesser of sixty (60) square feet or five percent (5%) of
each exterior wall of the building.
      3.   Monopoles With No Platform:
         a.   Maximum Height And Width: The maximum height of the monopole or
monopole antenna shall be sixty feet (60'), although the approving body may, as
a conditional use, allow an antenna or antenna support structure up to one
hundred ten feet (110') in height, if the applicant demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the approving body that the additional height is necessary to
obtain coverage or to allow colocation, and that the applicant has taken steps
to mitigate adverse effects on the surrounding neighborhood. The entire antenna
structure mounted on the monopole shall not exceed three feet (3') in width.
The antenna itself shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height.
         b.   Setback: Monopoles shall be set back a minimum of one hundred
fifteen percent (115%) of the height of the monopole from any residential lot
line, measured from the base of the monopole to the nearest residential lot
line.
         c.   Color: Monopoles, antennas and related support structures shall
be painted a neutral color, or a color to match the background against which
they are most commonly seen.
      4.   Monopoles With Platform:
         a.   Maximum Height And Width: The maximum height of the monopole or
monopole antenna shall be seventy five feet (75'), although the approving body
may, as a conditional use, allow an antenna or antenna support structure up to
one hundred ten feet (110') in height, if the applicant demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the approving body that the additional height is necessary to
obtain coverage or to allow colocation, and that the applicant has taken steps
to mitigate adverse effects on the surrounding neighborhood. The antennas and
antenna mounting structures on the monopole shall not exceed eight feet (8') in
height or fifteen feet (15') in width. The antenna itself shall not exceed ten
feet (10') in height.
         b.   Setback: Monopoles shall be set back a minimum of one hundred
fifteen percent (115%) of the height of the monopole from any residential lot
line, measured from the base of the monopole to the nearest residential lot
line.
         c.   Color: Monopoles, antennas and related support structures shall
be painted a neutral color, or a color to match the background against which
they are most commonly seen.
      5.   Stealth Facilities; Maximum Height: The maximum height of a stealth
facility shall be the maximum structure height on the zoning district in which
the stealth facility is located. The applicant may exceed the maximum structure
height if allowed pursuant to a conditional use permit.
   B.   Additional Conditional Use Permit Considerations: In addition to the
city's standard conditional use permit considerations, the approving authority
shall consider the following factors when deciding whether to grant a
conditional use permit for a personal wireless services facility:
      1.   Compatibility: Compatibility of the facility with the height, mass
and design of buildings, structures and uses in the vicinity of the facility.
      2.   Screening: Whether the facility uses existing or proposed
vegetation, topography or structures in a manner that effectively screens the
facility.
      3.   Disguise: Whether the facility is disguised in a manner that
mitigates potential negative impacts on surrounding properties.
      4.   Parcel Size: Whether the facility is located on a parcel of
sufficient size to adequately support the facility.
      5.   Location On Parcel: Whether the structure is situated on the parcel
in a manner that can best protect the interests of surrounding property owners,
but still accommodate other appropriate uses of the parcel.
      6.   Location In General: Whether location or colocation of the facility
on other structures in the same vicinity is practicable, without significantly
affecting the antenna transmission or reception capabilities.
      7.   Colocation: The willingness of the applicant to allow colocation on
its facility by other personal wireless services providers on such terms as are
common in the industry.
   C.   Additional Regulations For Monopoles And Towers:
      1.   Distance From Other Monopoles: Monopoles and towers shall be located
at least one thousand feet (1,000') from each other, except upon a showing of
necessity by the applicant, or upon a finding by the city that a closer
distance would adequately protect the health, safety and welfare of the
community. This distance requirement shall not apply to stealth facilities or
to antennas attached to lawful structures such as transmission towers, utility
poles and outdoor lighting structures.
      2.   Location On Parcel: Monopoles shall be located as unobtrusively on a
parcel as possible, given the location of existing structures, nearby
residential areas and service needs of the applicant. Monopoles shall not be
located in a required landscaped area, buffer area or parking area. (Ord. 557,
2-3-1999)
10-17-9: SAFETY:
   A.   Regulation Compliance:
      1.   Compliance With FCC And FAA Regulations: All operators of personal
wireless services facilities shall demonstrate compliance with applicable
Federal Communication Commission (FCC) and Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA) regulations, including FCC radio frequency regulations, at the time of
application and periodically thereafter as requested by the city. Failure to
comply with the applicable regulations shall be grounds for revoking a site
plan or conditional use permit approval.
      2.   Other Licenses And Permits: The operator of every personal wireless
services facility shall submit copies of all licenses and permits required by
other agencies and governments with jurisdiction over the design, construction,
location and operation of the facility to the city, shall maintain such
licenses and permits in good standing, and shall provide evidence of renewal or
extension thereof upon request by the city.
   B.   Protection Against Climbing: Monopoles shall be protected against
unauthorized climbing by removing the climbing pegs from the lower twenty feet
(20') of the monopole.
   C.   Fencing: Monopoles and towers shall be fully enclosed by a minimum six
foot (6') tall fence or wall, as directed by the city, unless the city
determines that a wall or fence is not needed or appropriate for a particular
site due to conditions specific to the site.
   D.   Security Lighting Requirements: Monopoles and towers shall comply with
the FAA requirements for lighting. As part of the conditional use permit
consideration, the city may also require security lighting for the site. If
security lighting is used, the lighting impact on surrounding residential areas
shall be minimized by using indirect lighting, where appropriate.
   E.   Abandonment: The city may require the removal of all antennas and
monopoles if the facility has been inoperative or out of service for more than
twelve (12) consecutive months.
      1.   Notice: Notice to remove shall be given in writing by personal
service, or by certified mail addressed to the operator's last known address.
      2.   Violation: Failure to remove the antennas and monopoles after
receiving written notice to remove is a violation of the terms of this chapter.
The city may initiate criminal and/or civil legal proceedings against any
person, firm, entity or corporation, whether acting as principal, agent,
property owner, lessee, lessor, tenant, landlord, employee, employer or
otherwise, for failure to remove antennas and monopoles in accordance with this
chapter. The city may seek a civil injunction requiring the removal of any
structures on the site in accordance with this chapter. Any lease agreement
with the city may also stipulate failure to remove the antennas and monopoles
after receiving written notice to do so pursuant to this chapter automatically
transfers ownership of the antennas, monopoles, support buildings and all other
structures on the site to the city. (Ord. 557, 2-3-1999)
10-17-10: SITE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Regulations For Accessory Structures:
      1.   Storage Areas And Solid Waste Receptacles: No outside storage or
solid waste receptacles shall be permitted on the site.
      2.   Equipment Enclosures: All electronic and other related equipment and
appurtenances necessary for the operation of any personal wireless services
facility shall, whenever possible, be located within a lawfully preexisting
structure or completely below grade. When a new structure is required to house
such equipment, the structure shall be harmonious with, and blend with, the
natural features, buildings and structures surrounding such structure.
      3.   Accessory Buildings: Freestanding accessory building used with a
personal wireless services facility shall not exceed four hundred fifty (450)
square feet and shall comply with the setback requirements for structures in
the zone in which the facility is located.
   B.   Parking: The city may require a minimum of one parking stall for sites
containing a monopole, tower and/or accessory buildings if there is
insufficient parking available on the site.
   C.   Maintenance: All personal wireless services facilities shall be
maintained in a safe, neat and attractive manner.
   D.   Landscaping: All sites with a personal wireless services facility shall
be landscaped in accordance with the zone requirements where the facility is
located.
   E.   Allowed Locations: Telecommunication and television towers, monopoles,
antennas and support structures and equipment shall be permitted or not
permitted, as set forth herein, the current zoning of said uses
notwithstanding. (Placement of towers, monopoles, antennas and any support
structures or buildings on city-owned property shall be subject to private
contract with the city.) (Ord. 557, 2-3-1999)
CHAPTER 18
HOME OCCUPATIONS
SECTION:
10-18-1: Conditions
10-18-2: Nonconforming Uses
10-18-3: Licensing And Regulation
10-18-4: Penalty
10-18-1: CONDITIONS:
It is unlawful to conduct or pursue a home occupation within the corporate
limits of the city unless each of the following conditions are complied with:
   A.   Employees: All employees conducting business on the premises shall be
residents of the premises wherein the home occupation is being conducted.
   B.   Neighborhood Atmosphere Not Altered: The premises shall not be
physically changed to accommodate the home occupation to the extent that it
would alter the residential atmosphere of the neighborhood. The home occupation
shall not disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood by reason of
lighting, sounds, noise, vibrations or interference with radio or television
reception. The home occupation shall not generate dust, odors, noxious fumes,
glare or other hazards to safety and health which may be sensed beyond the
premises.
   C.   Conducted Within Primary Structure: The home occupation shall be
conducted entirely within the primary structure on the premises and the space
devoted to the home occupation shall not exceed an area greater than twenty
five percent (25%) of the main floor area and/or attached garage of the primary
structure; however, no more than twenty five percent (25%) of an attached
garage area shall be used for the home occupation. In addition, any use of an
attached garage must be inconspicuous. Detached garages, accessory buildings
and the yard are specifically prohibited from the home occupation use.
   D.   Operating Supplies: Operating supplies, including inventory and
displays for the home occupation shall not take up more than fifty percent
(50%) of the permitted area described in subsection C of this section.
   E.   Displays Enclosed: All displays of sales goods, wares or merchandise
shall be totally enclosed within the premises and shall not be visible from
without the premises.
   F.   Sign: One flat sign attached to the primary residence not exceeding two
(2) square feet in area and indicating the home occupation is the only sign
that shall be permitted on the premises. This subsection shall not apply to the
advertising of fruit or vegetables in season.
   G.   Traffic: The home occupation shall not generate vehicular traffic
different in quality or quantity from that normally present in the neighborhood
in which the dwelling is located.
   H.   Parking: There shall be no off street parking facilities on the
premises of the home occupation dwelling permitted beyond that normally
required for residential uses. (Ord. 575, 2-16-2000)
   I.   Fencing Of Daycare/Preschool Centers: Any dwelling, where a home
occupation daycare/preschool center is operated, shall have no less than twenty
five percent (25%) of the yard at such dwelling fenced in such a manner as to
meet the fencing requirements of section
10-14-7 of this title and to provide for the reasonable safety and well being
of the children being cared for at the dwelling. (Ord. 802, 4-3-2012)
   J.   Rental Dwelling: No home occupation license may be granted to any
person occupying a rented dwelling place unless the applicant shall have first
obtained the written approval from the owner of the rented premises for the
operation of the business.
   K.   Hazardous Conditions: The home occupation shall not create a hazard by
using flammable, explosive or other dangerous materials. Animals which are
capable of inflicting harm or discomfort or endangering the health and safety
of any person or property shall not be kept or raised.
   L.   Demand For Excessive Services: The home occupation shall not create a
demand for municipal or utility services or community facilities in excess of
those usually and customarily provided for residential uses. (Ord. 575, 2-16-
2000)
   M.   Daycare/Preschool Provider: The home occupation may be a child daycare/
preschool which cares for not more than eight (8) children at a time or care
session. Children of the provider, under the age of four (4) years wherein the
home occupation takes place shall be counted for this limitation. The daycare/
preschool provider may not care for more than two (2) children two (2) years of
age or younger at one time. Definition of an infant is any child two (2) years
of age or younger. A home business daycare/preschool, if in the basement, must
have access to an exterior door in the basement. These requirements apply only
to a conditionally licensed home occupation daycare/preschool. Commercially
licensed daycares and preschools must comply with Utah state law and Riverdale
City ordinances. (Ord. 800, 2-21-2012)
10-18-2: NONCONFORMING USES:
Home occupations which are lawfully in existence at the time of the adoption of
this chapter but which do not comply with the above conditions may continue to
do business. However, such nonconforming uses shall cease to be lawful when
such use has been abandoned for one continuous year.
   A.   A home occupation which is lawful because of this section shall not be
enlarged or expanded as to volume, intensity, size, area, nature, extent, time
or effect after the adoption of this chapter.
   B.   Nonconforming home occupations are hereby made exempt from the
extension privilege of subsection 10-20-2A3 of this title. (Ord. 575, 2-16-
2000)
10-18-3: LICENSING AND REGULATION:
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city from licensing, taxing or
regulating a home occupation. The city may conduct visual on site inspections
at the discretion of the planning commission prior to city council approval of
a home occupation business license. There may be periodic on site inspections
prior to the renewal of a home occupation business license. (Ord. 575, 2-16-
2000)
10-18-4: PENALTY:
A violation of this chapter is deemed a class C misdemeanor and upon
conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day a violation continues is hereby deemed to be a
separate offense for the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 575, 2-16-2000; amd.
2001 Code)
CHAPTER 19
CONDITIONAL USES
SECTION:
10-19-1: Purpose And Intent
10-19-2: Conditional Use Permit
10-19-3: Review Procedure
10-19-4: Determination
10-19-5: Basis For Review Of Conditional Use Permit
10-19-6: Appeal
10-19-7: Building Permit
10-19-8: Expiration
10-19-9: Temporary Structures For Seasonal Sales
10-19-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose and intent of conditional uses is to allow in certain areas
compatible integration of uses which are related to the permitted uses of the
zone, but which may be suitable and desirable only in certain locations in that
zone due to conditions and circumstances peculiar to that location and/or upon
certain conditions which make the uses suitable and/or only if such uses are
designed, laid out and constructed on the proposed site in a particular manner.
(1985 Code § 19-7-1)
10-19-2: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
A conditional use permit shall be required for all uses listed as conditional
uses in the zone regulations. A conditional use permit may be revoked by the
city council after review and recommendation by the planning commission upon
failure to comply with the conditions imposed with the original approval of the
permit. (1985 Code § 19-7-2)
10-19-3: REVIEW PROCEDURE:
   A.   Application: Application for a conditional use permit shall be made to
the community development department.
   B.   Plans: Detailed location, site and building plans shall accompany the
completed application forms provided by the city. For structures in existence,
only a location plan need be provided.
      1.   New construction: Detailed location, site and building plans shall
accompany the completed application.
      2.   Existing structures: A detailed location plan shall accompany the
completed application.
   C.   Approval Authority: Consideration will be made by the community
development staff. All other applications will be forwarded to the planning
commission. The application, together with all pertinent information, shall be
considered by the planning commission at its next regularly scheduled meeting.
      1.   New construction: Planning commission.
      2.   Existing structures: Community development department staff. (Ord.
665, 8-19-2008)
   D.   Public Hearing: The planning commission may call a specific public
hearing on any application after adequate notice if it is deemed in the public
interest. The planning commission shall take action on the application by the
second meeting of the planning commission after the application filing date. A
record of the hearing, together with a recommendation for denial or issuance of
the conditional use permit with conditions of approval or reasons for denial,
shall be forwarded to the city council. (1985 Code § 19-7-3)
10-19-4: DETERMINATION:
In authorizing any conditional use, the planning commission shall impose such
requirements and conditions necessary for the protection of adjacent properties
and the public welfare. (Ord. 665, 8-19-2008)
10-19-5: BASIS FOR REVIEW OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
The planning commission shall review a conditional use permit with evidence
presented to establish that:
   A.   A conditional use shall be approved if reasonable conditions are
proposed or can be imposed to mitigate the reasonably anticipated detrimental
effects of the proposed use in accordance with applicable standards.
   B.   If the reasonably anticipated detrimental effects of a proposed
conditional use cannot be substantially mitigated by the proposal or the
imposition of reasonable conditions to achieve compliance with applicable
standards, the conditional use may be denied.
   C.   The proposed use of the particular location is necessary or desirable
to provide a service or facility which will contribute to the general well
being of the community; and
   D.   Such use will not, under the circumstances of the particular case and
the conditions imposed, be detrimental to the health, safety and general
welfare of persons nor injurious to property or improvements in the community,
but will be compatible with and complementary to the existing surrounding uses,
buildings and structures when considering traffic generation, parking, building
design and location, landscaping and signs; and
   E.   The proposed use conforms to the goals, policies and conditions
specified in this chapter for such use; and
   F.   That the proposed use conforms to the goals, policies and governing
principles and land use of the master plan for the city; and
   G.   The proposed use will not lead to the deterioration of the environment,
or ecology of the general area, nor will it produce conditions or emit
pollutants of such a type or of such a quantity so as to detrimentally affect,
to any appreciable degree, public or private property, including the operation
of existing uses thereon, in the immediate vicinity or the community or area as
a whole. (Ord. 665, 8-19-2008)
10-19-6: APPEAL:
The decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council by
filing such appeal within ten (10) calendar days after the final decision was
made in the planning commission meeting. The city council may uphold or reverse
the decision of the planning commission and impose any additional conditions
that it may deem necessary in granting an appeal. The decision of the city
council shall be final. (Ord. 665, 8-19-2008)
10-19-7: BUILDING PERMIT:
Upon receipt of a conditional use permit, the developer shall take such permit
to the building inspector, who will review the permit and conditions attached.
Based on this review and compliance with any other items that might develop in
the pursuance of his duties, the building inspector may approve an application
for a building permit and shall ensure that development is undertaken and
completed in compliance with said permit and conditions pertaining thereto.
(1985 Code § 19-7-8)
10-19-8: EXPIRATION:
Unless there is substantial action under a conditional use permit within a
period of one year of its issuance as determined by the planning commission,
the conditional use permit shall expire. The planning commission may grant a
maximum extension of six (6) months under exceptional circumstances. (1985 Code
§ 19-7-9)
10-19-9: TEMPORARY STRUCTURES FOR SEASONAL SALES:
The community development director or his/her designee may waive certain of the
requirements of the codes adopted in this code to permit the erection and use
of temporary structures for the sale of seasonal merchandise under the
following conditions:
   A.   Application: The person making application for the waiver of such
requirements shall file with the community development director or his/her
designee, an application, in writing, in such form and containing such
information as shall be determined by the community development director or
his/her designee consistent with this chapter. Said application shall include
an informal site plan drawn to scale showing the size of the proposed structure
and its location in relation to the other structures and improvements on the
site plan of the location on file with the city. No such temporary seasonal
structure shall be permitted to be located upon any parcel of property for
which there is not an existing approved site plan on file with the city.
   B.   Factors For Consideration: In considering whether to recommend approval
or denial of the requested waiver, the community development director or his/
her designee shall consider the following factors:
      1.   The degree of deviation from the codes adopted in this code.
      2.   The effect the proposed structure will have on the safety of persons
and property.
      3.   The benefit of the sale of the proposed merchandise to city
residents and customers of city business licensees.
      4.   The aesthetic appearance of the proposed structure.
      5.   The effect on pedestrian and vehicle traffic in the area, including
traffic within the existing site plan.
      6.   The size of the proposed structure. It is the intent of this section
that waivers be granted only to small structures not exceeding two hundred
(200) square feet in size. See also section
3-1-7 of this code.
      7.   The degree of self-containment of the structure as contrasted to the
need for outside utility connections.
      8.   The availability of restroom facilities for persons using the
structure.
      9.   The past experience and character of the applicant.
      10.   Compatibility of the proposed structure and use with the existing
site plan on file with the city.
      11.   The permanency of the proposed operations. It is the intent of this
section that the structure be used for the sale of seasonal merchandise. Under
no conditions shall the structure be permitted to remain longer than fifteen
(15) weeks. It is not the intent of this section that the waiver be granted for
a weekend or other short duration of time.
      12.   No more than one portable structure for seasonal sale shall be
allowed per site or shall it be closer than one thousand (1,000) linear feet,
for each street side, to the next nearest portable structure.
      13.   No more than one business that sells a single commodity shall be
allowed for each requested seasonal sales portable structure conditional use
permit.
   C.   Definition Of Seasonal Items: Seasonal items are limited to products
that are available or primarily in demand only during certain seasons of the
year or products that are associated with recognized state or government
holidays or products that are regulated for sale by the state of Utah.
"Seasonal products" include, but are not limited to, the following items:
Christmas tree lot
Shaved ice/snow cone
State regulated fireworks
Because of the availability of local and imported fruits, vegetables and
flowers that are available year round these are not considered to be seasonal
products. The sale of fruits and vegetables in the A-1/A-2 zones is regulated
by section
10-8-2 of this title.
   D.   Advice Of Officials: The community development director or his/her
designee may seek the advice of the fire department, public works department,
city attorney or city engineer prior to the denial or approval of the proposed
portable structure. (Ord. 830, 2-5-2013)
CHAPTER 20
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES
SECTION:
10-20-1: Nonconforming Buildings
10-20-2: Nonconforming Use Of Buildings
10-20-3: Nonconforming Use Of Land
10-20-4: Nonconforming Use Compliance
10-20-5: Signs Permitted With Nonconforming Uses
10-20-1: NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS:
   A.   Maintenance, Repairs And Upkeep:
      1.   A nonconforming building or structure may be maintained.
      2.   Repairs and structural alterations may be made to a nonconforming
building.
      3.   A nonconforming building or structure which is damaged or partially
destroyed by fire, flood, wind, earthquake, or other calamity or act of God, or
the public enemy, may be restored and the occupancy or use of such building,
structure or part thereof which existed at the time of such partial
destruction, may be continued or resumed; provided, that such restoration is
started within a period of one year and is diligently prosecuted to completion.
(1985 Code § 19-11-1)
   B.   Additions, Enlargements And Moving:
      1.   A building or structure nonconforming as to use regulations shall
not be added to or enlarged in any manner, unless such building or structure,
including such additions and enlargements, is made to conform to all the
regulations of the zone in which it is located.
      2.   A building or structure nonconforming as to height, area or yard
regulations shall not be added to or enlarged in any manner unless such
addition and enlargement conforms to all the regulations of the zone in which
it is located.
      3.   A building or structure lacking sufficient automobile parking space
in connection therewith, as required by this title, may be altered or enlarged,
provided additional automobile parking space is supplied to meet the
requirements of this title for such alterations or enlargements.
      4.   No nonconforming building or structure shall be moved in whole or in
part to any other location on the lot, unless every portion of such building or
structure is made to conform to all the regulations of the zone in which it is
located. (1985 Code § 19-11-2)
   C.   Abandonment By Nonuse: A nonconforming building or structure or portion
thereof shall be deemed abandoned by nonuse during a continuous period of one
year. If a nonconforming building or structure or portion thereof has been or
shall be abandoned, the same shall not thereafter be occupied or used except
for a use which conforms to the use regulations of the zone in which it is
located. (1985 Code § 19-11-3)
10-20-2: NONCONFORMING USE OF BUILDINGS:
   A.   Maintenance; Regulations:
      1.   The nonconforming use of a building or structure existing at the
time of the applicable zoning regulations became or becomes effective may be
continued.
      2.   A vacant nonconforming building or structure may be occupied by a
use for which the building or structure was designed or intended if so occupied
within a period of one year after the building or structure became
nonconforming.
      3.   A nonconforming use may be extended to include the entire floor area
of the existing building in which it was conducted at the time use became
nonconforming.
      4.   Except by permit of the board of adjustment as provided in chapter 4
of this title, the nonconforming use of a building or structure may not be
changed except to a conforming use; but where such change is made to a
conforming use, the use shall not thereafter be changed back to a nonconforming
use. (1985 Code § 19-11-4)
   B.   Abandonment By Nonuse: The nonconforming use of a building or structure
or portion thereof shall be deemed abandoned by nonuse during a continuous
period of one year. If a nonconforming use of any such building or structure or
portion thereof has been or shall be abandoned, the same shall not thereafter
be occupied or used except for a use which conforms to the use regulations of
the zone in which it is located. (1985 Code § 19-11-5)
10-20-3: NONCONFORMING USE OF LAND:
A nonconforming use of a tract of land or portion thereof may be continued. No
such nonconforming use of land shall in any way be expanded or extended either
on the same or any adjoining tract of land. A nonconforming use of land shall
be deemed vacant by nonuse immediately upon permanent discontinuation of the
nonconforming use. If a nonconforming use of land has been or shall be deemed
vacant, such land shall not thereafter be used or occupied except for a use
which conforms to the use regulations of the zone in which the use is located.
(1985 Code § 19-11-6)
10-20-4: NONCONFORMING USE COMPLIANCE:
Any building, structure or use for which a valid building permit has been
issued and actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date
hereof, or amendments to this chapter, may be completed and used in accordance
with the plans, specifications and permit on which said building permit was
granted. "Actual construction" is hereby defined to be the actual placing of
construction materials in their permanent position, fastened in a permanent
manner, actual work in excavating a basement or the demolition or removal of an
existing structure begun preparatory to rebuilding; provided, that in all cases
actual construction work shall be diligently carried on until the completion of
the building or structure involved. (1985 Code § 19-11-7)
10-20-5: SIGNS PERMITTED WITH NONCONFORMING USES:
   A.   Residential Zones: Nonconforming uses in residential zones; one sign
per use. One square foot of sign area per lineal foot of building frontage,
with a maximum of fifty (50) square feet.
   B.   Other Than Residential Zones: Nonconforming uses in other than
residential zones; one sign per use. Area of the sign shall be in accordance
with the provisions of the regulations set forth in chapter 16 of this title,
for the respective zone in which the nonconforming use is located. (1985 Code §
19-11-8)
CHAPTER 21
SUBDIVISIONS
SECTION:
10-21-1: General Provisions
10-21-2: Definitions
10-21-3: Scope Of Regulations
10-21-4: Application For Subdivision
10-21-5: Preliminary Plan
10-21-6: Financial Guarantees For Improvements
10-21-7: Final Plat
10-21-8: Construction Plans And Profiles
10-21-9: Design Standards
10-21-10: Parks, School Sites, Other Public Places
10-21-11: Improvements
10-21-12: Small Subdivisions; Special Provisions
10-21-13: Enforcement And Permits
10-21-14: Penalty
10-21-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   The underlying purpose and intent of this chapter is to promote the
health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city
in the matter of the subdivision of land, to encourage the healthful growth of
the city and related matters affected by such subdivision.
   B.   Any proposed subdivision and its ultimate use shall be in the best
interests of the public and shall be in harmony with good neighborhood
development of the area concerned and the subdivider shall present evidence to
this effect when requested to do so by the planning commission.
   C.   In cases where unusual topographic or other exceptional conditions
exist, variations and exceptions from this chapter may be made by the city
council, after recommendation by the planning commission. (1985 Code § 19-40-1)
10-21-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the respective
meanings hereinafter set forth, unless a different meaning clearly appears from
the context:
CITY: City of Riverdale, Utah.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Riverdale, Utah.
CITY ENGINEER: The city engineer of the city of Riverdale, Utah.
COUNTY: Weber County, Utah.
CUL-DE-SAC: A minor dead-end street provided with a turnaround.
DWELLING: Any building or structure, or portion thereof, including a trailer
house, intended for residential use.
GUEST HOUSE: A separate dwelling structure, including a trailer house, located
on a lot with one main structure intended for housing guests or servants and
not rented, leased or sold separate from the rental, lease or sale of the main
dwelling.
LOT: A portion of a subdivision or parcel of land intended as a unit for
building development or transfer of ownership. A parcel of land occupied or to
be occupied by a building or group of buildings, together with such yards, open
spaces, lot width and lot area, as are required by this title, having frontage
upon a street or upon a right of way approved by the board of adjustment.
Except for group dwellings and guest houses, not more than one dwelling
structure shall occupy any one lot.
MAJOR STREET PLAN: A plan, labeled "major street plan of the city of
Riverdale", including maps or reports or both, which has been approved by the
city council as required by law or such plan as it may be amended from time to
time and so certified to the city council.
OFFICIAL MAP: Any map adopted by the city council under provisions of Utah Code
Annotated section 10-9-306.
PARCEL OF LAND: Contiguous quantity of land, in the possession of, or owned by,
or recorded as the property of, the same person.
PARTITION OR DIVISION OF AGRICULTURAL LAND: A bona fide "partition or division
of agricultural land" for agricultural purposes" shall mean the division of a
parcel of land into three (3) or more lots or parcels, none of which lots or
parcels are smaller than five (5) acres in area; and provided, that no
dedication of any street or road is required to serve any such lots or parcels
of agricultural land for the purpose of building development.
PERSON: Any individual, corporation, partnership, firm or association of
individuals however styled or designated.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The city planning commission of Riverdale, Utah.
STREET: A thoroughfare which has been dedicated or abandoned to the public and
accepted by proper public authority, or a thoroughfare not less than twenty six
feet (26') wide which has been made public by right of use and which affords
the principal access to abutting property.
STREET, COLLECTOR: A street, existing or proposed, of considerable continuity
which serves or is intended to serve as the principal trafficway between large
and separated areas or districts and which is the main access to the major
street system.
STREET, MAJOR: A street, existing or proposed, which serves or is intended to
serve as a major trafficway and is designated on the master street plan as a
controlled access highway, major street, parkway or other equivalent term to
identify those streets comprising the basic structure of the street plan.
STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS: A minor street which is parallel to and adjacent to a
major street and which provides access to abutting properties and protection
from through traffic.
STREET, MINOR: A street, existing or proposed, which is supplementary to a
collector or major street and of limited continuity, which serves or is
intended to serve the local needs of a neighborhood.
SUBDIVIDER, DEVELOPER: The person, persons, partnership, limited company or
corporation that is causing or will cause improvements to be made to the
benefit of the property designated as a subdivision.
SUBDIVISION: Any land that is divided, resubdivided or proposed to be divided
into two (2) or more parcels, sites, units, plots or other division of land for
the purpose, whether immediate or future, for offer, sale, lease or
development, either on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans,
terms and conditions.
ZONING ORDINANCE: The uniform zoning ordinance which is this title. (1985 Code
§ 19-40-2; amd. 2001 Code)
10-21-3: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
   A.   No person shall subdivide any tract of land which is located wholly or
in part of the city except in compliance with this chapter. No person shall
sell or exchange or offer to sell or exchange any parcel of land which is any
part of a subdivision of a larger tract of land, nor offer for recording in the
office of the county recorder any deed conveying such parcel of land, or any
interest therein, unless such subdivision has been created pursuant to and in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter; provided, that this chapter
shall not apply to any lot or lots forming a part of a subdivision created and
recorded prior to the effective date of this chapter.
   B.   Prior to the review of any property plat amendment, subdivision of land
or quit claim of property, Riverdale City requires that any and all of the
affected property or properties prior year (delinquent) taxes, interest and
penalties be paid. (Ord. 824, 12-4-2012)
10-21-4: APPLICATION FOR SUBDIVISION:
The following process shall be strictly adhered to in order to create a
residential subdivision in the city:
   A.   Preapplication (Concept) Review: Each person who proposes to subdivide
land within the territorial limits of the city shall confer with the city
planning staff committee (which committee shall consist of the community
development director, the city administrator, the public works director and the
city engineer) before preparing any plats, charts or plans in order to become
familiar with the city subdivision requirements and existing general plan for
the territory in which the proposed subdivision lies and to discuss the
proposed plan of development of the tract. A sketch plan is required to be
presented to the planning staff committee to illustrate the proposed
subdivision concept. (Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
   B.   Submission; Fee: Preliminary sketches based on said conferences shall
then be prepared for review prior to submission of the preliminary plat. Two
(2) such sketches shall be submitted on a topographic base map showing the
relationship to proposed traffic arteries, existing arteries, shopping centers,
schools, parks, etc. (If more detail is felt to be desirable, ASPO report no.
116 contains greater detail.) A fee in such amount as established by resolution
of the city council to offset the cost of reviewing and other related work
performed by the city staff associated with the review of these sketches. The
fee amount shall be as provided in the consolidated fee schedule set forth in
title 1, chapter 12 of this code. No preliminary plat shall be presented to the
planning commission or city council without the payment of said fee being
received by the city.
   C.   Information Form: A subdivision information form to be supplied to the
subdivider by the planning commission shall be filled out and submitted to the
planning commission prior to submission of the preliminary plat. (1985 Code §
19-40-4; amd. 2001 Code)
10-21-5: PRELIMINARY PLAN:
   A.   Required: Upon completing the requirements set forth in section
10-21-4 of this chapter, each person who proposes to subdivide land in the city
shall prepare a preliminary plan of such subdivision and shall submit eight (8)
black and white prints thereof to the planning commission. One print shall be
delivered by the planning commission to each of the following for the
information and recommendation of such officials and departments: city
engineer, fire department and each company or agency furnishing water, electric
or gas service. Preliminary plans must be received by the planning commission
ten (10) days prior to the next scheduled planning commission meeting in order
to allow sufficient time to be checked and to receive recommendations from the
foregoing listed agencies. (Ord. 815, 9-25-2012)
   B.   Scale; Information Required: The preliminary plan shall be drawn to a
scale not smaller than one hundred feet to the inch (1" = 100'), and shall
show:
      1.   The proposed name of the subdivision.
      2.   The location of the subdivision as forming a part of a larger tract
or parcel where the plan submitted covers only a part of the subdivider's
tract, or only a part of a larger vacant area. In such case, a sketch of the
prospective future street system of the unplanned parts shall be submitted and
the street system of the part submitted shall be considered in the light of
adjustments and connections with the future street system of the larger area.
      3.   Sufficient information to locate accurately the property shown on
the plan.
      4.   The names and addresses of the subdivider; the engineer or surveyor
of the subdivision, and the owners of the land immediately adjoining the land
to be subdivided.
      5.   Contour map at appropriate intervals where required by the planning
commission.
      6.   The boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided.
      7.   The location, widths and other dimensions of all existing or platted
streets and other important features such as railroad lines, watercourses,
exceptional topography, and buildings within the tract or within two hundred
feet (200') of the tract to be subdivided.
      8.   Existing and proposed sanitary sewers, storm drains, water supply
mains and culverts within the tract or within one hundred feet (100') thereof.
      9.   The location, widths and other dimensions of proposed streets,
alleys, easements, parks, and other open spaces and lots, with proper labeling
of spaces to be dedicated to the public.
      10.   North point, scale and date.
   C.   Decision Of Planning Commission: The planning commission may approve or
reject the preliminary plan, or grant approval on conditions stated. Approval
of the preliminary plan by the planning commission shall not constitute final
acceptance of the subdivision by the planning commission. One copy of the
approved preliminary plan, signed by the chairman of the planning commission,
shall be retained in the office of the planning commission. One signed copy
shall be given to the subdivider. Receipt of this signed copy shall be
authorization for the subdivider to proceed with the preparation of plans and
specifications for the minimum improvements required in section
10-21-11 of this chapter and with the preparation of the final plan.
   D.   Improvement Plans: Prior to the construction of any improvements
required in section
10-21-11 of this chapter, or to the submission of financial guarantees, the
subdivider shall furnish to the city engineer all plans, information and data
necessary for said improvements. These plans shall be examined by the city
engineer and shall be approved if he determines them to be in accordance with
the requirements of section
10-21-11 of this chapter. No construction of buildings shall have begun until
after recording of the final plat.
   E.   Term Of Approval: Approval of the preliminary plan by the planning
commission shall be valid for a maximum period of twelve (12) months after
approval, unless upon application of the developer the planning commission
grants an extension. If the final plat has not been recorded within the twelve
(12) month period, the preliminary plan must again be submitted to the planning
commission for reapproval; however, preliminary approval of a large tract shall
be voided; provided, that the final plat of the first section is submitted for
final approval within one year, and provided an extension of time is granted.
(1985 Code § 19-40-5)
10-21-6: FINANCIAL GUARANTEES FOR IMPROVEMENTS:
Prior to the final plat being presented to the city council for approval, the
subdivider/developer (or an individual with legal authority acting on behalf of
the subdivider/developer) shall, at the discretion of the city, satisfy one of
the following requirements:
   A.   Escrow Deposit: Enter into a developer's agreement with the city and
furnish satisfactory proof of an escrow deposit in favor of the city in an
amount equal to the cost of the improvements required for the subdivision, plus
ten percent (10%) of said costs, with said amounts to be released pursuant to
the terms and conditions of the developer's agreement.
   B.   Performance Bond: Enter into a developer's agreement with the city and
furnish to the city a developer's performance bond in an amount equal to one
hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the cost of the improvements required for
the subdivision, with said bond to be released pursuant to the terms and
conditions of the developer's agreement. (Ord. 871, 9-1-2015)
10-21-7: FINAL PLAT:
   A.   Planning Staff Committee Review: Prior to the submission of the final
plat to the planning commission for review, the subdivider/developer's engineer
shall submit the proposed final plat, with any changes and modifications as
directed at the preliminary review by the planning commission, along with a
letter of certification that all lots meet the requirements of this title to
the city planning staff committee. The planning staff committee, after
reviewing the proposed final plat and confirming that all the above fees and
financing guarantees have been satisfied, shall present the final plat to the
planning commission for appropriate action.
   B.   Preparation Of Plat: After compliance with the provisions of subsection
A of this section, and sections
10-21-5 and
10-21-6 of this chapter, a final plat of the subdivision covering all or part
of an approved preliminary plat shall be prepared by a licensed surveyor not in
the employ of the city in conformance with the design standards of section
10-21-9 of this chapter and submitted within one year from the date of
preliminary plan approval unless the time is extended by the planning
commission; otherwise, such approval shall be deemed to have been withdrawn.
Two (2) black and white prints of the final plat shall be submitted to the
planning commission at least seven (7) days prior to the date of the planning
commission meeting at which time such plat is to be considered.
   C.   Drawing: The final plat shall consist of a sheet of approved tracing
linen, to the outside or trim line dimensions of nineteen inches by thirty
inches (19" x 30") and the border line of the plat shall be drawn in heavy
lines leaving a space of at least one-half inch (1/2") margin on all four (4)
sides. The plat shall be so drawn that the top of the drawing faces either
north or west, whichever accommodates the drawing best. All lines, dimensions
and markings shall be made on the tracing linen with approved waterproof black
india drawing ink. The plat shall be made to a scale large enough to clearly
show all details, in any case not smaller than one hundred feet to the inch (1"
= 100'), and workmanship on the finished drawing shall be neat, clean cut and
readable. The plat shall be signed by all parties listed in subsection C5 of
this section, who are duly authorized and required to sign and shall contain
the following information:
      1.   A subdivision name, approved by the county recorder, and the general
location of the subdivision, in bold letters at the top of the sheet.
      2.   A north point and scale of the drawing, and the date.
      3.   Accurately drawn boundaries, showing the proper bearing and
dimensions of all boundary lines of the subdivision, properly tied to public
survey monuments. These lines should be slightly heavier than street and lot
lines.
      4.   The names, widths, lengths, bearings and curve data on centerlines
of proposed streets, alleys and easements; also the boundaries, bearings and
dimensions of all portions within the subdivision as intended to be dedicated
to the use of the public; the lines, dimensions, bearings and numbers of all
lots, blocks and parts reserved for any reason within the subdivision. All lots
and blocks are to be numbered consecutively under a definite system approved by
the planning commission. All proposed streets shall be named or numbered in
accordance with and in conformity with the adopted street naming and numbering
system 1  of the city and Weber County.
      5.   The standard forms approved by the planning commission lettered for
the following:
         a.   Description of land to be included in the subdivision.
         b.   Registered professional engineer and/or land surveyor's
"certificate of survey".
         c.   Owner's dedication.
         d.   Notary public's acknowledgment.
         e.   Planning commission's certificate of approval.
         f.   City engineer's certificate of approval.
         g.   City council certificate of acceptance attested by the city
recorder.
      6.   A three inch by three inch (3" x 3") space in the lower right hand
corner of the drawing for recording information.
      7.   After approving and signing the final plat, the planning commission
shall submit the plat for approval to the city engineer, who shall collect a
checking fee from the subdivider, and shall check the engineering requirements
of the drawing. After approval and signature by the city engineer, the plat
shall be submitted to the city council for approval and certificate of
acceptance. The final plat, bearing all official approvals as above required,
shall be returned to the subdivider for recording at the expense of the
subdivider. No subdivision shall be recorded in the office of the county
recorder and no lot included in such subdivision shall be sold or exchanged and
no offer shall be made to sell or exchange any such lot unless and until the
plat is so approved and accepted.
   D.   Expiration Of Final Subdivision Plat Approval; Extension Of Final
Subdivision Plat Approval:
      1.   After the final subdivision plat has been recorded in the office of
the Weber County recorder, the applicant(s) may apply for building permits
consistent with the approved and recorded final subdivision plat and consistent
with the city requirements for a building permit. The approval of a final
subdivision application shall be effective for a period of one year from the
date the final subdivision application is approved by the city council, at the
end of which time the final subdivision plat shall have been recorded in the
office of the Weber County recorder.
      2.   If the approved final subdivision plat is not recorded within the
one year period of date of approval, and the planning commission has not
extended the approval of the final subdivision plat, the final subdivision
approval shall be void and any vested rights thereunder will be lost, whereupon
the planning commission may require that a new subdivision plat be submitted
and approval obtained pursuant to this section. A written request may be
submitted to the planning commission prior to expiration of the final
subdivision plat for an extension of up to six (6) months. The planning
commission can grant such an extension where good cause can be shown. Once the
application has expired, in order to reintroduce the proposed subdivision
development, the applicant(s) must submit a new application with all applicable
fees. (Ord. 881, 7-20-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 9, chapter 5 of this code.
10-21-8: CONSTRUCTION PLANS AND PROFILES:
Prior to commencement of construction, the subdivider shall furnish a complete
set of construction plans and profiles prepared by a licensed professional
engineer not in the employ of the city of all streets, existing and proposed,
within the subdivision to the city engineer with the final plat. The city
engineer, within a reasonable time not to exceed twenty (20) days from receipt
of plans, shall notify the subdivider of approval or disapproval and in case of
disapproval, the reason therefor. (1985 Code § 19-40-7)
10-21-9: DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Street Arrangement: The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions
shall make provision for the continuation of the existing streets in adjoining
areas (or their proper protection where adjoining land is not subdivided)
insofar as such may be deemed necessary by the planning commission for public
requirements. The street arrangement shall be such as to cause no unnecessary
hardship to owners of adjoining property when they plat their own land and seek
to provide for convenient access to it.
   B.   Minor Streets: Minor streets shall approach the major or collector
streets at an angle of not less than eighty degrees (80°).
   C.   Major And Collector Streets: Major and collector streets shall conform
to the width designated on the major street plan wherever a subdivision falls
in an area for which a major street plan has been adopted. For territory where
such street plan has not been completed at the time the subdivision preliminary
plan is submitted to the planning commission, major or collector streets shall
be provided as required by the planning commission with minimum widths of one
hundred feet (100') for major streets and sixty six feet (66') for collector
streets.
   D.   Minor Residential Streets: Minor residential streets shall have a
minimum width of sixty feet (60'), except that cul-de-sacs (dead-end streets)
or loop streets serving not more than ten (10) lots may have minimum widths of
not less than fifty feet (50').
   E.   Alleys: Alleys shall have a minimum width of twenty feet (20'). Alleys
may be required in the rear of business lots, but will not be accepted in
residential blocks except under unusual conditions where such alleys are
considered necessary by the planning commission. (1985 Code § 19-40-8)
   F.   Cul-De-Sacs: Cul-de-sacs/turnarounds (dead-end streets) shall be used
only where unusual conditions exist which make other designs undesirable. Cul-
de-sacs are not desirable. Cul-de- sacs/turnarounds are not favorable to the
city and will generally not be acceptable in subdivision plans. Each cul-de-
sac/turnaround must be terminated by a turnaround not less than one hundred
feet (100') in diameter and cannot be a distance longer than four hundred feet
(400') from the center of the intersection to the throat of the cul-de-sac/
turnaround. In the event that surface water drains into the cul-de-sac/
turnaround, necessary catch basins and drainage easements shall be provided.
(Ord. 591, 7-3-2001)
   G.   Easements: Easements for drainage through the property may be required
by the city engineer, and easements of not less than ten feet (10') in width
shall be provided where required for utilities or other purposes.
   H.   Service Roads: Service roads paralleling major streets shall be
required unless the planning commission approves double- frontage lots which
may back onto major highways or collector streets as designated on the major
street plan. Where lots back onto a major highway or collector street, a buffer
planting strip of trees or shrubs shall be provided in a width of ten feet
(10') or wider, but in no case less than ten feet (10').
   I.   Protection Strips: Where subdivision streets parallel contiguous
property of other owners, the subdivider may, upon approval of the planning
commission, retain and deed to the city a protection strip not less than one
foot (1') in width between said street and adjacent property; provided, that an
agreement approved by the city attorney has been made by the subdivider,
contracting to deed to the then owners of the contiguous property, the one foot
(1') or larger protection strip for a consideration named in the agreement,
such consideration to be not more than the fair cost of land in the protection
strip, the street improvements properly chargeable to the contiguous property,
plus the value of one-half (1/2) the land in the street at the time of
agreement, together with interest at a fair rate from the time of agreement
until the time of the subdivision of such contiguous property. One copy of the
agreement shall be submitted to the city attorney and one to the planning
commission prior to approval of the final plat. Protection strips shall not be
submitted at the end of or within the boundaries of a public street or proposed
street, or within any area intended for future public use.
   J.   Blocks:
      1.   Blocks shall not exceed one thousand six hundred feet (1,600') in
length. A dedicated walkway through the block may be required where access is
necessary to a point designated by the planning commission. Such walkway shall
be a minimum of four feet (4') in width, but may be required to be wider where
determined necessary by the planning commission. The subdivider shall surface
the full width of the walkway with a concrete surface, install a chainlink
fence or its equal four feet (4') high on each side and the full length of each
walkway, and provide, in accordance with the standards and rules and
regulations, barriers at each walkway entrance to allow vehicles no wider than
four feet (4').
      2.   The width of blocks generally shall be sufficient to allow two (2)
tiers of lots.
      3.   Irregular shaped blocks, indented by cul-de-sacs, or containing
interior spaces, will be acceptable when properly designed and fitted to the
overall plat.
      4.   Blocks intended for business or industrial use shall be designed
specifically for such purposes with adequate space set aside for off street
parking and delivery facilities.
   K.   Lots:
      1.   The lot arrangement and design shall be such that lots will provide
satisfactory and desirable sites for buildings and be properly related to
topography and to existing and probable future requirements. (1985 Code § 19-
40-8)
      2.   All lots shown on the subdivision plan must conform to the minimum
requirements of this title for the zone in which the subdivision is located,
and to the minimum requirements of the city engineer and the state board of
health for sewage disposal. The minimum width for any residential building lot
shall be as required by this title. Where a public sewer is not available, the
minimum area of such lot shall be not less than that approved in a letter to
the planning commission by the board of health nor less than twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet, whichever is greater. (1985 Code § 19-40-8; amd. 2001
Code)
      3.   Each lot shall abut on a street dedicated by the recording of the
subdivision or on an existing publicly dedicated street, or on a street which
has become public by right of use and is more than twenty six feet (26') wide.
Interior lots abutting on more than one street shall be prohibited except where
unusual conditions make other design undesirable.
      4.   Corner lots shall have extra width sufficient for maintenance of
required building lines on both streets.
      5.   Side lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles, or radial
to the street line.
      6.   All remnants of lots below minimum size left over after subdividing
of a larger tract must be added to adjacent lots, rather than allowed to remain
as unusable parcels.
      7.   Where the land covered by a subdivision includes two (2) or more
parcels in separate ownership and the lot arrangement is such that a property
ownership line divides one or more lots, the land in each lot so divided shall
be transferred by deed to either single or joint ownership before approval of
the final plat, and such transfer certified to the planning commission by the
county recorder. (1985 Code § 19-40-8)
10-21-10: PARKS, SCHOOL SITES, OTHER PUBLIC PLACES:
   A.   When the preliminary plan is submitted for the division of property, a
part or all of which is deemed suitable by the planning commission for schools,
parks, playgrounds or other public use in accordance with the master plan, the
planning commission shall require the subdivider to include the required public
open space in the subdivision design to the satisfaction of the planning
commission.
   B.   The subdivider, at or before the time of presentation of the final
subdivision plat for approval of the city council, shall offer to sell to the
city or other appropriate agency, at any time during the two (2) year period
immediately following the recording of the final plat, any land which has been
set aside for park, playground, school or other public use at a fair market
price.
   C.   In the case of land required for park or playground, the fair market
price will be based upon raw land value, but in no event shall such price
exceed the price for said land in the last bona fide sale thereof within the
period of five (5) years immediately before the date of the final subdivision
plat.
   D.   The city or other appropriate public agency may accept such offer at
any time within a two (2) year period immediately following the recording of
the final plat. If any such proposed public areas have not been purchased by
the appropriate public agency within two (2) years after the recording of the
final plot, such areas may be divided into lots in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter, and sold. (1985 Code § 19-40-9)
10-21-11: IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Time Of Construction: The improvements listed in this section shall not
be installed prior to recording the final plat. No improvements shall be
installed until their location and specifications are approved by the city
engineer. Water and sewer mains and laterals and fire hydrants shall be
installed prior to the installation of road base, curbs, gutters, and the
surfacing of streets.
   B.   Performance Guarantees:
      1.   Before final plat approval by the city council, the subdivider shall
have satisfied the financing requirements of section
10-21-6 of this chapter. The required performance guarantees are to assure the
actual construction of the following improvements within a period of two (2)
years in a manner satisfactory to and in an amount specified by the city
council. Improvements include part or all of the following: streets, curbs,
gutters, water supply systems, fire hydrants, sewer systems, surface water
disposal systems, protection from hazards of canals and ditches, safety fences,
street trees, monuments, or other improvements required by the city council.
      2.   Sidewalks shall be installed by the building contractor at the same
time as the said contractor installs driveways and walkways on individual lots.
Said installation of sidewalks shall be completed and in good repair at or
before the time an application for occupancy is made to the community
development director.
      3.   The developer shall be responsible for the satisfactory performance
of improvements dedicated to the city for a period of one year after inspection
and final acceptance by the city. These improvements include, but are not
limited to: streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, water main lines, fire
hydrants, sewer mains and manholes, storm sewer mains and catch boxes,
monuments, and street signs which are in a dedicated easement and are
controlled solely by the city.
      4.   The developer's engineer shall, as each improvement is installed,
certify, in writing, that the installed improvements meet city standards and
that said improvements have been completed as approved by the city. Said
written certification shall be delivered to the city engineer, who shall make
periodic on site inspections for plan review and to verify the certification of
the developer's engineer. The developer's engineer shall provide evidence to
the satisfaction of the city engineer that the installed improvements meet city
standards before the developer shall be allowed to proceed with other
improvements on the development, or to begin construction of buildings or
structures in the subdivision.
      5.   In the event a utility easement or easements are provided to the
city in connection with the installed improvements, the utility line shall be
placed as close to the center of said easement as is reasonably possible.
   C.   Standards: Standards for design, construction, specifications and
inspection of street improvements, curbs and gutters, sidewalks and drainage
facilities shall be prepared by the city engineer, standards of design and
procedure by the planning commission, standards for water distribution and
sewage disposal facilities by the state board of health and city engineer, and
similar standards for fire hydrants by the city engineer and fire department.
Such standards and rules and regulations, and any amendments thereto, before
becoming effective, shall be adopted or amended by the city council as a part
of this chapter after recommendation by the planning commission and shall be
available to the public. (Ord. 871, 9-1-2015)
   D.   Streets On Property Of Other Public Agencies Or Utility Companies:
Where it is proposed that streets be constructed on property controlled by a
public agency or utility company, approval for the location, improvement and
maintenance of such streets shall be obtained from the public agency or utility
company and entered on the final plat in a form approved by the city attorney.
   E.   Street Improvements: All streets shall be constructed by the subdivider
in accordance with the standards and rules and regulations of the city
engineer.
   F.   Curbs, Gutters And Sidewalks: Curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall be
installed on existing and proposed streets by the developer of the property in
all subdivisions and must be put in prior to the sale of any subdivision or
phase.
   G.   Water Supply: A culinary water supply which must be approved by the
city engineer and the state board of health shall be available to each lot in
the subdivision and shall be provided in conformance with the standards and
rules and regulations of the city. (Ord. 766, 9-7-2010)
   H.   Fire Hydrants: Fire hydrants shall be installed by the subdivider at
locations determined by the city engineer and fire department in all
subdivisions in accordance with the standards, rules and regulations of the
city. (Ord. 815, 9-25-2012)
   I.   Sewage Disposal: Whether by individual disposal system or by public
disposal facilities, sewage disposal shall be provided and approved by the city
engineer and public works director for each lot in the subdivision in
accordance with the standards, rules and regulations of the city. (Ord. 766, 9-
7-2010; amd. Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
   J.   Surface Water: The subdivider shall provide adequate methods of
conveyance and disposal of stormwater and surface water at his expense, the
plans for which shall be prepared by a licensed engineer not in the employ of
the city and which shall be approved by the planning commission after
recommendation by the city engineer. If easements are required across abutting
property to permit drainage of the subdivision, it shall be the responsibility
of the subdivider to acquire such easements.
   K.   Ditches And Canals: Open ditches or canals shall not be allowed within
or adjoining a subdivision. It shall be the subdivider's responsibility to work
with the irrigation, drainage or ditch companies and arrange for the covering,
realigning or elimination of open ditches or canals. In cases where canals or
ditches cross public roads or proposed public roads, specifications and grades
for pipe or culvert must be approved by the city engineer.
   L.   Safety Fences: The subdivider shall install a six foot (6')
nonclimbable chainlink fence, or equivalent thereof, in conformance with all
applicable standards, rules and regulations of the city, along all nonaccess
streets, open reservoirs, bodies of water or railroad rights of way.
   M.   Street Trees: Street trees may be provided at the option of the
subdivider, but when so provided, the variety and location of such trees shall
be recommended by the planning commission staff and approved by the planning
commission.
   N.   Monuments: Permanent monuments shall be accurately set and established
at such points as are necessary to definitively establish all lines of the
plat, except those outlining individual lots. Monuments shall be of a type
approved by the city engineer. All subdivision plats shall be tied to a corner
or monument of record or established land office survey corner.
   O.   Streetlights: The city shall install streetlights at each intersection
of the subdivision. The installation shall be under the direction of the public
works director and shall conform to the standards set forth in the city street
lighting policy. The expense for the cost of materials and installation shall
be borne by the developer/subdivider.
   P.   Administrative Rules, Regulations; Authority: The city council is
authorized to prescribe by administrative rule or regulation filed for record
with the city recorder forms and procedures to ensure the orderly, regular and
efficient processing of applications for the approval of a proposed subdivision
and the strict compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   Q.   Fees Deposited; Inspections: The subdivider, upon submission of his
plans, shall deposit with the city such fees as may be prescribed by resolution
of the city council. The public works inspector shall be in charge of
inspecting all improvements, and may request the assistance of the city
engineer if the public works inspector deems it necessary. The subdivider
shall, prior to beginning any improvements as set forth herein, enter into a
written agreement with the city to pay any and all fees or assessments
associated with the services provided by the city or which become necessary for
the enforcement of this chapter, as said services are rendered. (Ord. 766, 9-7-
2010)
10-21-12: SMALL SUBDIVISIONS; SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
A preliminary plan shall be required for all subdivisions but under the
conditions listed below, approval of the preliminary plan by the planning
commission and by the city council shall be authorization for the subdivider to
sell lots within the subdivision covered by the preliminary plan by metes and
bounds, and the requirements of a final plan shall be waived. When final plans
are not required, the subdivider shall provide such improvements on existing
streets within the subdivision as shall be required by the city council. Final
plans shall not be required where all of the following conditions exist:
   A.   The subdivision consists of not more than ten (10) lots.
   B.   The subdivision does not require the dedication of any land for street
or other public purposes.
   C.   The subdivision is not traversed by the mapped lines of a proposed
street or a street to be widened as shown on the major street plan.
   D.   Each of the lots in the subdivision meets the frontage, width and area
requirements of this title, or has been granted a variance from such
requirements by the board of adjustment. (1985 Code § 19-40-11)
10-21-13: ENFORCEMENT AND PERMITS:
   A.   Official: The community development director is hereby designated and
authorized as the officer charged with the enforcement of this chapter. He
shall enforce all the provisions of this chapter, entering actions in the
courts when necessary and his failure to do so shall not legalize any violation
of such provisions.
   B.   Permits: The community development director shall not grant a permit,
nor shall any city officer grant any license or permit for the use of any land
or the construction or alteration of any building or structure on a lot which
would be in violation of any provisions of this chapter or on a lot in a
subdivision created by judicial decree, until a subdivision plat therefor has
been recorded, or approved under section
10-21-7 of this chapter. Any license or permit issued in conflict with such
provisions shall be null and void.
   C.   Inspections: The community development director shall inspect or cause
to be inspected all buildings, fire hydrants and water supply and sewage
disposal systems in the course of construction, installation or repair.
Excavations for fire hydrants and water and sewer mains and laterals shall not
be covered or backfilled until such installation shall have been approved by
the city engineer. If any such installation is covered before being inspected
and approved, it shall be uncovered after notice to uncover has been issued to
the responsible person by the community development director. (Ord. 854, 5-6-
2014)
   D.   Fee: At the time any building permit is applied for to construct any
building or structure in any subdivision which may be established, there shall
be paid, along with such application for such building permit, a fee in such
amount as prescribed by the city council as provided in the consolidated fee
schedule set forth in title 1, chapter 12 of this code, which additional fee
shall be in addition to the usual building permit fee which might otherwise be
applicable. This additional fee shall be used to assist in defraying the
expenses of the city in the creation of such subdivision. (1985 Code § 19-40-
12; amd. 2001 Code)
10-21-14: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a class C misdemeanor and punished as is provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (1985 Code § 19-40-13)
CHAPTER 22
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PRUD)
SECTION:
10-22-1: Purpose
10-22-2: Eligibility
10-22-3: PRUD Defined
10-22-4: General Requirements
10-22-5: Specific Requirements
10-22-6: Public Hearings
10-22-7: Form And Consistency
10-22-8: Applicable Provisions, Regulations And Policies
10-22-9: Amendments Or Cancellations
10-22-10: Recording Of A PRUD Subdivision
10-22-11: Modifications Or Suspension To Comply With State Or Federal Laws
10-22-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   To provide the city with flexibility in the approval of residential
development projects by tailoring development standards and requirements to the
unique features of a particular development site. To this end, the development
should be planned as one complex land use rather than an aggregation of
individual, unrelated buildings located on separate lots. (Ord. 677, 3-6-2007)
10-22-2: ELIGIBILITY:
Persons with a legal or equitable interest in the property that is being
considered for development in site specific areas of the city as depicted on
the Riverdale City land use master plan map. (Ord. 677, 3-6-2007)
10-22-3: PRUD DEFINED:
A "PRUD" is a conditional use master planned, architecturally designed
development in which the regulations of the underlying zone, where the
development is proposed, may be negotiated and modified to allow flexibility
and initiative in site and building design and location, in accordance with an
approved PRUD plan and requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 677, 3-6-2007)
10-22-4: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
All PRUD developments are a conditional use. All agreements and exhibits shall
be reviewed by the planning commission and approved by the city council and
shall be specific and contain in the overall development plan, the following:
   A.   Time Limit: Time limit for completion of development.
   B.   Description: Description of the property.
   C.   Allowed Uses:
Parks/maintainable, usable open space.
Recreation facilities (clubhouse).
Single-family dwelling.
Swimming pool.
Other uses which provide a service only to the residents of the PRUD.
   D.   Welfare: Public health, safety and general welfare shall be observed.
      1.   Emergency vehicle access must be provided during all phases of the
project from inception through completion.
   E.   Density: Per acre density of dwelling units.
   F.   Construction Requirements:
      1.   City engineering standards shall apply for the following
infrastructure and when completed shall be dedicated to Riverdale City:
         a.   Streets: The street width along with sidewalk and park strip
requirements will be reviewed by the public works and fire departments for
their recommendation to the planning commission. The minimum width of all
dedicated streets within the PRUD shall be no less than fifty feet (50'); this
includes the asphalt driving surface, curbs and gutters, landscaped park
strips, sidewalks and a one foot (1') strip of land on the private property
side of the sidewalks.
         b.   Sewer: Sewer main trunk lines and manholes shall be dedicated to
and maintained by Riverdale City. All service lateral lines are owned and
maintained by the PRUD association or each individual property owner in the
PRUD.
         c.   Water: All water meters, water main lines, service lines on the
street side of the meters and fire hydrants will be owned and maintained by
Riverdale City.
         d.   Stormwater: All stormwater lines and inlet boxes in the street
right of way.
      2.   Information provided to Riverdale City to include, but not be
limited to:
         a.   Geotech report.
         b.   Traffic study, as required by the city engineer and public works
director when the scope, location, and density of the development or other
factors deem it necessary.
         c.   Sensitive land study (wetlands).
   G.   Setbacks: No rear yard setback of any dwelling within the PRUD shall be
closer than twenty feet (20') to the adjacent zone boundary or property outside
of the PRUD. All other building setbacks shall comply with the minimum
requirements of the building code unless it is the determination of the
planning commission that greater setbacks are necessary to provide for open
space areas or for access or aesthetic reasons.
All building setbacks shall be reviewed and approved by the planning
commission.
   H.   Landscaping: All landscaping shall visually enhance and complement the
overall development and be installed and maintained in conformance with a
landscape plan, which has been approved by the planning commission and city
council. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the entire development shall be
open green space/landscaping.
   I.   Screening:
      1.   Requirement for fencing/screening shall be reviewed by the planning
commission for view and safety.
   J.   Usable Open Space: Open space, apart from sensitive areas.
      1.   Usable Open Green Space: A planned open area suitable for
relaxation, recreation or landscaping which may be held in common or private
ownership, provided that all residents of the development shall have a right to
enter and use the open space. It should be unoccupied and unobstructed by
buildings and hard surfaces such as asphalt or concrete, except that such open
green spaces may include walkways, patios, recreational activity areas, picnic
pavilions, gazebos and water features.
   K.   Parking: The minimum length of individual driveways from front property
line to the wall of the dwelling or garage shall be no less than twenty four
feet (24'). There shall be a minimum of two (2) exterior parking spaces per
unit. Visitor parking will be evaluated and requirements imposed by the
planning commission for all detached dwelling types within a PRUD. For attached
townhouse or condominium type development there shall be one visitor parking
stall for every two (2) units or fraction thereof.
   L.   Architectural Design:
      1.   Square footage (lots and homes); if individual dwelling lots are
common area, the site plan must represent all common areas that are owned by
the PRUD homeowners' association.
      2.   Parking area, enclosed or open.
      3.   Exterior coverings: There shall be a minimum of forty percent (40%)
of brick or rock, and painting of an exterior building element is prohibited.
   M.   Layout: Development layout on site plan identifying the location and
arrangement of all allowed uses and improvements.
      1.   Provide information and identify why it is suitable as a PRUD.
   N.   Financial Ability:
      1.   Provide ability to financially carry out the proposed project within
the time limit established.
      2.   Provide an escrow for all the city improvements and no escrow will
be released until the project is completed.
      3.   An independent finance person or company shall be responsible for
the association dues assessed by the association for maintenance and
improvements to common areas.
      4.   All PRUDs will be licensed yearly by the city with the PRUD's
balance sheet and income statement provided with yearly application.
   O.   Schedule: Phasing schedule and timing for the provisions of all
features, dedications and improvements:
      1.   If project is approved to be done in phases, each phase will be
completed before the next phase is started.
      2.   Clubhouse and amenities will be completed in first phase.
   P.   Review: Review and approval of association's CC&Rs (conditions,
covenants and restrictions).
   Q.   Other: Other conditions, terms, restrictions and requirements for
subsequent actions and approvals as stipulated during the review or public
hearing process. (Ord. 733, 5-5-2009)
10-22-5: SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Ownership: The development may be in single or corporate ownership or
the application filed jointly by the owners of the property. (Ord. 677, 3-6-
2007)
   B.   Yard Requirements: The property adjacent to the planned residential
unit development shall not be adversely affected and to this end, the planning
commission may require, in the absence of appropriate physical boundaries, that
uses of least intensity or greatest compatibility be arranged around the
boundaries of the project. Yard requirements for setbacks and spacing distances
between dwellings shall be approved by the planning commission and subject to
the review and requirements of fire department and building department and
shall comply with the following:
      1.   No rear yard setback of any dwelling within the PRUD shall be closer
than twenty feet (20') to adjacent zone boundary or property outside of the
PRUD. (Ord. 815, 9-25-2012)
   C.   Site Development Standards; Signs: Site development standards and sign
regulations shall be determined by approval of the site development plan.
   D.   Open Space: The city council, upon recommendation of the planning
commission, may require the preservation, maintenance and ownership of open
space utilizing, at the city's option, one of the following methods:
      1.   Dedicating the land as a public park or parkway system; or
      2.   Granting to the city a permanent open space easement on and over the
said private open spaces to guarantee that the open spaces remain perpetually
in recreational use, with ownership and maintenance being the responsibility of
a homeowners' association established with articles of association and bylaws
which are satisfactory to the city; or
      3.   Complying with the provisions of the condominium ownership act of
1953, Utah Code Annotated title 57, chapter 8, which provides for the payment
of common expenses for the upkeep of common areas and facilities. Recreation
uses and facilities may be developed within the common open space areas in
compliance with a recreation and landscaping plan approved as part of the
approved final development plan of the planned residential unit development.
      4.   If the second or third method, as set forth above, is utilized to
maintain the open spaces, but the organization established fails to maintain
the open spaces in reasonable order and condition, the city may, at its option,
do or contract to have done the required maintenance and shall assess ratably
the open space and individually owned properties within the planned residential
unit development. Such assessment shall be a lien against property and shall be
filed with the county recorder, or the city may initiate appropriate legal
action to collect the maintenance fees, together with reasonable attorney fees
and costs.
   E.   Guarantee: The developer shall be required to provide an escrow in an
amount determined by the community development director guaranteeing the
completion of the development of the open space, or a phase thereof. When
completed in accordance with the approved plan, the bond shall be released. If
uncompleted at the end of two (2) years, the community development director
will review the progress and may proceed to use the escrow to complete required
improvements.
   F.   Subdivisions: If the planned residential unit development is to be
subsequently divided either as a "subdivision" into a phase development parcel
or into separately owned and operated units, such division boundaries shall be
indicated in the development plan and preliminary subdivision approval
concurrently obtained in the case of a "subdivision".
   G.   Applicability Of Subdivision Regulations: The subdivision ordinance,
chapter 21 of this title, as it now or hereafter may exist applies to all
developments.
   H.   Adaptable Area: The area shall be adaptable to a unit type development
and shall not contain within or through it any ownership or physical barrier
which would tend to impair the unit cohesiveness.
   I.   Accessory Amenity Uses: Accessory amenity uses may be included in
planned residential unit developments as a necessary service to residents of
the development as determined by the planning commission, provided agreements
and restrictive covenants controlling the proposed uses, ownership, operational
characteristics and physical design to the city's satisfaction are filed by and
entered into by the developer to ensure that the approved necessary service is
maintained.
   J.   Changes; Alterations: Once the overall development plan showing details
of buildings, structures and uses has been approved by the city council after
recommendations of the planning commission, no changes or alterations to such
development plans or uses shall be made without first obtaining approval of the
community development director. The community development director may require
changes to be approved by the planning commission and council. (Ord. 677, 3-6-
2007)
10-22-6: PUBLIC HEARINGS:
A public hearing shall be held to receive input regarding the PRUD proposal by
the planning commission and a recommendation forwarded to the city council. The
required notice shall be the notice required by the regular planning commission
meeting. (Ord. 677, 3-6-2007)
10-22-7: FORM AND CONSISTENCY:
A PRUD application may be approved by the city council by ordinance following
the receipt of the planning commission recommendation with a finding that the
development is consistent with the goals of the city. (Ord. 677, 3-6-2007)
10-22-8: APPLICABLE PROVISIONS, REGULATIONS AND POLICIES:
Unless otherwise modified by written agreement by the city council all
provisions, regulations and policies governing the uses of the land, density,
design and improvements and construction standards and specifications and all
other requirements and regulations of the zone in effect at the time of the
execution of the PRUD application shall apply. A PRUD application shall not
prevent the city from subsequent actions applicable to the property that is the
subject of a PRUD application from applying any new provisions or regulations
that do not conflict with those contained within the PRUD application.
   A.   Substantial compliance with zone regulations and other provisions of
this title in requiring adequate standards related to the public health, safety
and general welfare shall be observed, without unduly inhibiting the advantages
of large scale site planning for residential and related purposes. (Ord. 677,
3-6-2007)
10-22-9: AMENDMENTS OR CANCELLATIONS:
A PRUD application may be amended or canceled in whole or in part by mutual
consent of the parties or their successors. (Ord. 677, 3-6-2007)
10-22-10: RECORDING OF A PRUD SUBDIVISION:
After the city council approves a PRUD application, the city recorder shall
record the PRUD subdivision as approved in the office of the Weber County
recorder. The recorded copy of the PRUD subdivision shall be considered the
official copy. The benefits, rights and obligations of the PRUD subdivision
shall be binding upon all successors to the original parties. (Ord. 677, 3-6-
2007)
10-22-11: MODIFICATIONS OR SUSPENSION TO COMPLY WITH STATE OR FEDERAL LAWS:
In the event that federal or state laws or regulations, enacted after the
adoption of a PRUD subdivision, prevent or preclude compliance with one or more
provisions of the subdivision, such provisions of the subdivision shall be
modified or suspended as may be necessary to comply with such federal and state
laws or regulations. (Ord. 677, 3-6-2007)
CHAPTER 23
CLUSTER SUBDIVISIONS
SECTION:
10-23-1: Purpose And Intent
10-23-2: General Regulations
10-23-3: Site Development Standards
10-23-4: Open Space
10-23-5: Procedure
10-23-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
Cluster subdivisions are intended to allow flexibility in the neighborhood and
subdivision lot design by permitting the development of single-family and two-
family dwellings on lots smaller than normally required for the zone in which
the subdivision is located and by dedicating or reserving the land so saved to
needed open space. It is not intended that this type of subdivision be
universally applied but only where circumstances or natural features and land
use make it appropriate and of special benefit to the residents of the
subdivision and surrounding area. The consolidated lot resulting from the
reduction of lot sizes shall be usable land, not swamp land or steep slope.
(1985 Code § 19-9-1)
10-23-2: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Permitted Zones: A cluster subdivision shall be a permitted use in all
agricultural and residential zones and not withstanding any other provisions of
this title, the provisions as hereinafter set forth shall be applicable if any
conflict exists; provided, however, that no such cluster subdivision shall
contain less than twenty five (25) dwellings. (1985 Code § 19-9-2; amd. 2001
Code)
   B.   Reduction In Lot Area: Where land is proposed for subdivision into lots
and a subdivider dedicates or permanently reserves land within the subdivision
for recreational use or open space, a reduction in the minimum lot area
required for the zone in which the cluster subdivision is located may be
approved by the planning commission, provided the provisions of this chapter
are met; and further provided, that the cluster subdivision receives
subdivision approval. (1985 Code § 19-9-2)
10-23-3: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Area: The minimum lot area for dwellings may be reduced below the area
normally required in the zone in which the cluster subdivision is located, but
no lot shall have an area less than two-thirds (2/3) of the minimum lot area
required for such dwelling in the respective zone.
   B.   Width; Side Yard: The minimum lot width and side yard may be reduced
below the width and side yard normally required in the zone in which the
cluster subdivision is located, but no lot shall have a width or side yard of
less than three-fourths (3/4) of the minimum lot width or side yard required in
the respective zone.
   C.   Yard Use; Height: Yard use and height regulations shall be the same as
for the zone in which the cluster subdivision is located. (1985 Code § 19-9-3)
10-23-4: OPEN SPACE:
   A.   Required: There shall be permanently reserved within the subdivision
for recreation and/or open space, parcels of land whose total area is not less
than the amount by which the areas of the residential lots are reduced below
the minimum area normally required in the zone in which the cluster subdivision
is located. (1985 Code § 19-9-4)
   B.   Preservation And Maintenance: Recreation and/or open space areas to be
permanently reserved shall be improved, landscaped and maintained in accordance
with a plan approved by the planning commission and the subdivision provisions
of the subdivision ordinance, chapter 21 of this title. (1985 Code § 19-9-5;
amd. 2001 Code)
10-23-5: PROCEDURE:
A preliminary plan of the cluster subdivision showing the areas within the
subdivision to be permanently reserved for recreation and/or open space, and
plans showing the proposed use, improvements and method of maintenance of such
areas shall be approved by the planning commission before the cluster
subdivision proposal becomes a permitted use in the zone in which it is
proposed. (1985 Code § 19-9-6)
CHAPTER 24
GROUP DWELLINGS
SECTION:
10-24-1: Yard Regulations
10-24-2: Group Dwelling PRUD
10-24-3: Conditional Use
10-24-1: YARD REGULATIONS:
Group dwellings shall be considered as one building for the purpose of front,
side and rear yard requirements, the entire group as a unit requiring one
front, one rear and two (2) side yards as specified for dwelling structures.
The minimum distance between structures shall be ten feet (10') for single-
story buildings, fifteen feet (15') for two (2) story buildings and twenty feet
(20') for three (3) or more story buildings. (1985 Code § 19-10-1)
10-24-2: GROUP DWELLING PRUD:
A group dwelling complex must be developed as a PRUD if the area of the complex
is equal to or exceeds the minimum area requirements for a PRUD as listed in
section
10-22-3 of this title. (1985 Code § 19-10-2)
10-24-3: CONDITIONAL USE:
All group dwellings with twenty five (25) or more dwelling units in an R-3 zone
or an R-4 zone, or with fifty (50) or more dwelling units in an R-5 zone, are
considered as a conditional use and as such must comply with the provisions of
chapter 19 of this title. (1985 Code § 19-10-3)
CHAPTER 25
DEVELOPMENT IN ALL ZONES
SECTION:
10-25-1: General Provisions
10-25-2: Definitions
10-25-3: Scope Of Chapter
10-25-4: Preapplication Sketch Plan
10-25-5: Preliminary Plan Required
10-25-6: Design Standards
10-25-7: Improvements
10-25-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: The underlying purpose and intent of this chapter
is to promote the health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the
inhabitants of the city in the matter of all proposed land developments, to
encourage the healthful growth of the city and related matters affected by such
developments.
   B.   Public Interest: Any proposed development and its use shall be in the
best interests of the public and shall be in harmony with the surrounding area
and the developer shall present evidence to this effect when requested to do so
by the planning commission.
   C.   Appeal For Variance: In cases where the planning commission denies
approval because unusual topographic or other exceptional conditions exist, an
appeal for a variance may be made to the board of adjustment. An appeal may
allege that there was an error in an order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the land use authority in the administration or
interpretation of any land use ordinance. (Ord. 701, 5-6-2008)
10-25-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the respective
meanings hereinafter set forth, unless a different meaning clearly appears from
the context:
CITY: City of Riverdale, Utah.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Riverdale, Utah.
CITY ENGINEER: The city engineer of the city of Riverdale, Utah, acting in the
capacity of providing reviews only for conformance of submitted plans with this
and other sections of the city's ordinances.
COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Area for location of various types of commercial
activity, that is, commerce or trade as listed in chapter 10, article A of this
title, which are compatible and complementary to surrounding land uses.
COUNTY: Weber County, Utah.
CUL-DE-SAC: A minor dead end street provided with a turnaround.
FINAL ACCEPTANCE BY THE CITY: Approval of the site plan by the city council.
MANUFACTURING DEVELOPMENT: Area that will accommodate the need for making goods
or wares by manual labor or by machinery on a large scale as listed in chapter
11, article A of this title, and uses where the environmental impact upon the
community may be substantial and where development standards will be
implemented to preserve the general welfare of the community.
MASTER STREET PLAN: A plan, labeled "master street plan of the city of
Riverdale" including maps or reports or both, which has been approved by the
city council as required by law or such plan as it may be amended from time to
time and so certified to the city council.
OFFICIAL MAP: Any map adopted by the city council under provisions of Utah Code
Annotated section 10-9a-407.
PARTITION OR DIVISION OF AGRICULTURAL LAND: A bona fide "partition or division
of agricultural land" for agricultural purposes shall mean the division of a
parcel of land into three (3) or more lots or parcels, none of which lots or
parcels are smaller than five (5) acres in area; and provided, that no
dedication of any street or road is required to serve any such lots or parcels
of agricultural land for the purpose of building development.
PERSON: Any individual, corporation, partnership, firm or association of
individuals however styled or designated.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The city planning commission of Riverdale, Utah.
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT: Area that will accommodate the need for various
dwelling groups such as single-family, planned residential unit development and
apartments that are situated in areas that will not be adversely impacted by
other unrelated uses.
STREET: A thoroughfare which has been dedicated or abandoned to the public and
accepted by proper public authority or a thoroughfare not less than twenty six
feet (26') wide which has been made public by right of use and which affords
the principal access to abutting property.
STREET, COLLECTOR: A street, existing or proposed, which serves or is intended
to serve as the principal trafficway between large and separated areas or
districts and which is the main access to the major street system.
STREET, MAJOR: A street, existing or proposed, which serves or is intended to
serve as a major trafficway and is designated on the master street plan as a
controlled access highway, major street, parkway or other equivalent term to
identify those streets comprising the basic structure of the street plan.
STREET, MINOR: A street, existing or proposed, which is supplementary to a
collector or major street and of limited continuity, which serves or is
intended to serve the local needs of a neighborhood.
ZONING ORDINANCE: The uniform zoning ordinance, which is this title. (Ord. 701,
5-6-2008)
10-25-3: SCOPE OF CHAPTER:
Tracts of land which are located in the city and which are intended for any
proposed land use shall be developed in compliance with this chapter. No person
shall offer for recording in the office of the county recorder any deed
conveying any land development, or any interest therein, unless such
development has been created pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter. (Ord. 701, 5-6-2008)
10-25-4: PREAPPLICATION SKETCH PLAN:
   A.   Required: Each person who proposes to develop land for any use within
the city shall confer with the community development director before preparing
any plats, charts or plans in order to become familiar with the city
development requirements and existing master plans for the territory in which
the proposed development lies and to discuss the proposed plan of development
of the tract.
   B.   Information Form: A development information form to be supplied to the
developer by the community development director shall be filled out and
submitted to the planning commission prior to submission of the preliminary
plat. (Ord. 701, 5-6-2008)
10-25-5: PRELIMINARY PLAN REQUIRED:
   A.   Submission: Each person who proposes to develop land in the city shall
prepare a preliminary plan of such development and shall submit eight (8)
prints thereof to the planning commission and show compliance with the
requirements of the site plan standards checklist which shall be obtained from
the community development director. Preliminary plans must be received by the
community development director seven (7) days prior to the scheduled planning
commission meeting in order to allow sufficient review time.
   B.   Planning Commission Action: The planning commission may approve or
reject the preliminary plan, or grant approval on conditions stated. Approval
of the preliminary plan by the planning commission shall not constitute final
acceptance of the development by the planning commission. One copy of the
approved preliminary plan, signed by the chairman of the planning commission,
shall be retained in the office of the planning commission. One signed copy
shall be given to the developer. Receipt of this signed copy shall be
authorization for the developer to proceed with the preparation of plans and
specifications and with the preparation of the final plan. Prior to the
construction of any improvements or the submission of any bond, the developer
shall furnish to the city engineer all plans, information and data necessary
for review of said improvements for conformance with this chapter. These plans
shall be reviewed by the city engineer and shall be accepted if he determines
them to be in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. No construction
of buildings or additions shall begin until after a favorable recommendation of
the final plan by the planning commission and approval by the city council.
Amendments to the site plan shall be favorably recommended by the planning
commission and approved by the city council.
   C.   Time Limit Of Preliminary Site Plan Approval: Approval of the
preliminary site plan by the planning commission shall be valid for a maximum
period of one year, unless, upon application of the developer, the planning
commission grants an extension. After compliance with the requirements of the
planning commission, city engineer, fire marshal, police chief, public works
director and community development director, a final site plan shall be
prepared and submitted to the planning commission for recommendation to the
city council for final approval. The final site plan shall be in conformance
with city ordinances and design standards and if applicable, a development
agreement.
   D.   Expiration Of Final Site Plan Approval; Extension Of Final Site Plan
Approval:
      1.   Failure to obtain a building permit within one year of the final
site plan approval by the city council, of any site plan, shall terminate and
cancel the prior site plan approval given, and any vested rights thereunder
will be lost, whereupon the planning commission may require that a new site
plan be submitted and approval obtained pursuant to this section. Once the
application has expired, in order to reintroduce the proposed site plan
development, the owner or developer must submit a new application with all
applicable fees.
      2.   A written request may be submitted to the planning commission prior
to expiration of the final site plan approval for an extension of up to six (6)
months. The planning commission can grant such an extension where good cause
can be shown. (Ord. 881, 7-20-2016)
10-25-6: DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Street Arrangement: The arrangement of streets in new developments
shall make provision for the continuation of the existing streets in adjoining
areas (or their proper protection where adjoining land is not developed)
insofar as such may be deemed necessary by the planning commission for public
requirements. The street arrangement shall be such as to cause no unnecessary
hardship to owners of adjoining property when they plat their own land and seek
to provide for convenient access to it.
   B.   Minor Streets: Minor streets shall approach the major or collector
streets at an angle of not less than eighty degrees (80°).
   C.   Major And Collector Streets: Major and collector streets shall conform
to the width designated on the master street plan wherever a development falls
in an area for which a master street plan has been adopted. For territory where
such street plan has not been completed at the time the development preliminary
plan is submitted to the planning commission, major or collector streets shall
be provided as required by the planning commission with minimum widths of one
hundred feet (100') for major streets and sixty six feet (66') for collector
streets.
   D.   Minor Residential Streets: Minor residential streets shall have a
minimum width of sixty feet (60'), except that cul-de-sacs (dead end streets)
or loop streets serving not more than ten (10) lots may have a minimum width of
fifty feet (50').
   E.   Alleys: Alleys shall have a minimum width of twenty feet (20'). Alleys
may be required in the rear of business lots, but will not be accepted in
residential blocks except under unusual conditions where such alleys are
considered necessary by the planning commission.
   F.   Cul-De-Sacs: Cul-de-sacs (dead end streets) shall be used only where
unusual conditions exist which make other designs undesirable. Each cul-de-sac
must be terminated by a turnaround not less than one hundred feet (100') in
diameter. If surface water drainage is into the turnaround due to the grade of
the street, necessary catch basins and drainage easements shall be provided.
   G.   Easements: Easements for drainage through the property may be required
by the city engineer, and easements of not less than ten feet (10') in width
shall be provided where required for utilities or other purposes.
   H.   Service Roads: Service roads paralleling major streets shall be
required unless the planning commission approved double frontage lots which may
back onto major highways or collector streets as designated on the master
street plan. Where lots back onto a major highway or collector street, a buffer
planting strip of trees or shrubs shall be provided in a width of a minimum of
ten feet (10').
   I.   Blocks: Blocks between streets shall not exceed one thousand six
hundred feet (1,600') in length. A dedicated walkway through the block may be
required where access is necessary to a point designated by the planning
commission. Such walkway shall be a minimum of four feet (4') in width, but may
be required to be wider where determined necessary by the planning commission.
The developer shall surface the full width of the walkway with a concrete
surface. (Ord. 701, 5-6-2008)
10-25-7: IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Time Of Construction: The improvements listed in this section shall be
installed prior to final inspection and issuance of a certificate of occupancy
except as provided in subsection B of this section. No improvements shall be
installed until their design and specifications are reviewed by the city
engineer for conformance with this chapter. Water and sewer mains and laterals
and fire hydrants shall be installed prior to the installation of road base,
curbs, gutters, sidewalks and the surfacing of streets.
   B.   Performance Bonds:
      1.   In lieu of actual completion of the improvements listed in this
section and before final approval by the city council, the developer may
deposit with the city a surety or cash bond to ensure the actual construction
of said improvements within a period of two (2) years after final approval by
the city council in a manner satisfactory to and in an amount specified by the
council. Improvements shall include part or all of the following: streets,
curbs, gutters, sidewalks, water supply systems, fire hydrants, sewer systems,
surface water disposal systems, protection from hazards of canals and ditches,
safety fences, landscaping, monuments, street signs, or other improvements
required by the city council and planning commission.
      2.   The developer shall be responsible for the satisfactory performance
of improvements dedicated to the city for a period of one year after inspection
and final acceptance by the city. These improvements include, but are not
limited to: streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, water main lines, fire
hydrants, sewer mains and manholes, storm sewer mains and catch boxes,
monuments, and street signs which are in a dedicated easement and are
controlled solely by the city.
      3.   Prior to the final plat being presented to the city council for
approval, the subdivider/developer (or an individual with legal authority
acting on behalf of the subdivider/developer) shall, at the discretion of the
city, satisfy one of the following improvement performance requirements:
         a.   Escrow Deposit: Enter into a developer's agreement with the city
and furnish satisfactory proof of an escrow deposit in favor of the city in an
amount equal to the cost of the improvements required for the subdivision, plus
ten percent (10%) of said costs, with said amounts to be released pursuant to
the terms and conditions of the developer's agreement.
         b.   Performance Bond: Enter into a developer's agreement with the
city and furnish to the city a developer's performance bond in an amount equal
to one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the cost of the improvements
required for the subdivision, with said bond to be released pursuant to the
terms and conditions of the developer's agreement.
   C.   Standards: Standards for design, construction, specifications and
inspection of street improvements, curbs and gutters, sidewalks and drainage
facilities shall be prepared by the city engineer, standards of design and
procedure by the planning commission, standards for water distribution and
sewage disposal facilities by the state board of health and city engineer, and
similar standards for fire hydrants by the city engineer and fire department.
Such standards and rules and regulations, and any amendments thereto, before
becoming effective, shall be adopted or amended by the city council as a part
of this chapter after recommendation by the planning commission and shall be
available to the public. (Ord. 871, 9-1-2015)
   D.   Streets On Property Of Other Public Agencies Or Utility Companies:
Where it is proposed that streets be constructed on property controlled by a
public agency or utility company, approval for the location, improvement and
maintenance of such streets shall be obtained from the public agency or utility
company by the developer and entered on the final site plan in a form approved
by the city attorney.
   E.   Street Improvements: All streets shall be constructed by the developer
in accordance with the standards and rules and regulations of the city.
   F.   Curbs, Gutters And Sidewalks: Curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall be
installed on existing and proposed streets by the developer in all
developments. (Ord. 701, 5-6-2008)
   G.   Water Supply: A culinary water supply must be approved by the public
works director and the city engineer. The developer shall install water mains
and service lines or laterals from such mains to each structure within the
development prior to the installation of road base, surfacing, curbs, gutters
and sidewalks. (Ord. 701, 5-6-2008; amd. Ord. 854, 5-6-2014)
   H.   Fire Hydrants: Fire hydrants shall be installed by the developer at
locations determined by the city engineer and fire department in all
developments in accordance with the standards, rules and regulations of the
city. (Ord. 815, 9-25-2012)
   I.   Sewage Disposal: Whether by individual disposal system or by public
disposal facilities, sewage disposal shall be provided and reviewed by the city
engineer and approved by the public works director and sewer district. The
developer shall connect with such sanitary sewer and provide sewer mains and
extend laterals from the main sewer line to each building prior to the
installation of the road base, surfacing, curbs, gutters and sidewalks.
   J.   Surface Water: The developer shall provide adequate methods of
conveyance and disposal of stormwater and surface water at his expense, the
plans for which shall be prepared by a licensed engineer not in the employ of
the city and which shall be approved by the planning commission after
recommendation by the city engineer. If easements are required across abutting
property to permit drainage of the development, it shall be the responsibility
of the developer to acquire such easements.
   K.   Ditches And Canals: Open ditches or canals shall not be allowed in or
adjoining a development. It shall be a developer's responsibility to work with
the irrigation, drainage or ditch companies and arrange for the covering,
realigning or elimination of open ditches or canals. In cases where canals or
ditches cross public roads or proposed public roads, specifications and grades
for pipe or culvert must be reviewed by the city engineer for conformance with
the city utility standards and accepted by the affected canal company as
adequate as to capacity.
   L.   Fences: The developer shall install a fence in conformance with all
applicable standards, rules and regulations of the city, along all nonaccess
streets, open reservoirs, bodies of water or railroad rights of way. (Ord. 701,
5-6-2008)
CHAPTER 26
CONSTITUTIONAL TAKINGS
SECTION:
10-26-1: Purpose
10-26-2: Defined
10-26-3: Guidelines
10-26-4: Analysis
10-26-5: Appeals
10-26-6: Limitations
10-26-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide advisory guidelines for the city to
assist the city in identifying actions that involve physical taking or exaction
of private real property that may have constitutional taking issues. (Ord. 620,
7-1-2003)
10-26-2: DEFINED:
As used herein:
CONSTITUTIONAL TAKING ISSUES: Actions involving the physical or regulatory
taking of private real property by the city that might require compensation to
a private real property owner under:
   A.   The fifth or fourteenth amendment of the constitution of the United
States;
   B.   Article I, section 22, of the Utah constitution; or
   C.   Any recent court rulings governing the physical or regulatory taking of
private real property by a governmental entity. (Ord. 620, 7-1-2003)
10-26-3: GUIDELINES:
The following guidelines shall be considered by the city when taking any action
that might result in the physical or regulatory taking of private real
property:
   A.   Identification: The city should review the following to determine and
identify whether a proposed governmental action raises constitutional taking
issues:
      1.   Does the action result in a permanent physical occupation of private
property?
      2.   Does the action require a property owner to dedicate property or
grant an easement to the city?
      3.   Does the action deprive the property owner of all economically
viable uses of the property?
      4.   Does the action impose a severe economic burden that is
inappropriately unfair when considered in light of: a) the burden placed on the
property owner; b) the nature of the government action and benefit; and c) the
property owner's investment backed expectations?
      5.   Does the action deny a fundamental attribute of ownership? (Ord.
620, 7-1-2003)
10-26-4: ANALYSIS:
If the city determines that a governmental action involves constitutional
taking issues, the proposed action should be reviewed by the city to analyze
the possible taking and to determine the action to be taken. In reviewing the
proposed action, the following factors may be analyzed:
   A.   The effect the potential taking would have on the use or value of the
private property;
   B.   The likelihood that the action may result in a constitutional taking;
   C.   Any alternatives to the proposed action that would fulfill the city's
lawful objectives and reduce the risk of a constitutional taking;
   D.   The cost to the city for payment of compensation if a taking is
determined;
   E.   The governmental interest involved and its nextus to the potential
taking; and
   F.   If the action is roughly proportionate or reasonably related to the
impact of any proposed development. (Ord. 620, 7-1-2003)
10-26-5: APPEALS:
Any owner of private property whose interest in the property is subject to a
physical or regulatory taking by the city, pursuant to a final and
authoritative decision or action of the city, may appeal the city's decision or
action by filing a written notice of appeal and statement of the grounds for
the appeal in the city recorder's office within thirty (30) days from the date
of the city's decision or action. The city council or its designee shall hear
all evidence regarding the appeal and render its decision and findings in
writing within fourteen (14) days from the date the appeal was filed. If the
city fails to hear and decide the appeal within fourteen (14) days, the city's
decision or action is presumed to be approved. (Ord. 620, 7-1-2003)
10-26-6: LIMITATIONS:
The guidelines set forth herein are advisory only and shall not be construed to
expand nor limit the scope of the city's liability for a constitutional taking.
The city shall have no legal liability to any person, firm or entity of any
nature whatsoever and a court may not impose liability upon the city for
failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 620, 7-1-2003)
CHAPTER 27
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
10-27-1: Statutory Authorization, Findings Of Fact, Purpose And Methods
10-27-2: Definitions
10-27-3: General Provisions
10-27-4: Administration
10-27-5: Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction
10-27-6: Penalties For Noncompliance
10-27-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND METHODS:
   A.   Statutory Authorization: The legislature of the state of Utah has in
Utah Code Annotated 10-3-701 delegated the responsibility to local governmental
units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore the state of Utah does or has
delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations
designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, Riverdale City does ordain as
follows.
   B.   Findings Of Fact:
      1.   The flood hazard areas of Riverdale City are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely
affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
      2.   These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed, or otherwise protected from flood damage.
   C.   Statement Of Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the
public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private
losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
      1.   Protect human life and health;
      2.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
      3.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
      4.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
      5.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
floodplains;
      6.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas; and
      7.   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a
flood area.
   D.   Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses: In order to accomplish its purposes,
this chapter uses the following methods:
      1.   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities;
      2.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
      3.   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
      4.   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage;
      5.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands. (Ord. 865, 4-21-2015)
10-27-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give
this chapter its most reasonable application.
ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING: Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or
similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high
velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and
deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
APEX: A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path
of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan
flooding can occur.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO, AH, or VO zone on a community's
flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent (1%) chance or greater
annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet (3') where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM).
After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of
the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30,
VE or V.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
CRITICAL FEATURE: An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING: A nonbasement building:
   A.   Built, in the case of a building in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B,
C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a
building in zone V1-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal
structure member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means
of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the floor of
the water; and
   B.   Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the
building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case
of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, "elevated building" also
includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter
walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of
floodwaters. In the case of zone V1-30, VE, or V, "elevated building" also
includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building",
even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls if the
breakaway walls met the standards of section 60.3(e)(5) of the national flood
insurance program regulations.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: For purposes of determining rates, structures for which
the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or
before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing
construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures".
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted herein.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of a community, on which the
federal emergency management agency has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report provided by the federal emergency
management agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation
of the base flood, as well as the flood boundary-floodway map.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   A.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
   B.   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM: Those physical structural works for which funds have
been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed
specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas
within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the
depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal
barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying
works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to,
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations,
building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a
floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance, and erosion control ordinance) and
other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local
regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the
purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD PRONE AREA: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by
water from any source (see definition of Flood Or Flooding).
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY (REGULATORY FLOODWAY): The channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the national register of historic places (a
listing maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined
by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the national register;
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
   C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary
of interior; or
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
         1.   By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of
the interior; or
         2.   Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without
approved programs.
LEVEE: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control,
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees,
and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the national
flood insurance program regulations.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the
national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are
referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures
for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date
of an initial FIRM city program or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later,
and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain
management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start
of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by the city and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
   D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was
within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, which is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of
the improvement. This includes structures which have incurred "substantial
damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
   A.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary conditions; or
   B.   Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure".
VARIANCE: A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this chapter
when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance,
therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited
by this chapter. (For full requirements see section 60.6 of the national flood
insurance program regulations.)
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the city's floodplain management regulations. A structure or
other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or
other evidence of compliance required by national flood insurance program
regulations, as found in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2),
(e)(4), or (e)(5), is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the national geodetic
vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas. (Ord. 865, 4-21-2015)
10-27-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Lands To Which This Chapter Applies: This chapter shall apply to all
areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Riverdale City.
   B.   Basis For Establishing The Areas Of Special Flood Hazard: The areas of
special flood hazard identified by the federal emergency management agency in a
scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study For The
City Of Riverdale, Utah", dated June 2, 2015, with accompanying flood insurance
rate maps and flood boundary-floodway maps (FIRM and FBFM) and any revisions
thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
chapter. Riverdale City automatically adopts effective FEMA flood insurance
studies (FIS), and automatically adopts effective FEMA flood insurance rate
maps.
   C.   Establishment Of Development Permit: A development permit shall be
required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
   D.   Compliance: No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered,
or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations.
   E.   Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: This chapter is not intended to
repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter and another section or chapter of
this code, or an easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
   F.   Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this chapter,
all provisions shall be:
      1.   Considered as minimum requirements;
      2.   Liberally construed in favor of the city council; and
      3.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
   G.   Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: The degree of flood protection
required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and
is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions
greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade
or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of
special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part
of the city or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder. (Ord. 865, 4-21-2015)
10-27-4: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Designation Of The Floodplain Administrator: The city community
development director is hereby appointed floodplain administrator to administer
and implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of
44 CFR (national flood insurance program regulations) pertaining to floodplain
management.
   B.   Duties And Responsibilities Of The Floodplain Administrator: Duties and
responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
      1.   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining
to the provisions of this chapter.
      2.   Review permit applications to determine whether proposed building
site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe
from flooding.
      3.   Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits
required by adoption of this chapter.
      4.   Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental
agencies (including section 404 of the federal water pollution control act
amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) from which prior approval is required.
      5.   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions)
the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
      6.   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state
coordinating agency, which is the Utah floodplain administrator, prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the federal emergency management agency.
      7.   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
      8.   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance
with subsection 10-27-3B of this chapter, the floodplain administrator shall
obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and
floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to
administer the provisions of section
10-27-5 of this chapter.
      9.   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain
administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements,
or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and
AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than one foot (1') at any point within the community.
      10.   Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the
national flood insurance program regulations, a community may approve certain
development in zones A1-30, AE, and AH, on the community's FIRM which increases
the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot (1'),
provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM revision
through FEMA (conditional letter of map revision).
   C.   Permit Procedures:
      1.   Application for a development permit shall be presented to the
floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not
be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and
proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the
location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard.
Additionally, the following information is required:
         a.   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;
         b.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed;
         c.   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or
architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the
floodproofing criteria of subsection 10-27-5B2 of this chapter;
         d.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development;
         e.   Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with
subsection B1 of this section.
      2.   Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain
administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the
following relevant factors:
         a.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
         b.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
         c.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
         d.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
         e.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
         f.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems;
         g.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site;
         h.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
         i.   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to
flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; and
         j.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
for that area.
   D.   Variance Procedures: Any requests for variances from the requirements
of this chapter will be subject to the following procedures:
      1.   The Riverdale City appeal authority shall hear and render judgment
on requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
      2.   The appeal authority shall hear and render judgment on an appeal
only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by Riverdale City in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
      3.   Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal
officer may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
      4.   The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions
involving an appeal and shall report variances to the federal emergency
management agency upon request.
      5.   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the national register of historic places or
the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this chapter.
      6.   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below
the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in subsection C2 of this
section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-
half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
      7.   Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this
chapter, the appeal authority may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this
chapter (see subsection 10-27-1C of this chapter).
      8.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      9.   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
      10.   Prerequisites for granting variances:
         a.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
         b.   Variances shall only be issued upon:
            (1)   Showing a good and sufficient cause;
            (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
            (3)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
         c.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation.
      11.   Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of
a functionally dependent use provided that:
         a.   The criteria outlined in subsections D1 through D9 of this
section are met, and
         b.   The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats
to public safety. (Ord. 865, 4-21-2015)
10-27-5: PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
   A.   General Standards: In all areas of special flood hazards the following
provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements:
      1.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed
(or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy;
      2.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
      3.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
      4.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding;
      5.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
      6.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge
from the systems into floodwaters; and
      7.   On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   B.   Specific Standards: In all areas of special flood hazards where base
flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in subsection 10-27-3B or
10-27-4B8 of this chapter, or subsection C3 of this section, the following
provisions are required:
      1.   Residential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including
basement), elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered
professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification
to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as
proposed in subsection 10-27-4C1a of this chapter, is satisfied.
      2.   Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above
the base flood level or together, with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined
in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are
floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
      3.   Enclosures: New construction and substantial improvements, with
fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and
which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
         a.   A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided;
         b.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1')
above grade; and
         c.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
      4.   Manufactured Homes:
         a.   Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on
a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which
minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes
must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over
the top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to
applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
         b.   Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites: 1)
outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, 2) in a new manufactured
home park or subdivision, 3) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision, or 4) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a
flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
         c.   Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially
improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within
zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the
provisions of this subsection B4 be elevated so that either:
            (1)   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the
base flood elevation; or
            (2)   The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no
less than thirty six inches (36") in height above grade and be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement.
      5.   Recreational Vehicles: Require that recreational vehicles placed on
sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either:
         a.   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days;
         b.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
         c.   Meet the permit requirements of subsection 10-27-4C1 of this
chapter, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes"
in subsection B4 of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway
use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by
quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently
attached additions.
   C.   Standards For Subdivision Proposals:
      1.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with subsections 10-27-1B, C,
and D of this chapter.
      2.   All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the
placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet development
permit requirements of subsections 10-27-3C and 10-27-4C of this chapter, and
the provisions of this section.
      3.   Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions which are greater than fifty (50) lots
or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to
subsection 10-27-3B or 10-27-4B8 of this chapter.
      4.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce
exposure to flood hazards.
      5.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damage.
   D.   Standards For Areas Of Shallow Flooding (AO/AH Zones): Located within
the areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 10-27-3B of this
chapter, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special
flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet (3') where
a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions
apply:
      1.   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet
on the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no depth number is specified).
      2.   All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures:
         a.   Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet
on the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no depth number is specified); or
         b.   Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be
designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and effects of buoyancy.
      3.   A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a
certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this
section, as proposed in subsection 10-27-4C1a of this chapter, are satisfied.
      4.   Require within zone AH or AO adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
   E.   Floodways: Located within areas of special flood hazard established in
subsection 10-27-3B of this chapter are areas designated as floodways. Since
the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters
which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following
provisions shall apply:
      1.   Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory
floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the
proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within
the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
      2.   If subsection E1 of this section is satisfied, all new construction
and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this section.
      3.   Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the
national flood insurance regulations, a community may permit encroachments
within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base
flood elevations, provided that the community first applies for a conditional
FIRM and floodway revision through FEMA. (Ord. 865, 4-21-2015)
10-27-6: PENALTIES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE:
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned for not more than
thirty (30) days, or both, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all
costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent
Riverdale City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent
or remedy any violation. (Ord. 865, 4-21-2015)
CHAPTER 28
RESIDENTIAL LANDSCAPING
SECTION:
10-28-1: Purpose
10-28-2: Scope
10-28-3: Notice
10-28-4: Definitions
10-28-5: General Standards And Requirements
10-28-6: Failure To Meet Standards
10-28-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish residential landscaping standards
for private property that enhance the appearance of individual lots, increase
the compatibility of residential uses, maintain open space, encourage "green"
space, and protect the public health, safety and welfare by minimizing the
impacts of: soil erosion, pollution, refuse, fire hazards, and unmanaged
growth, through promoting natural landscaping or "Xeriscaping", and water
conservation. (Ord. 655, 4-4-2006)
10-28-2: SCOPE:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall govern and be applied to all
owners and occupants of real property which is:
      1.   Located within the Riverdale City corporate limits with the zoning
designation of R-1-4.5, R-1-6, R-1-8, R-1-10, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, RE-15, RE-20;
or
      2.   Located within the Riverdale City corporate limits with a zoning
designation of A-1, provided said A-1 property has been developed for a
residential use and said chapter provisions shall only be applicable to a
residential lot in said A-1 zone in a minimum amount of eight thousand (8,000)
square feet.
   B.   The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to any real
property located in the Riverdale City corporate limits, zoning designation
notwithstanding, which is:
      1.   Protected by local, state, or federal law, statute, or regulations;
      2.   A nonconforming use permitted by Riverdale City; or
      3.   All properties with a certified hillside slope of twenty percent
(20%) or greater.
   C.   This chapter may be enacted in whole or in part, and if any of this
chapter is ever deemed unconstitutional or vague the remaining sections shall
remain in force and effect. (Ord. 655, 4-4-2006)
10-28-3: NOTICE:
All new residential property owners, whether purchasing an existing or new
residential property, shall receive a copy of this chapter upon applying for a
building permit or utilities for said property. Said property owner shall be
immediately subject to all provisions in this chapter. (Ord. 655, 4-4-2006)
10-28-4: DEFINITIONS:
HARD SURFACE: Shall consist of concrete, asphalt, brick or concrete pavers,
rock or gravel and cobblestones. All hard surface material must be kept free of
weeds.
HARDSCAPE SPACE: Any space made up of water features, benches, planters, walls,
decorative ornaments, stamped concrete, small decorative rocks as well as
boulders, mulch, curbing, and planters or other like materials, approved by the
planning commission, that are not of a vegetative nature.
LIVING LANDSCAPE: Consists of turf, trees, shrubs, plant material both
flowering and nonflowering, it shall include indigenous plants that are not
noxious weeds so long as they are maintained as set out within this chapter.
NONLIVING LANDSCAPE: Shall consist of boulders, rock, lava rock, wood chips,
decorative curbing and masonry work.
OPEN SPACE: All the space on the property not occupied by the residence, a
driveway equivalent to the carport, or attached garage, and/or swimming pool.
XERISCAPE: Includes plant material that can survive on low or minimal water
usage. (Ord. 715, 8-19-2008)
10-28-5: GENERAL STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS:
Every applicable place of property within the city of Riverdale shall maintain
landscape in a well cared for manner that enhances the appearance of the
property.
   A.   In no case shall hardscape of a residential dwelling exceed forty
percent (40%) of the open space of the property, unless said hardscape exists
prior to passage of this chapter;
   B.   Yards shall consist of a balance of living and nonliving landscape that
do not violate any other federal, state, or municipal statute, ordinance, or
law;
   C.   Yards shall comply with the fencing and setback requirements of all
Riverdale City ordinances;
   D.   Yards shall be maintained as not to cause "interference from
landscaping" with public property or right of way;
   E.   All living landscape shall be maintained in an orderly, attractive and
healthy condition. This shall include, but not be limited to, proper pruning,
mowing, weeding, and removal of litter; and
   F.   All hardscape shall be maintained to be free from defects and maintain
an orderly and attractive appearance.
   G.   No vehicles shall be allowed to park overnight on anything other than
hard surfaces.
   H.   All new and refurbished single-family and two-family homes, apartments,
condominiums and townhouses shall be required to approve and maintain, as
landscape yards, the front, corner street side yard and park strip and install
an appropriate irrigation system, so that the landscaping will receive the
appropriate amount of water in order to flourish in good health, before final
approval or certificate of occupancy is issued. An escrow agreement may be
issued between November 1 to March 31 with a temporary certificate of occupancy
which includes a time certain for installation of the landscaping by the owner/
developer. Landscaping may include a combination of grass, plant cover and
Xeriscape. (Ord. 655, 4-4-2006)
10-28-6: FAILURE TO MEET STANDARDS:
Failure to meet the standards set forth in this chapter shall be dealt with
through the procedures as identified in title 4, chapter 5, "Nuisances", of
this code. (Ord. 655, 4-4-2006)
TITLE 11
FRANCHISES
CHAPTER 1
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Telecommunications Rights Of Way Ordinance
11-1-2: Telecommunications Network Defined
11-1-3: Franchise Agreements
11-1-1: TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHTS OF WAY ORDINANCE:
The city has adopted in title 7, chapter 5 of this code, the telecommunications
rights of way ordinance. Said chapter governs the applications and review
process for telecommunication franchises within the city. (Ord. 566, 6-2-1999)
11-1-2: TELECOMMUNICATIONS NETWORK DEFINED:
As used in this chapter, "telecommunications network" means a series and system
of facilities, equipment and/or wiring in, under, along, over and across
present and future city rights of way to provide voice, data and/or video
transmission services. (Ord. 566, 6-2-1999)
11-1-3: FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS:
   A.   Comcast Of Utah II: The city has granted to Comcast of Utah, a
nonexclusive franchise agreement for the construction and maintenance of a
telecommunications network within the city. Said franchise was granted by the
adoption of ordinance 751, December 15, 2009. Said franchise agreement is on
file in the office of the city recorder. The whole thereof is hereby referred
to, adopted and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out herein. (Ord.
751, 12-15-2009)
   B.   Electric LightWave, Inc.: The city has granted to Electric LightWave,
Inc., a nonexclusive franchise agreement for the construction and maintenance
of a telecommunications network within the city. Said franchise was granted by
the adoption of ordinance 506, December 4, 1996. Said franchise agreement is on
file in the office of the city recorder. The whole thereof is hereby referred
to, adopted and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out herein.
   C.   NextLink Of Utah, LLC: The city has granted to NextLink of Utah, Inc.,
a nonexclusive franchise agreement for the construction and maintenance of a
telecommunications network within the city. Said franchise was granted by the
adoption of ordinance 528, October 1, 1997. Said franchise agreement is on file
in the office of the city recorder. The whole thereof is hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out herein.
   D.   U.S. West Communications: The city has granted to U.S. West
Communications a nonexclusive franchise agreement for the construction and
maintenance of a telecommunications network within the city. Said franchise was
granted by the adoption of ordinance 566, June 2, 1999. Said franchise
agreement is on file in the office of the city recorder. The whole thereof is
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out
herein. (Ord. 566, 6-2-1999)
CHAPTER 2
GAS FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS
SECTION:
11-2-1: Gas Distribution System Rights Of Way Ordinance
11-2-2: Public Utility Company Defined
11-2-3: Franchise Agreements
11-2-1: GAS DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM RIGHTS OF WAY ORDINANCE:
The city has adopted in title 7, chapter 4 of this code, the standard that a
permit is required as the basis for issuance of a gas line and established the
authority to direct the relocation of structures in public rights of way. (Ord.
853, 5-6-2014)
11-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY DEFINED:
As used in this chapter, "public utility company" means any company subject to
the jurisdiction of the Utah state public service commission, or any mutual
corporation providing gas, electricity, water, telephone or other utility
product or services for use by the general public. (Ord. 853, 5-6-2014)
11-2-3: FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS:
   A.   Questar Gas Company: The city has granted to Questar Gas Company a
nonexclusive franchise agreement for the construction, operation and
maintenance of a gas distribution system within the city. Said franchise was
granted by the adoption of ordinance 839, August 20, 2013. Said franchise
agreement is on file in the office of the city recorder. The whole thereof is
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out
herein. (Ord. 853, 5-6-2014)
