TITLE 1 ADMINISTRATION

Chapter
1            Official City Code
2            Saving Clause
3            Definitions
4            General Penalty
5            Official And Corporate Provisions
6            Mayor And City Council
7            Officers And Employees
    7A           City Manager
    7B           City Recorder
    7C           City Treasurer
    7D           City Attorney
    7E           City Engineer
    7F           Encroachment Officer
    7G           Zoning Enforcement Officer
8            Campaign Finance Disclosure
9            Records Access And Management
10           Financial Provisions
    10A          Director Of Administrative Services
    10B          Purchasing Policy – Contracts
    10C          Bank Fees
11           Constitutional Taking Issues
12           Administrative Code Enforcement Hearing Program
    12A          General Provisions And Definitions
    12B          Administrative Code Enforcement Procedures
    12C          Administrative And Judicial Remedies
    12D          Recovery Of Code Enforcement Penalties And Costs
13           Disposal Of City-Owned Real Property
14           Insurance Coverage For City Owned Vehicles
15           Administrative Appeals

CHAPTER 1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE


1-1-1:       Title
1-1-2:       Acceptance
1-1-3:       Amendments
1-1-4:       Code Alterations

1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the city council, this city code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official city code of the city of St. George. This city code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the St. George city code and is hereby published by authority of the city council and shall be supplemented to incorporate the most recent legislation of the city as provided in section 1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to this city code by title in any legal documents. (1962 Code § 1-1-1; amd. 2003 Code)

1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This city code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in section 1-2-1 of this title. (1962 Code § 1-1-2; amd. 2003 Code)

1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the city code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this city code. All such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in its proper place in each copy of this city code. Each such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of the city code. (1962 Code § 1-1-3; amd. 2003 Code)

1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section or any page of this city code in such a manner that the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the city council. The city recorder shall see that the replacement pages are properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the city recorder. Any person having custody of a copy of the city code shall make every effort to maintain said code current as to the most recent ordinances passed. Such person shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are delivered or made available to such person through the office of the city recorder. Said code books, while in actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the city and shall be returned to the office of the city recorder when directed to do so by order of the city council. (2003 Code)

CHAPTER 2 SAVING CLAUSE


1-2-1:       Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2:       Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3:       Court Proceedings
1-2-4:       Severability Clause

1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
A. Repealer; Exceptions: All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this city code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this city code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; fee ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the city; and all special ordinances.
B. Effect Of Repealing Ordinances: The repeal of the ordinances provided in subsection A of this section shall not affect any debt or fee which is accrued, any duty imposed, any penalty incurred, nor any action or proceeding commenced under or by virtue of the ordinances repealed or the term of office of any person holding office at the time these ordinances take effect, nor shall the repeal of any ordinance have the effect of reviving any ordinance heretofore repealed or superseded. (1962 Code § 1-2-1; amd. 2003 Code)

1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this city code or by virtue of the preceding section, excepting as the city code may contain provisions for such matters, in which case, this city code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1962 Code § 1-2-2)

1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
A. Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
B. Scope Of Section: This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
C. Actions Now Pending: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the city herein repealed, and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this city code. (1962 Code § 1-2-3; amd. 2003 Code)

1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this city code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this code, or any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (2003 Code)

CHAPTER 3 DEFINITIONS


1-3-1:       Construction Of Words
1-3-2:       Definitions, General
1-3-3:       Catchlines

1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
A. Whenever any word in any section of this city code importing the plural number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this city code by words importing the singular number only, or a particular gender, several matters, parties or persons and the opposite gender and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this city code which contains any express provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context may be repugnant thereto. The use of any verb in the present tense shall include the future and past tense when applicable.
B. All words and phrases shall be constructed and understood according to the common use and understanding of the language; the technical words and phrases and such other words and phrases as may have acquired a particular meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such particular meaning.
C. The word “ordinance” contained in the ordinances of the city has been changed in the content of this city code to “title,” “chapter,” “section” and/or “subsection,” or words of like import for organizational and clarification purposes only. Such change to the city’s ordinances is not meant to amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1962 Code § 1-1-4; amd. 2003 Code)

1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either expressly or by implication.
BUSINESS: Includes any trade, profession, calling, activity, operation or enterprise for which a license or permit is required by any ordinance of the city.
CITY: The city of St. George, Washington County, Utah.
CITY CODE: The city code of the city of St. George, Utah.
CITY COUNCIL: Unless otherwise indicated, the city council of the city of St. George, Utah.
CITY RECORDER: The individual appointed to act as the city recorder of the city.
COUNTY: Washington County, Utah.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city employee by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words “of the city of St. George.”
FEE: A sum of money charged by the city for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
GENDER: A word importing either the masculine or feminine gender only shall extend and be applied to the other gender and to persons.
HIGHWAY, ROAD: Includes public bridges, and may be equivalent to the words “county way,” “county road,” “common road,” and “state road.”
INTENT TO DEFRAUD: Whenever an intent to defraud is required in order to constitute an offense, it shall be sufficient if an intent appears to defraud any person.
KNOWINGLY: Imports only a knowledge that the facts exist which brings the act or omission within the provisions of this code. It does not require any knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation. The term “license” includes any certificate, permit or license issued by the city.
LOCATION: Whenever any act, conduct or offense is prohibited or required and no reference is made to location, unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the act, conduct or offense prohibited or required shall be within the boundaries of this city.
NEGLIGENT, NEGLECT, NEGLIGENCE AND NEGLIGENTLY: Imports a want of such attention to the nature or probable consequences of the act or omission as a prudent person ordinarily bestows in acting in its own concern.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of inhabitants of the city, or any activity which by its perpetuation can reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or persons within the city.
OCCUPANT OR TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any act required by the provisions of this code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city officer or official by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words “of the city of St. George.”
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or interest therein.
PROPERTY: Includes both real and personal property.
REASONABLE TIME: In all cases where any ordinance requires that an act be done in a reasonable time or that reasonable notice be given, such reasonable time for such notice shall be deemed to mean such time as may be necessary for the expeditious performance of such duty or compliance with such notice.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other property.
STATE: The state of Utah.
STREET: Includes alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public squares, public places, sidewalks, gutters and culverts, crosswalks and intersections.
TENANT OR OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
TIME COMPUTED: The time within which an act is to be done as provided in any ordinance or in any resolution or order of the city, when expressed in days, shall be determined by excluding the first day and including the last day; except, if the last day be a Sunday or a legal holiday, then the last day shall be the day next following such Sunday or legal holiday which is not a Sunday or legal holiday. When time is expressed in hours, Sunday and all legal holidays shall be excluded.
WEEK: Shall be construed to mean any seven (7) day period.
WHOLESALER: The terms “wholesaler” and “wholesale dealer,” as used in this code, unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WILFULLY: When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted, implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or make the omission referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law, or to injure another, or to acquire an advantage.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case such person is unable to write, by such person’s proper mark. (1962 Code §§ 1-1-5A, 1-3-1; amd. 2003 Code)

1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of the city code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (2003 Code)

CHAPTER 4 GENERAL PENALTY1 


1-4-1:       Sentencing
1-4-2:       Offenses Designated; Classified
1-4-3:       Liability
1See also title 6, chapter 2, article A of this code for provisions regarding civil infractions.

1-4-1: SENTENCING:
A. Penalty For Violation Of Ordinance2: 
    1. Criminal: 
        a. Class B: The city council may impose a minimum criminal penalty for the violation of any municipal ordinance by a fine not to exceed the maximum class B misdemeanor fine under Utah Code Annotated section 76-3-301 or by a term of imprisonment up to six (6) months, or by both the fine and term of imprisonment.
        b. Class A; Cohabitant Abuse, DUI Offenses, Driving With Suspended Or Revoked License: The city council may impose a minimum criminal penalty by a fine not to exceed the maximum class A misdemeanor fine under Utah Code Annotated section 76-3-301 or by a term of imprisonment not exceeding one (1) year under Utah Code Annotated section 76-3-204, or by both a fine and term of imprisonment for the following:
            (1) Alleged class A misdemeanor violations of Utah Code Annotated section 41-6-44; and
            (2) Alleged violations of Utah Code Annotated section 30-6-1 et seq., which consists of cohabitant abuse; and
            (3) Alleged violations of Utah Code Annotated section 53-3-227, which consists of the person operating a vehicle while the person’s driving privilege is suspended or revoked for a violation of Utah Code Annotated section 41-6-44, a city ordinance which complies with the requirements of Utah Code Annotated section 41-6-43, Utah Code Annotated section 41-6-44.10, Utah Code Annotated section 76-5-207, or a criminal prohibition that the person was charged with violating as a result of a plea bargain after having been originally charged with violating one or more of those sections or ordinances.
    2. Civil: 
        a. Except as provided in subsection A2b of this section, the city council may prescribe a minimum civil penalty for the violation of any municipal ordinance by a fine not to exceed the maximum class B misdemeanor fine under Utah Code Annotated section 76-3-301.
        b. A municipality may not impose a civil penalty and adjudication for the violation of a municipal moving traffic ordinance, except as authorized in Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-703.5.
B. Term Of Imprisonment For Misdemeanors3: A person who has been convicted of a misdemeanor may be sentenced to imprisonment as follows:
    1. In the case of a class A misdemeanor, for a term not exceeding one (1) year;
    2. In the case of a class B misdemeanor, for a term not exceeding six (6) months;
    3. In the case of a class C misdemeanor, for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days.
C. Infractions4: 
    1. A person convicted of an infraction may not be imprisoned but may be subject to a fine, forfeiture and disqualification, or any combination.
    2. Whenever a person is convicted of an infraction and no punishment is specified, the person may be fined as for a class C misdemeanor.
D. Fines Of Persons5: A person convicted of an offense may, in addition to any term of imprisonment imposed, be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed:
    1. Class A misdemeanor: Two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) when the conviction is of a class A misdemeanor; and
    2. Class B misdemeanor: One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) when the conviction is of a class B misdemeanor conviction; and
    3. Class C misdemeanor; infraction: Seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) when the conviction is of a class C misdemeanor conviction or infraction conviction.
E. Fines Of Corporations6: The sentence to pay a fine, when imposed upon a corporation, association, partnership or governmental instrumentality for an offense defined in this code, or the ordinances of the city, or for an offense defined outside of this code over which this city has jurisdiction, for which no special corporate fine is specified, shall be to pay an amount fixed by the court, not exceeding:
    1. Class B misdemeanor: Five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) when the conviction is for a class B misdemeanor conviction; and
    2. Class C misdemeanor; infraction: One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) when the conviction is for a class C misdemeanor conviction or for an infraction conviction.
F. Revocation Of License: Rep.
(1962 Code § 1-4-3; amd. 2003 Code; Ord. 2019-01-005 § 2, 1-3-2019)
2UCA § 10-3-703.
3UCA § 76-3-204.
4UCA § 76-3-205.
5UCA § 76-3-301.
6UCA § 76-3-302.

1-4-2: OFFENSES DESIGNATED; CLASSIFIED:
A. Sentencing In Accordance With Chapter: 
    1. A person adjudged guilty of an offense under this code or the ordinances of this city shall be sentenced in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
    2. Ordinances enacted after the effective date of this code which involve an offense should be classified for sentencing purposes in accordance with this chapter, unless otherwise expressly provided.
B. Designation Of Offenses: Offenses are designated as misdemeanors or infractions.
C. Misdemeanors Classified1 : 
    1. Misdemeanors are classified into three (3) categories:
        a. Class A misdemeanors;
        b. Class B misdemeanors;
        c. Class C misdemeanors.
    2. An offense designated as a misdemeanor or any act prohibited or declared to be unlawful in this code or any ordinance of this city when no other specification as to punishment or category is made is a class B misdemeanor.
D. Infractions: 
    1. Infractions are not classified.
    2. Any offense which is made an infraction in this code or other ordinances of this city, or which is expressly designated an infraction and any offense designated by this code or other ordinances of this city which is not designated as a misdemeanor and for which no penalty is specified is an infraction.
E. Continuing Violation: In all instances where the violation of this code or any ordinance hereinafter enacted is a continuing violation, a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which the violation occurs or continues to occur. (2003 Code)
1UCA § 76-3-104.

1-4-3: LIABILITY:
A. Employers And Agents: When the provisions of any section of this city code prohibit the commission of an act, not only the person actually doing the prohibited act or omitting the directed act, but also the employer and all other persons concerned with or in aiding or abetting the said person, shall be guilty of the offense described and liable to the penalty set forth.
B. Officers And Employees: No provision of this city code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of the city council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1962 Code §§ 1-4-5, 1-1-5B)

CHAPTER 5 OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE PROVISIONS


1-5-1:       Corporate Seal

1-5-1: CORPORATE SEAL:
A. Described: The seal heretofore provided and used, by and for the city, is described as follows: circular in form, one and eleven-sixteenth inches (1 11/16") in diameter, the impression of which represents a cluster of grapes, and the inscription “city of St. George Seal, Utah”, and two (2) stars in the margin, is hereby declared to be the corporate seal of the city.
B. Facsimile: A facsimile of the corporate seal is hereby reproduced as follows:
[IMAGE: <1-5-1_001.png>]
(1962 Code § 1-23-2)

CHAPTER 6 MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL


1-6-1:       Legislative And Governing Body
1-6-2:       Meetings
1-6-3:       Powers And Duties
1-6-4:       Mayor
1-6-5:       Compensation and Benefits

1-6-1: LEGISLATIVE AND GOVERNING BODY:
The mayor and city council shall be the legislative and governing body of this city and as such shall have, exercise and discharge all of the rights, powers, privileges and authority conferred by law upon the city, and shall perform all duties required of them by this code or other laws of the city. (1962 Code § 1-6-1)

1-6-2: MEETINGS:
A. Regular: 
    1. The city council shall hold regular meetings on the first and third Thursdays in each month; provided, that when any general holiday occurs on any first or third Thursday, the regular meeting shall be held on the Thursday next following. The hour of said meeting shall be at four o’clock (4:00) P.M.
    2. All meetings of the governing body shall be held in compliance with the provisions of Utah Code Annotated title 52, chapter 4, relating to open and public meetings. The yes votes and no votes shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances, resolutions and any action which would create a liability against the city, and in all other cases at the request of any member, and it shall be entered upon the journal of its proceedings. The minimum number of yes votes required to pass any ordinance, resolution or to take any action by the governing body, unless otherwise prescribed by law, shall be a majority of the members of the quorum, but shall never be less than three (3). Where there is an even number of members, the consent or concurrence of one-half (1/2) of the members shall be sufficient to confirm an appointment or concur in the renewal of an appointive officer.
    3. The city council may convene and conduct open and public meetings by electronic means in accordance with this section, and Utah Code Annotated title 52, chapter 4, section 207, as follows:
        a. Quorum: A quorum of the city council shall be present at a primary anchor location for an electronic meeting. The primary anchor location shall be in the building where the city council would normally meet if they were not holding an electronic meeting. Secondary anchor locations are permitted but not required. The quorum at the primary anchor location shall vote to approve establishment of the electronic meeting in order to include other members of the city council through an electronic connection;
        b. Notice to City Council: Notice of the electronic meeting shall be given to city council members at least twenty-four (24) hours before the meeting, so they may participate in and be counted as present for all purposes, including a determination that a quorum is present. The notice shall describe how the city council members will be connected to the electronic meeting.
        c. Public Notice: Public notice of the electronic meeting shall be given in accordance with Utah Code Annotated title 52, chapter 4, section 202. Written notice also shall be given by posting it at the primary anchor location.
        d. Open Meeting: Space and facilities shall be provided at the primary anchor location, so interested persons and the public may attend and monitor the open portions of the meeting. For portions of the meeting where comments from the public are accepted, space and facilities shall be provided at the primary anchor location for interested persons and the public to attend, monitor, and participate in the public comment portions of the meeting.
    4. Any ordinance, resolution or motion of the governing body having fewer than three (3) favorable votes shall be deemed defeated and invalid, except a meeting may be adjourned to a specific time by a majority vote of the governing body even though such majority vote is less than three (3).
    5. A majority of the members of the governing body, regardless of number, may fill any vacancy in the governing body.
    6. Each year in January, the city council shall fix the time of holding regular meetings by ordinance, in which event notice of the change of meeting night shall be published by publication in a newspaper or by posting in six (6) public places for at least thirty (30) days.
B. Special: If at any time the business of the city requires a special meeting of the governing body, such meeting may be ordered by the mayor or any two (2) members of the governing body. The order shall provide at least three (3) hours’ notice of the special meeting, and notice thereof shall be served by the city recorder on each member who did not sign the order by delivering the notice personally or by leaving it at the member’s usual place of abode. The personal appearance by a member at any specially called meeting constitutes a waiver of the notice required in this section. No vote of the council shall be reconsidered or rescinded at a special meeting, unless at such special meeting there is present as large a number of members as were present when such vote was taken.
C. Quorum: Three (3) or more members of the council shall constitute a quorum to transact business, but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time and may, when necessary, compel the attendance of absent members and direct the chief of police to enforce the attendance of such members.
D. Action On Committee Reports: Any report of a committee of the council shall, by request of any two (2) members, be deferred for final action thereon to the next regular meeting after the report is made, except that the council may call a special meeting to consider final action.
E. Rules; Expulsion Of Members: The council shall determine its own rules of proceedings, may fine or expel any member for disorderly conduct on a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the members of the governing body.
F. Disorderly Conduct: The governing body, on a two-thirds (2/3) vote, may expel any person who is disorderly during the meeting of the governing body. This subsection or any action taken by the governing body shall not preclude prosecution under any other provision of law.
G. Requiring Attendance: The governing body may require the attendance of any person to give testimony or produce records, documents or things for inspection, copying or examination necessary or useful for the governance of the city. (1962 Code §§ 1-6-2—1-6-5, 1-6-7; amd. 2003 Code; Ord. 2020-03-006 § 2 (Exh. A), 3-26-2020)

1-6-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. General Duties: The council shall perform such other duties as are or may be prescribed by the statutes of this state or by the provisions of this code, and shall perform such other acts and take such other measures, not inconsistent with law, as may be necessary for the efficient government of the city.
B. Create Offices: The council may create any office they may deem necessary for the government of the city, and provide for filling vacancies in elective and appointive offices, and prescribe the powers, duties and compensation of all officers of the city, except as otherwise provided by law.
C. Bond Required: 
    1. The mayor and city council members shall each execute a bond with good and sufficient sureties, payable to the city in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of the respective elected officers and the payment of all monies received by such officer according to law and the ordinances of the city.
    2. The premium charged by a corporate surety for the elected officers’ bonds required herein shall be paid by the city.
    3. The bonds of the council members shall be approved by the mayor and the bond of the mayor shall be approved by the council at the first meeting of the governing body in January following a municipal election. (1962 Code §§ 1-6-10, 1-6-11, 1-6-16; amd. 2003 Code)

1-6-4: MAYOR:
A. General Duties: The mayor shall perform all duties which are or may be prescribed by law, or the provisions of this code, and shall see that the laws are faithfully executed.
B. Presiding Officer; Voting: It shall be the duty of the mayor to preside at all meetings of the council, but he shall not vote, except in case of a tie vote of the council or in the appointment or dismissal of a city manager. He may call special meetings of the council as the occasion may require.
C. Mayor Pro Tem: In case of the temporary absence of the mayor from the city, or in case of his temporary inability to perform the duties of his office, it shall be his duty to communicate such fact to the members of the council; whereupon, it shall become the duty of the council to elect some member of the governing body to act as mayor pro tem, and during such time that council member is so acting in the capacity of mayor pro tem, he shall have power to exercise all the functions and duties of the mayor. The election of a mayor pro tem shall be entered in the minutes of the meeting.
D. Signature Required: The mayor shall sign all city ordinances and licenses, and the mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to sign his name officially for and in behalf of the city to all deeds, bonds, bills, notes, contracts, leases and other writings to which the city is a party, when so directed by the city council.
E. General Supervision: The mayor, as chief executive officer of the city, shall exercise a general supervision over each and all the departments of the city government.
F. General, Specific Duties: 
    1. The mayor shall:
        a. Keep the peace and enforce the laws of the city;
        b. Remit fines and forfeitures;
        c. Report remittances under subsection F1b of this section to the council at its next regular session;
        d. Perform all duties prescribed by law, resolution or ordinance;
        e. Ensure that all the laws, ordinances and resolutions are faithfully executed and observed;
        f. Report to the council the condition of the city and recommend for council consideration any measures that the mayor considers to be in the best interests of the city;
        g. When necessary, call on the residents of the city over the age of twenty one (21) years to assist in enforcing the laws of the state and ordinances of the municipality;
        h. Appoint, with the advice and consent of the council, persons to fill municipal offices or vacancies on commission or committees of the municipality; and
        i. Report to the council any release granted under subsection F2b of this section.
Subsection F1h does not apply to the appointment of a manager under section 1-7A-2 of this title.
    2. The mayor may:
        a. At any reasonable time, examine and inspect the official books, papers, records or documents of the city or of any officer, employee or agent of the city; and
        b. Release any person imprisoned for violation of any municipal ordinance.
G. May Limit Use Of Water: In the event of scarcity of water, the mayor may, by proclamation, limit the use of water for any purpose other than domestic purposes to such extent as may be required for the public good in the judgment of the council.
H. Revision Of Ordinances: The mayor may appoint by and with the advice and consent of the council, one or more competent persons to prepare and submit to the council for their adoption or rejection, a revision of the ordinances of the city, and for the government of the city, and the compensation of such revisers shall be determined and fixed by the council and paid out of the treasury. (1962 Code §§ 1-5-1, 1-5-2, 1-5-7—1-5-11; amd. 2003 Code)

1-6-5: COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS:
Compensation for the mayor and city council shall be as follows:
A. Mayor: Fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) per year.
B. City Council: Twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) per year.
C. The foregoing salaries shall be adjusted in the same manner and by the same percent increase as may from time-to-time be authorized as a cost-of-living adjustment for full-time city employees.
    1. The mayor and city council shall be paid on the same payroll schedule used for full-time city employees, and their compensation and reimbursement of expenses shall be subject to the same rules that apply to full-time city employees for federal and state deductions, contributions, tax withholdings, worker’s compensation and other benefits.
    2. The mayor and city council may also:
        a. Elect to participate in the employee benefits plan in the same manner as a full-time city employee; and
        b. Have access to the employee assistance plan, wellness programs, and voluntary group benefits that may be available to city employees; and
        c. Be compensated for personal vehicle use and the use of mobile electronic devices for communication of city-related business. (Ord. 8-7-1996, 8-15-1996; amd. 2003 Code; Ord. 2018-12-001, 12-6-2018)

CHAPTER 7 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES


1-7-1:       Election Of Officers
1-7-2:       Eligibility And Residency Requirements
1-7-3:       Vacancies
1-7-4:       Appointive Officers
1-7-5:       Oaths And Bonds
1-7-6:       Compensation
1-7-7:       Expenditures Within Budget Appropriations
1-7-8:       Holding Created Offices Prohibited
1-7-9:       Delivery Of Property To Successor
7A           City Manager
    1-7A-1:      Office Created
    1-7A-2:      Appointment
    1-7A-3:      Residence
    1-7A-4:      Eligibility Of Council Members
    1-7A-5:      Compensation
    1-7A-6:      Powers And Duties
    1-7A-7:      Removal From Office
    1-7A-8:      Agreements On Employment
7B           City Recorder
    1-7B-1:      Office; Certification
    1-7B-2:      Duties
    1-7B-3:      Certification Of Annual Tax Levy
7C           City Treasurer
    1-7C-1:      General Duties
    1-7C-3:      Warrants; Order Of Payment
    1-7C-4:      Receipts For Payment
    1-7C-5:      Special Assessments
    1-7C-6:      Funds Kept Separate
    1-7C-7:      Additional Duties as Prescribed
7D           City Attorney
    1-7D-1:      Legal Advisor
    1-7D-2:      Prosecute Actions
    1-7D-3:      Docket Report
    1-7D-4:      Additional Duties as Prescribed
7E           City Engineer
    1-7E-1:      Powers And Duties
    1-7E-2:      Custodian Of Drawings And Documents
    1-7E-3:      Public Inspections; Accountability
    1-7E-4:      Fees Paid In Advance
    1-7E-5:      Engineer Seal
    1-7E-6:      No Conflict In Recording Or Filing
7F           Encroachment Officer
    1-7F-1:      Created; Powers And Duties
    1-7F-2:      Interference; Penalty
7G           Zoning Enforcement Officer
    1-7G-1:      Created; Powers And Duties
    1-7G-2:      Interference; Penalty

1-7-1: ELECTION OF OFFICERS:
A. Specified: The election and terms of office shall be as follows:
    1. The offices of mayor and two (2) council members shall be filled in municipal elections held in 1977. The terms shall be for four (4) years. These offices shall be filled every four (4) years in municipal elections.
    2. The offices of the other three (3) council members shall be filled in a municipal election held in 1979. The terms shall be for four (4) years. These offices shall be filled every four (4) years in municipal elections. (1962 Code § 1-7-1; amd. 2003 Code)
B. Conduct Of Elections: All general and special elections within this city shall be held and conducted and returns made thereof as is now or may hereafter be provided by law. (1962 Code § 1-7-4)

1-7-2: ELIGIBILITY AND RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS:
A. Elected Officers: All elective officers shall be chosen by the registered voters of the city.
B. Residency Requirements: 
    1. Elected Officials: 
        a. A person filing a declaration of candidacy for mayor or city council shall:
            (1) Have been a resident of the city for at least three hundred sixty five (365) consecutive days immediately before the date of the election; and
            (2) Meet the other requirements of Utah Code Annotated section 20A-9-203.
        b. A person living in an area annexed to the city meets the residency requirement of this subsection if that person resided within the area annexed to the city for at least three hundred sixty five (365) consecutive days before the date of the election.
        c. Any elected officer shall be a registered voter in the city.
        d. Each elected officer shall maintain residency within the boundaries of the city during the elected officer’s term of office.
        e. If an elected officer establishes a principal place of residence, as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 20A-2-105, outside the city during the elected officer’s term of office, the office is automatically vacant.
        f. If an elected officer is absent from the city any time during the elected officer’s term of office for a continuous period of more than sixty (60) days without the consent of the governing body, the office is automatically vacant.
    2. Appointed Officers: All persons appointed to the following offices or positions of this city must be residents of the city, except that residence in the city at the time of appointment shall not be required as a condition of the appointment, but within one hundred eighty (180) days after reporting for work, the appointee must become and remain a resident of the city during the term of employment unless otherwise approved by the city council:
        a. City manager;
        b. Chief of police;
        c. Fire chief;
        d. Director of leisure services;
        e. Director of public works;
        f. Director of water services;
        g. Director of energy services;
        h. Director of administrative services;
        i. City attorney. (Ord. 2016-01-003, 1-21-2016)

1-7-3: VACANCIES:
A. Mayor Or Council Member: If any vacancy shall occur in the office of the mayor or a council member by death or resignation, removal or otherwise, such vacancy shall be filled as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 20A-1-510. (1962 Code § 1-7-2; amd. 2003 Code)
B. City Recorder Or Treasurer: If a vacancy shall occur in the office of the city recorder or city treasurer, the mayor, by and with the consent of the city council, shall forthwith fill such vacancy by appointment for the unexpired term. (1962 Code § 1-7-3)

1-7-4: APPOINTIVE OFFICERS:
The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, shall appoint on or before the first Monday in February following a municipal election, the following named officers, who shall hold their offices for the term of two (2) years, unless sooner removed by the city council, and until their successors are appointed and qualified: a city attorney, city recorder, city treasurer, chief of police, fire chief, director of leisure services, director of public works, director of water services, director of energy services, director of administrative services, and such other officers and agents as may be provided by law; and in like manner shall fill all vacancies among the same, except as otherwise provided by law. (Ord. 2016-01-003, 1-21-2016)

1-7-5: OATHS AND BONDS:
A. All officers of the city, whether elected or appointed, before they enter upon the duties of their respective offices, shall take, subscribe and file the constitutional oath of office.
B. The city treasurer shall secure a fidelity bond in an amount not less than that established by the state money management council. (Ord. 2016-01-003, 1-21-2016)

1-7-6: COMPENSATION1 :
A. The governing body, by ordinance, shall adopt compensation or compensation schedules for elective and statutory officers for the city, after public hearing.
B. Upon its own motion, the governing body may review or consider the compensation of any officer or officers of the city or a salary schedule applicable to any officer or officers of the city for the purpose of determining whether or not it should be adopted, changed or amended. In the event that the governing body decides that the compensation or compensation schedules should be adopted, changed or amended, it shall set a time and place for a public hearing at which all interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
C. Notice of the time, place and purpose of the meeting shall be published once at least seven (7) days prior to the public hearing in a newspaper published in the county and circulated in the city.
D. After conclusion of the public hearing, the governing body may enact an ordinance fixing, changing or amending the compensation or compensation schedule applicable to any elective or appointive officer of the city.
1See also section 1-6-5 of this title.
(1962 Code § 1-7-18; amd. 2003 Code)

1-7-7: EXPENDITURES WITHIN BUDGET APPROPRIATIONS:
No city officer shall make expenditures or incur encumbrances in excess of total appropriations for any department in the budget as adopted or as subsequently amended. Any obligation contracted by any such officer shall not be or become valid or enforceable against the city. No check or warrant to cover any claim against any appropriation shall be drawn until the claim has been processed. (1962 Code § 1-7-11; amd. 2003 Code)

1-7-8: HOLDING CREATED OFFICES PROHIBITED:
No member of the council shall hold or be appointed to any office which shall have been created during the term for which the member was elected and for one year after the expiration of such term. (1962 Code § 1-7-12; amd. 2003 Code)

1-7-9: DELIVERY OF PROPERTY TO SUCCESSOR:
Every officer of the city shall, within five (5) days after notification and request, deliver to the successor in office all properties, books and effects of every description in the officer’s possession belonging to the city or appertaining to the office, and upon refusal to do so, the officer shall be liable for all damages caused thereby and guilty of a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this title. (1962 Code § 1-7-15; amd. 2003 Code)

ARTICLE A. CITY MANAGER


1-7A-1:      Office Created
1-7A-2:      Appointment
1-7A-3:      Residence
1-7A-4:      Eligibility Of Council Members
1-7A-5:      Compensation
1-7A-6:      Powers And Duties
1-7A-7:      Removal From Office
1-7A-8:      Agreements On Employment

1-7A-1: OFFICE CREATED:
The office of city manager is hereby created and established. (Ord. 1978-24, 6-15-1978)

1-7A-2: APPOINTMENT:
The city manager shall be appointed by the governing body. The city manager’s term of office shall be for an indefinite period. (Ord. 1978-24, 6-15-1978; amd. 2003 Code)

1-7A-3: RESIDENCE:
Residence in the city at the time of appointment of a city manager shall not be required as a condition of the appointment, but within one hundred eighty (180) days after reporting for work, the city manager must become and remain a resident of the city during the term of such employment. (Ord. 1978-24, 6-15-1978)

1-7A-4: ELIGIBILITY OF COUNCIL MEMBERS:
No member of the city council shall be eligible for appointment as city manager until one (1) year has elapsed after such council member shall have ceased to be a member of the city council. (Ord. 1978-24, 6-15-1978)

1-7A-5: COMPENSATION:
The city manager shall receive such compensation as the city council shall, from time to time, determine. In addition, the city manager shall be reimbursed for all actual and necessary expenses incurred by him in the performance of his official duties. (Ord. 1978-24, 6-15-1978)

1-7A-6: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The city manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the city under the direction and control of the mayor and city council, except as otherwise provided in this article. He shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all affairs of the city which are under his control. In addition to his general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, he shall have the powers set forth in the following subsections:
A. Law Enforcement: It shall be the duty of the city manager to enforce all laws and ordinances of the city.
B. Authority Over Employees: It shall be the duty of the city manager, and he shall have the authority, to control, order and give directions to all heads of departments and to subordinate officers and employees of the city under his jurisdiction through their department heads. (Ord. 1978-24, 6-15-1978)
C. Power Of Appointment And Removal: It shall be the duty of the city manager to appoint, remove, promote and demote any and all officers and employees of the city, subject to all applicable personnel ordinances, rules and regulations, except the city recorder, city treasurer, city attorney, police chief, fire chief, director of public works, director of leisure services, director of water services, director of energy services, and director of administrative services. The city manager’s recommendations on the appointment or removal of said department heads will be considered on the basis of merit by the governing body.
D. Administrative Reorganization Of Offices: It shall be the duty and responsibility of the city manager to conduct studies and affect such administrative reorganization of offices, positions or units under his direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective and economical conduct of the city’s business.
E. Ordinances: The city manager shall recommend to the mayor and city council for adoption of such measures and ordinances as he deems necessary.
F. Attendance At Council Meetings: It shall be the duty of the city manager to attend all meetings of the city council, unless at his request he is excused therefrom by the mayor or the city council, except when his removal is under consideration.
G. Financial Reports: It shall be the duty of the city manager to keep the mayor and city council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city.
H. Budget: It shall be the duty of the city manager to prepare and submit the proposed annual budget and the proposed annual salary plan to the mayor and city council for its approval. (Ord. 1978-24, 6-15-1978)
I. Expenditure Control And Purchasing: It shall be the duty of the city manager to see that no expenditures shall be submitted or recommended to the mayor and the city council except on approval of the city manager or his authorized representative. (Ord. 1978-24, 6-15-1978; amd. 2003 Code)
J. Investigations And Complaints: It shall be the duty of the city manager to make investigations into the affairs of the city and any department or division thereof, and any contract or the proper performance of any obligations of the city. Further, it shall be the duty of the city manager to investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the city government.
K. Public Buildings: It shall be the duty of the city manager to exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks and all other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the mayor and city council. (Ord. 1978-24, 6-15-1978)
L. Additional Duties: It shall be the duty of the city manager to perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may lawfully be delegated to him from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other official action of the mayor and city council. (Ord. 1978-24, 6-15-1978; amd. 2003 Code)

1-7A-7: REMOVAL FROM OFFICE:
A. Procedure: The removal of the city manager shall be effected only by a majority vote of the whole city council as then constituted, convened in a regular council meeting, subject to the provisions of the next succeeding subsections. In case of his intended removal by the city council, the city manager shall be furnished with a written notice stating the city council’s intention to remove him, at least thirty (30) days before the effective date of his removal. If the city manager so requests, the city council shall provide in writing reasons for the intended removal, which shall be provided to the city manager within seven (7) days after the receipt of such request from the city manager.
B. Hearing: Within seven (7) days after the delivery to the city manager of such notice of intention to remove, he may, by written notification to the city recorder, request a hearing before the city council. Thereafter the city council shall fix a time for the hearing which shall be held at its usual meeting place, at which time the city manager may appear and be heard with or without counsel.
C. Suspension Pending Hearing: After furnishing the city manager with written notice of intended removal, the city council may suspend him from duty, but his compensation shall continue until his removal by action of the city council passed subsequent to the aforesaid hearing.
D. Discretion Of Council: In removing the city manager, the city council shall use its uncontrolled discretion, and its action shall be final and shall not depend upon any particular showing of cause or degree of proof at the hearing, the purpose of which is to allow the city manager to present to the city council his grounds of opposition to his removal prior to its action. (Ord. 1978-24, 6-15-1978; amd. 2003 Code)

1-7A-8: AGREEMENTS ON EMPLOYMENT:
Nothing in this article shall be construed as a limitation on the power and authority of the governing body to enter into any supplemental agreement with the city manager delineating additional terms and conditions of employment not inconsistent with any provisions of this article. (Ord. 1978-24, 6-15-1978; amd. 2003 Code)

ARTICLE B. CITY RECORDER1 


1-7B-1:      Office; Certification
1-7B-2:      Duties
1-7B-3:      Certification Of Annual Tax Levy
1See also section 1-7-4 of this chapter for appointment provisions.

1-7B-1: OFFICE; CERTIFICATION:
The office of the city recorder shall be located at the place of the governing body or at some other place convenient thereto as the governing body may direct. Copies of all papers filed in the city recorder’s office and transcripts from all records of the governing body, if certified by the city recorder under the corporate seal, are admissible in all courts as originals. (Ord. 2002-01-009, 1-17-2002)

1-7B-2: DUTIES:
The city recorder shall:
A. Attend meetings of the city council, keep the record of its proceedings, and perform such other duties of a like nature as may be required by the city council.
B. Be responsible for the recording, filing, indexing, making available for public inspection and safekeeping of all proceedings of the city council and other records of the city.
C. Record in full, uniformly and permanently, all ordinances and authenticate the same. The city recorder shall record, in a book used exclusively for that purpose, all ordinances passed by the city council. The city recorder shall give each ordinance a number, if the city council has not already done so. Immediately following each ordinance, or codification of ordinances, the city recorder shall make or cause to be made a certificate stating the date of passage and of the date of publication or posting, as required. The record and memorandum, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of the contents, passage and publication or posting of the ordinance or codification.
D. Post or publish, as required by law, ordinances and resolutions adopted by the city council, and all legal notices.
E. Supervise all municipal elections in accordance with state law and municipal ordinance and keep and maintain all election records and have custody of all property used in connection therewith, according to law.
F. Countersign all contracts made on behalf of the city and maintain a properly indexed record of all such contracts.
G. Notify the appointing authority of the impending expiration of the term of office of a member of any board or commission, said notice to be given at least thirty (30) days before such expiration.
H. Be the custodian of the official seal of the city.
I. Act as the city records officer to oversee and coordinate records access and management and city archives activities as required by local, state and federal law.
    1. As the records officer, the city recorder shall:
        a. Make annual reports of records service activities to the city council, as requested:
        b. Provide training relative to records management, maintenance and access to the various city departments, as necessary;
        c. Establish and maintain an active, continuing program for the economical and efficient management of the city’s records;
        d. Submit to the state archivist proposed schedules of records;
        e. Cooperate with the state archivist in conducting surveys made by the state archivist;
        f. Evaluate all record series that the city uses or creates and report to the state archivist the classification of each record series that is classified;
        g. Establish and report, to the state archives, retention schedules for objects that the city determines are not records, but that have historical or evidentiary value; and
        h. Designate those record series as required by law and report the designations of its record series to the state archives.
    2. As the records officer, the city recorder may:
        a. Classify a particular record, record series or information within a record at any time, but is not required to classify a particular record, record series or information until access to the record is requested.
        b. Redesignate a record series or reclassify a record, record series or information within a record at any time.
J. Perform such other duties assigned by the city manager.
K. Perform such other duties as are or may be prescribed by state law or the provisions of this code. (Ord. 2002-01-009, 1-17-2002; amd. 2003 Code)

1-7B-3: CERTIFICATION OF ANNUAL TAX LEVY:
The city recorder shall certify the ordinance or resolution setting the levy to the county auditor before June 15 of each year. (Ord. 2002-01-009, 1-17-2002)

ARTICLE C. CITY TREASURER1 


1-7C-1:      General Duties
1-7C-3:      Warrants; Order Of Payment
1-7C-4:      Receipts For Payment
1-7C-5:      Special Assessments
1-7C-6:      Funds Kept Separate
1-7C-7:      Additional Duties as Prescribed
1See also section 1-7-4 of this chapter for appointment provisions.

1-7C-1: GENERAL DUTIES:
A. The city treasurer is custodian of all money, bonds or other securities of the city.
B. The city treasurer shall:
    1. Determine the cash requirements of the city and provide for the investment of all monies by following the procedures and requirements of Utah Code Annotated title 51, chapter 7, Utah state money management act;
    2. Receive all public funds and monies payable to the city, within three (3) business days after collection, including all taxes, licenses, fines and intergovernmental revenue;
    3. Keep an accurate detailed account of all monies received under subsection B2 of this section in the manner provided by the governing body by ordinance or resolution; and
    4. Collect all special taxes and assessments as provided by law and ordinance. (2003 Code)

1-7C-3: WARRANTS; ORDER OF PAYMENT:
In the absence of appropriate monies, the city treasurer shall pay all warrants in the order in which presented and as money becomes available for payment thereof in the appropriate funds of the city. The city treasurer shall note upon the back of each warrant presented the date of presentation and the date of payment. (1962 Code § 1-10-4; amd. 2003 Code)

1-7C-4: RECEIPTS FOR PAYMENT:
The city treasurer shall give or cause to be given to every person paying money to the city treasury, a receipt or other evidence of payment therefor, specifying, as appropriate, the date of payment and upon which account paid and shall file the duplicate of the receipt, a summary report, or other evidence of payment in the office of the director of administrative services. (Ord. 2016-01-003, 1-21-2016)

1-7C-5: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS:
All money received by the city treasurer on any special assessment shall be applied to the payment of the improvement for which the assessment was made. The money shall be used for the payment of interest and principal on bonds or other indebtedness issued in settlement thereof, and shall be used for no other purpose whatever, except as otherwise provided in Utah Code Annotated section 10-6-131. (1962 Code § 1-10-7; amd. 2003 Code)

1-7C-6: FUNDS KEPT SEPARATE:
The city treasurer shall promptly deposit all city funds in the appropriate bank accounts of the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to commingle city funds with his or her own money. Whenever it shall appear that the city treasurer or any other officer is making profit out of public money, or is using the same for any purpose not authorized by law, such treasurer or officer shall be suspended from office. (1962 Code § 1-10-8; amd. 2003 Code)

1-7C-7: ADDITIONAL DUTIES AS PRESCRIBED:
The city treasurer shall perform such other duties as are or may be prescribed by law or the provisions of this code. (1962 Code § 1-10-9)

ARTICLE D. CITY ATTORNEY1 


1-7D-1:      Legal Advisor
1-7D-2:      Prosecute Actions
1-7D-3:      Docket Report
1-7D-4:      Additional Duties as Prescribed
1See also section 1-7-4 of this chapter for appointment provisions.

1-7D-1: LEGAL ADVISOR:
The city attorney shall act as legal advisor of the city in all matters pertaining to contracts with or by the city and on any question of law. It shall be his duty to advise all city officials in relation to their official duties. He shall advise the city council, or its committees, on such legal questions as may arise in relation to the business of the city, and shall report, at any time the city council or the mayor may direct, upon any matters in his hands, which may be necessary for their information. (1962 Code § 1-12-1; amd. 2003 Code)

1-7D-2: PROSECUTE ACTIONS:
The city attorney and designees shall prosecute all violations of city ordinances, and under state law, may prosecute infractions and misdemeanors occurring within the boundaries of the city. The city attorney and designees shall have the authority to grant transactional immunity for violations of city ordinances, and under state law, infractions and misdemeanors occurring within the boundaries of the city. The city attorney and designees shall represent the interests of the city or state in the appeal of any matter prosecuted in any trial court by the city attorney. (1962 Code § 1-12-2; amd. 2003 Code)

1-7D-3: DOCKET REPORT:
The city attorney shall keep a docket and enter therein an abstract account of all suits pending in any court, and judgment rendered pertaining to the city. The city attorney shall report to the city council the condition of the business under his control. (1962 Code § 1-12-4; amd. 2003 Code)

1-7D-4: ADDITIONAL DUTIES AS PRESCRIBED:
The city attorney shall perform such other duties as may be required by state law or the provisions of this code. (1962 Code § 1-12-5)

ARTICLE E. CITY ENGINEER


1-7E-1:      Powers And Duties
1-7E-2:      Custodian Of Drawings And Documents
1-7E-3:      Public Inspections; Accountability
1-7E-4:      Fees Paid In Advance
1-7E-5:      Engineer Seal
1-7E-6:      No Conflict In Recording Or Filing

1-7E-1: POWERS AND DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the city engineer to locate the lines and grades of all streets, sidewalks, alleys or other public ways, and to determine the position, size and construction of all sewers, waterworks, irrigation or drainage canals, reservoirs, culverts, aqueducts, bridges, viaducts, or other public works or appurtenances, and to prepare plans, maps or profiles of the same, and to make estimates and furnish specifications for any of said work, whenever required to do so by the city council. The city engineer shall, under the direction of the city council, have general charge, supervision and inspection of all public improvements and public works undertaken by or on behalf of the city by contract or otherwise, and shall see that the same are performed in a workmanlike manner, and in accordance with the authorized plans and with the terms and specifications of the contracts. (1962 Code § 1-15-1; amd. 2003 Code)

1-7E-2: CUSTODIAN OF DRAWINGS AND DOCUMENTS:
The city engineer shall keep record of all maps, plans, plats, profiles, drawings, final estimates, specifications and contracts which in any way relate to the public improvements and engineering affairs of the city. The city engineer shall be custodian of all drawings and documents above mentioned. (2003 Code)

1-7E-3: PUBLIC INSPECTIONS; ACCOUNTABILITY:
The city engineer shall record and file all drawings and documents pertaining to public lands and improvements. Those made in his or her office shall be placed on record as soon as completed and shall then be open for public inspection, and any person copying the same or taking notes therefrom may do so in pencil only. He or she shall keep the records and files in good condition and turn the same over to his or her successor in office. The city engineer shall allow no alteration, mutilation or changes to be made in any matter of record, and shall be held strictly accountable for the same. (2003 Code)

1-7E-4: FEES PAID IN ADVANCE:
The city engineer shall not record any drawings or instruments, or file any papers or notices, or furnish any copies, or render any service connected with his or her office, until the fees for the same are paid or tendered as prescribed by law or ordinance. (2003 Code)

1-7E-5: ENGINEER SEAL:
The city engineer shall be provided with a seal by the city for his or her use, containing the words “city of St. George, Utah Engineering Department”. The seal shall be affixed to every certification approval. (2003 Code)

1-7E-6: NO CONFLICT IN RECORDING OR FILING:
The recording or filing of any drawing or instrument in the city engineer’s office shall not interfere or conflict in any way with the recording or filing of the same in other offices of record. (2003 Code)

ARTICLE F. ENCROACHMENT OFFICER


1-7F-1:      Created; Powers And Duties
1-7F-2:      Interference; Penalty

1-7F-1: CREATED; POWERS AND DUTIES:
There is hereby created the position of encroachment officer to perform, monitor and enforce, with the help of deputies and under the supervision of the public works director, those activities carried on within public ways in the city, including, but not limited to, the issuance of encroachment permits and the inspection of public ways within the city. The encroachment officer shall carry out, enforce and perform all duties, provisions and mandates contained in the ordinances of the city concerning encroachment into city streets, drainage and utility corridors, and shall approve plans, specifications, and signing before encroachment permits are issued. In addition, the city encroachment officer and deputies are hereby specifically charged with enforcement of such ordinances and are granted express authority to issue citations in the name of the city for a violation of any city ordinances pertaining to matters under their jurisdiction. In addition to, or as an alternative to, issuance of such citation, the encroachment officer or deputies may report any violations of city ordinances of which they become aware to the public works director or city attorney for appropriate enforcement. (Ord. 3-4-1995, 3-16-1995)

1-7F-2: INTERFERENCE; PENALTY:
If any person shall obstruct or hinder the encroachment officer or deputies, or other person under the direction of the public works director, in the performance of the duties prescribed in section 1-7F-1 of this article, or shall fail or refuse to remedy any conditions as referenced in section 1-7F-1 of this article, such person shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this title. (Ord. 3-4-1995, 3-16-1995; amd. 2003 Code)

ARTICLE G. ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER


1-7G-1:      Created; Powers And Duties
1-7G-2:      Interference; Penalty

1-7G-1: CREATED; POWERS AND DUTIES:
There is hereby created the position of zoning enforcement officer to perform, monitor and enforce, with the help of deputies and under the supervision of the community development director, those activities required by the zoning ordinance and not otherwise reserved to other city officials. The zoning enforcement officer shall have authority to carry out all duties of a city building inspector and, in addition, shall carry out, enforce and perform all duties, provisions and mandates contained in the ordinances of the city concerning zoning specifications, including zoning, nuisance and sign regulations. In addition, the zoning enforcement officer and deputies are hereby specifically charged with enforcement of such ordinances and are granted express authority to enforce the provisions of the zoning ordinance, nuisance ordinance or sign ordinance through the issuance of citations in the name of the city. In addition to, or as an alternative to, the issuance of such citations, the zoning enforcement officer and deputies may report any violations of the zoning ordinance, nuisance ordinance or sign ordinance of which they become aware to the director of community development or city attorney, for appropriate enforcement action. (Ord. 3-4-1995, 3-16-1995; amd. 2003 Code)

1-7G-2: INTERFERENCE; PENALTY:
If any person shall obstruct or hinder the zoning enforcement officer or any deputy or other person under the direction of the community development director in a performance of the duties prescribed in section 1-7G-1 of this article, or shall fail or refuse to remedy any zoning, nuisance or sign conditions as referenced in section 1-7G-1 of this article, such person shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this title. (Ord. 3-4-1995, 3-16-1995; amd. 2003 Code)

CHAPTER 8 CAMPAIGN FINANCE DISCLOSURE


1-8-1:       Definitions
1-8-2:       Filing Of Disclosure Reports
1-8-3:       Time Of Filing
1-8-4:       Contents Of Statements
1-8-5:       Public Information
1-8-6:       Penalty

1-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
CANDIDATE: Any person who files a declaration of candidacy for an elective office of the city; or is nominated by a committee or party; or received contributions or made expenditures or consents to another person receiving contributions or making expenditures with a view to bringing about such person’s nomination or election to such office; or causes on his behalf, any written material or advertisement to be printed, published, broadcast, distributed or disseminated which indicates an intention to seek such office.
CONTRIBUTION: Monetary and nonmonetary contributions, such as in-kind contributions and contributions of tangible things, but shall not include personal services provided without compensation by individuals volunteering their time on behalf of a candidate.
ELECTION: Both primary and general elections.
EXPENDITURES: A purchase, payment, distribution, loan, advance, deposit or gift of money or anything of value made for the purpose of influencing the nomination or election of any candidate. (Ord. 8-1-1995, 8-1-1995; amd. 2003 Code)

1-8-2: FILING OF DISCLOSURE REPORTS:
Each candidate for elective offices shall file with the city recorder, dated, signed and sworn financial reports which comply with this chapter. (Ord. 8-1-1995, 8-1-1995)

1-8-3: TIME OF FILING:
The reports required by this chapter shall be filed at least once seven (7) days before both the primary and general elections and at least once thirty (30) days after the general election. (Ord. 10-1-1997, 10-2-1997; amd. 2003 Code)

1-8-4: CONTENTS OF STATEMENTS:
A. The statement filed at least once seven (7) days before the election shall include:
    1. A list of the amount of each contribution of more than fifty dollars ($50.00) received by the candidate, and the name of the donor;
    2. An aggregate total of all contributions of fifty dollars ($50.00) or less received by the candidate; and
    3. A list of each expenditure for political purposes made during the campaign period, the amount thereof, and the recipient of each expenditure.
B. The statement filed after the election shall include:
    1. A list of each contribution of more than fifty dollars ($50.00) received after the date of the pre-election statement and the name of the donor;
    2. An aggregate total of all contributions of fifty dollars ($50.00) or less received by the candidate after the date of the pre-election statement; and
    3. A list of all expenditures for political purposes made by the candidate after the date of the pre-election statement, and the recipient of each expenditure.
C. Candidates who are eliminated at a primary election shall file a post election statement as required herein within thirty (30) days following the primary election at which they are eliminated. (Ord. 8-1-1995, 8-1-1995; amd. Ord. 10-1-1997, 10-2-1997; 2003 Code)

1-8-5: PUBLIC INFORMATION:
The statements required by this chapter shall be public documents and shall be available for public inspection and copying during all regular city business hours. (Ord. 8-1-1995, 8-1-1995)

1-8-6: PENALTY:
Any candidate who fails to comply with this chapter is guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this title. (Ord. 8-1-1995, 8-1-1995; amd. 2003 Code)

CHAPTER 9 RECORDS ACCESS AND MANAGEMENT


1-9-1:       Government Records Access And Management Act Adopted By Reference
1-9-2:       Fees For Records Request

1-9-1: GOVERNMENT RECORDS ACCESS AND MANAGEMENT ACT ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
Except insofar as the application thereof is clearly impractical or inappropriate, in view of the context of purposes or penalty as provided, all of the definitions, requirements, regulations, prohibitions, provisions and sections of the Utah government records access and management act1, as amended, are hereby adopted by the city. Any and all violations thereof shall be considered violations of this chapter and each such violation shall subject the violator thereof to penalty provisions under this chapter if proceeded hereunder. (2003 Code)
1UCA § 63-2-101 et seq.

1-9-2: FEES FOR RECORDS REQUEST:
The fees paid to the city in connection with a records request shall be in such amount as established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 6-3-1992, 6-18-1992; amd. 2003 Code)

CHAPTER 10 FINANCIAL PROVISIONS


10A          Director Of Administrative Services
    1-10A-1:     Created; Powers And Duties
10B          Purchasing Policy – Contracts
    1-10B-1:     Contract Validity And Execution
    1-10B-2:     Purchasing Administration
    1-10B-3:     Standards For Purchasing
    1-10B-4:     Bidding Procedures
    1-10B-5:     Exceptions To Bidding Requirements
    1-10B-6:     Lowest Responsible Bidder
    1-10B-7:     Emergency Purchases
    1-10B-8:     Insurance And Bonds
    1-10B-9:     Public Record
    1-10B-10:    Subdivision Of Contract Or Purchase Prohibited
    1-10B-11:    Interlocal Cooperation
    1-10B-12:    Prohibited Acts And Activities
    1-10B-13:    Penalty
    1-10B-14:    Compliance With Federal Immigration Laws
10C          Bank Fees
    1-10C-1:     Bank Fees On Returned Checks And Other Returned Item Fees

ARTICLE A. DIRECTOR OF ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES


1-10A-1:     Created; Powers And Duties

1-10A-1: CREATED; POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. Created: There is hereby created the position of director of administrative services.
B. Powers And Duties: The administrative duties of the director of administrative services shall be to:
    1. Supervise all financial accounting activities of the city.
    2. Advise all chief administrators on matters of fiscal policy.
    3. Manage city investments.
    4. Manage city debt administration.
    5. Prepare internal and annual financial reports.
    6. Preaudit all financial claims made against the city to determine if such claims were appropriately processed according to city and state requirements.
    7. Assure that proper approval is obtained before any claim against the city is processed for payment.
    8. Approve any payroll checks prepared for an authorized city employee hired in accordance with personnel policies established by city ordinance or resolution. The amount paid to any such authorized employee shall also be in agreement to a specific salary assigned to such employee pursuant to a salary schedule adopted by the governing body or a salary amount assigned by resolution of the city council.
    9. Approve claims submitted for the payment of routine expenditures, such as utility bills, payroll related expenses, supplies and materials, which were purchased according to authorized purchasing procedures1 established by ordinance or resolution.
    10. Approve any submitted claim which is in accordance with an authorized city contract.
    11. Approve claims submitted for capital purchases, which were made pursuant to established purchasing procedures, referenced in the budget document and approved by an appropriation resolution adopted for the current fiscal year budget.
    12. Perform such other and further acts consistent with the provisions and intent of this section as may be required by the city manager, the city council or by state statutes.
C. Restrictions On Claim Approval: The above claim approval authority delegated to the director of administrative services is hereby subject to the following restrictions:
    1. No claim may be approved by the director of administrative services which is not within the duly and legally adopted or adjusted budget.
    2. No claim may be approved which was not made in accordance with personnel and purchasing procedures established by ordinance or resolution.
D. List Of Verified Claims: The above authorization shall not prevent the governing body from approving all or part of a list of verified claims, including a specific claim in an amount in excess of the stated maximum, where certified by the director of administrative services.
E. Preaudit Of Claims: The director of administrative services shall preaudit all claims pursuant to state statute requirements and shall not disburse any payments without appropriate approval. Procedures shall be established whereby documented approval is obtained as authorized by this section. Monthly detail expenditure reports shall also be prepared and made available to the city council.
F. Budgetary And Administrative Procedures: Specific budgetary and administrative procedures consistent with this article may be established by resolution.
G. Annual Financial Report: Within one hundred eighty (180) days after the close of each fiscal period, the director of administrative services shall present to the governing body an annual financial report prepared in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles, as prescribed in the “Uniform Accounting Manual” for Utah cities. This requirement may be satisfied by presentation of the audit report furnished by the independent auditor, if the financial statements included are appropriately prepared and reviewed with the governing body. Notwithstanding the acceptability of the audit report furnished by the independent auditor in substitution for financial statements prepared by an officer of the city, the governing body has the responsibility for those financial statements. The independent auditor has the responsibility of reporting whether the governing body’s financial statements are prepared in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles. Copies of the annual financial report or the audit report furnished by the independent auditor shall be filed with the state auditor and shall be filed as a public document in the office of the city recorder.
1See also chapter 10, article B of this title for purchasing procedures.
(Ord. 2016-01-003, 1-21-2016)

ARTICLE B. PURCHASING POLICY1 – CONTRACTS


1-10B-1:     Contract Validity And Execution
1-10B-2:     Purchasing Administration
1-10B-3:     Standards For Purchasing
1-10B-4:     Bidding Procedures
1-10B-5:     Exceptions To Bidding Requirements
1-10B-6:     Lowest Responsible Bidder
1-10B-7:     Emergency Purchases
1-10B-8:     Insurance And Bonds
1-10B-9:     Public Record
1-10B-10:    Subdivision Of Contract Or Purchase Prohibited
1-10B-11:    Interlocal Cooperation
1-10B-12:    Prohibited Acts And Activities
1-10B-13:    Penalty
1-10B-14:    Compliance With Federal Immigration Laws
1See also subsection 1-7A-6I of this title providing city manager responsible for purchasing.

1-10B-1: CONTRACT VALIDITY AND EXECUTION:
A. No liability against the city may be created and no expenditure of public funds may be made which is not for a public purpose.
B. No contract may become valid or is binding against the city until:
    1. The contract has been reduced to writing;
    2. The city has received notice from its department of administrative services that funds are lawfully available within budgeted appropriations to fulfill the city’s financial obligations thereunder;
    3. Where certifications of compliance with federal contract or grant assurances are required, the documents are approved as to form by the city attorney;
    4. The contract has been administered by the purchasing manager and fully complies with the requirements of the city’s purchasing requirements;
    5. The contract has been reviewed and approved as to form by the city attorney and executed by the mayor or, where authorized, by the city manager or a department head; and
    6. The signature of the mayor has been attested by the city recorder or, if signed by the city manager or department head, the signature has been countersigned by the city recorder. (Ord. 2018-04-004 § 2, 4-5-2018)

1-10B-2: PURCHASING ADMINISTRATION:
The purchasing manager shall have the responsibility for the purchasing activities of the city and its various departments under the supervision and control of the director of administrative services. The duties and powers with regard to purchasing shall include the following:
A. Establish and maintain purchasing policies and processes, including the review and approval of purchase requisitions, issue purchase orders, review contracts for the acquisition of supplies, services, and equipment and administer the purchasing card program.
B. Ensure compliance with the bidding and purchase procedures, authorizing a waiver of such procedures only where appropriate. Waiver of such procedures requires the city manager’s approval if the purchase exceeds twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00).
C. Provide for the transfer of surplus or unused supplies and equipment between departments wherever it can be done effectively.
D. Review and maintain records and forms related to all purchasing activities.
E. Provide for the disposal by public auction of surplus or unused supplies and equipment that cannot be utilized by the city but which has residual value, except where such property has either a fixed cost or a unique value, in which case disposal may be by negotiated sale.
F. Revise requisitions or estimates of a department’s requirements for supplies and contractual services as to quantity, quality, or estimated cost, whenever revision is approved by the city manager and department head, and determined to be in the best interest of the city. (Ord. 2018-04-004 § 2, 4-5-2018)

1-10B-3: STANDARDS FOR PURCHASING:
A. Specified: 
    1. Except as otherwise provided herein:
        a. Purchases of supplies, equipment or contractual services of an estimated value of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less may be made in the open market without complying with bidding procedures and without a written agreement except as provided in this section. Sufficient effort should be made on all purchases, regardless of cost, to determine the best value before any purchase is initiated. All purchases are subject to approval by the purchasing division. A written agreement is required for contractual services or if the purchases require customization, have unique design criteria, or special terms.
        b. Purchases of supplies, equipment or contractual services of an estimated value greater than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) but twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or less require at least three (3) written price quotes and shall be obtained prior to the purchasing of supplies, equipment or contractual services. A record of all written quotes shall be attached to the purchase requisition prior to submitting the requisition to the purchasing division for review and approval. A written agreement is only required for contractual services or if the purchases require customization, have unique design criteria, or special terms.
        c. Purchases of supplies, equipment or contractual services of an estimated value greater than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder pursuant to the formal bidding procedures. A written agreement is only required for contractual services or if the purchases require customization, have unique design criteria, or special terms.
    2. Value amounts used herein refer to both unit cost and combined multiple unit cost. The estimated value shall be determined by the department authorized signer and the purchasing manager, after review of the perinent requisition and specifications, in order to determine the applicable bidding procedure. The purchasing manager shall have the authority to waive the requirement to obtain written price quotes in such circumstances that are not cost effective or advantageous to the city.
    3. All written agreements shall be reviewed and approved by the legal department in conjunction with the purchasing division prior to a purchase or a project beginning.
B. Construction Projects: Except for maintenance and improvement projects performed by city personnel, all construction projects estimated by the city engineer, water and power engineer or other appropriate party to have a value in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), or where required by state law, shall be advertised for bid and awarded to the lowest responsible bidder, pursuant to the procedure hereinafter prescribed. All such contract awards shall be made by written contract as provided in section 1-10B-1 and shall comply with the insurance and bonding provisions of this article.
C. Bids Not Required For Certain Work: It is the policy of the city to reserve to itself all legal prerogatives to perform services and work with its own personnel and equipment; therefore, nothing in this article shall be construed to require bids to be called for or contracts let for:
    1. Conducting or managing any department, business or property of the city;
    2. Installing, lowering or repairing water mains or sewers, or making connections with water mains or sewers;
    3. Installing, altering, relocating or repairing electrical transmission or distribution lines, transformers and related equipment; or
    4. Grading, repairing, relocating or maintaining streets, sidewalks, bridges, culverts or conduits.
Any portion of a public works or improvements project not included in the above description shall be effected through bid and contract as provided in subsection B of this section, if the cost exceeds twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00).
D. Professional Services: Contracts for professional services estimated to be in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) shall be awarded at the discretion of the city council, including, but not limited to, auditing, banking, insurance, legal, engineering and similar professional consultation. Professional services contracts do not include construction projects as detailed in subsection B of this section.
E. Refusal To Receive Bids: The city may preclude contractors or suppliers from submitting bids where said proposed bidder has not completely satisfied prior notices to comply with construction documents, drawings and/or other specifications, or has otherwise failed to perform any work for the city or the state in a timely or satisfactory manner. The contractor or supplier may appeal the city’s decision to refuse bids from a specific contractor or supplier by filing a written notice of appeal within five (5) days of mailing or service of the notice of refusal. The appeal shall be filed with the purchasing manager. An informal administrative hearing shall be held within fifteen (15) days. The hearing shall be conducted and decided by the city manager and two (2) department heads. Their decision shall be final. (Ord. 2018-04-004 § 2, 4-5-2018)

1-10B-4: BIDDING PROCEDURES:
Where formal bidding is required, the lowest responsible bidder shall be determined through use of the following procedures:
A. Invitation For Bids: Notice inviting bids shall include a general description of the articles or services to be purchased, advise where bid forms and specifications are available, and state the process for submitting a bid. Notice for bids on construction projects shall be published at least twice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least five (5) days prior to the opening of bids. Notice for bids for services or purchases shall be posted electronically on the city website for at least seven (7) days prior to the opening of bids.
B. Bid Opening: Sealed bids shall be submitted as designated in the notice with the statement “bid for (item)” on the envelope.
    1. Bids shall be opened:
        a. In public in the presence of a witness at the time and place stated in the notice; or
        b. In an electronic bid opening process where bidders may see the opening of the bid. Bidders shall be notified of the time and process for viewing the opening.
    2. A tabulation of all bids received shall be posted on the city website for public inspection for a period of not less than thirty (30) days after the bid opening.
C. Rejection Of Bids: The city council shall have the authority to reject all bids, parts of all bids or all bids for any one (1) or more supplies or contractual services included in the proposed contract, when the low responsible bid exceeds available funds as certified by the appropriate city officer by more than five percent (5%), or when the public interest will be served thereby, and when permitted by law. Where a bid exceeds available funds and time or economic considerations preclude resolicitation of work or purchase of a reduced scope or quantity, the purchasing manager may negotiate with the lowest responsible bidder for an adjustment of the bid price, including changes in the bid requirements, in order to bring the low bid within the amount of available funds.
D. Tie Bids: If two (2) or more bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, with quality and service being equivalent, and if the public interest will not permit the delay of readvertising for bids, the city council shall accept the lowest bid made after negotiation with the tie bidders at or after the time of the bid opening.
E. Award Of Contracts: Contracts fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or less shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder as provided in this article, subject to approval by the affected city department and the city manager. Contracts in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder by the city council after appropriate review.
F. Change Orders: 
    1. All change orders must be approved by the department head, and then submitted to the purchasing manager prior to any requests for payment.
    2. The accumulation of change orders exceeding ten percent (10%) of the original purchase order which meet the following conditions shall be approved by the applicable department head. Change orders that do not meet the following conditions must be approved by the city manager:
        a. The total amount resulting from the change order is less than the budget amount approved by the city council; and
        b. The change order does not significantly change the original scope of work.
G. Local Vendor Preference: 
    1. In awarding bids for public work or for the procurement of supplies or services, preference shall be given to local vendors unless such preference is prohibited by federal law or by the terms of a federal grant or loan, the proceeds of which are used to fund the public work or procurement of supplies and services.
    A “local vendor” is defined as a business having:
        a. A commercial office, store, distribution center or other place of business located within the boundaries of the city, with an intent to remain on a permanent basis;
        b. A current city business license; and
        c. At least one employee physically present at the local business outlet.
    2. All three (3) criteria must be met in order to qualify as a local vendor. If there are no bidders who qualify as a local vendor, the same preference may then be extended to residents of Washington County under the conditions below. If a low bid is submitted by a nonpreferred bidder, the bid may be awarded to a local vendor if the local vendor’s bid is within five percent (5%) of the low nonpreferred bid, and if the local vendor agrees, in writing, within seventy-two (72) hours after notification that it is the qualified preferred bidder, to meet the low bid. Such notice shall contain the exact bid submitted by the nonpreferred bidder, and the city shall not enter into a contract until seventy-two (72) hours have elapsed after notification to the local vendor. The principal place of business of a local vendor may be elsewhere as long as a local branch meeting the above criteria is present. The domicile of one (1) or more partners, owners, associates, directors, employees or agents shall not qualify for constituting a local vendor in the absence of an actual local business outlet. (Ord. 2018-04-004 § 2, 4-5-2018; amd. Ord. 2020-04-002 § 2, 4-2-2020)

1-10B-5: EXCEPTIONS TO BIDDING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Uniqueness: Contracts which by their nature are not adapted to an award by competitive bidding, such as contracts for items available from a single source only, contracts for repair and maintenance of equipment already owned by the city which may be most efficiently performed by the originator of the equipment or its agent, contracts for the purchase of used equipment or items that are unique as to quality, condition and price, or contracts for a particular brand of equipment or product which is uniquely suited to the city’s needs by reason of training of its personnel or compatibility with existing equipment, shall not be subject to the competitive bidding requirements of this article. Notwithstanding the exception from competitive bidding requirements, the city shall advertise in the same manner as provided in section 1-10B-4A of this article, and request proposals prior to the purchase of items stated herein whenever it is reasonable to do so.
B. Auctions, Closeouts, Bankruptcy Sales: If the city manager determines that supplies, materials or equipment can be purchased at any public auction, closeout sale, bankruptcy, foreclosure or other similar sale, and if the city council makes a finding that such purchase can be made at a cost below the market cost in the city, the purchase may be made without complying with the competitive bidding requirements of this article if otherwise allowed by law.
C. Cooperative Agreements: Contracts available to municipalities that have been previously solicited by state and national cooperatives may be utilized. All cooperative contracts are subject to approval by the purchasing manager.
D. Approval Of City Council Required: An exception to bidding requirements under this section shall not eliminate the necessity of city council approval of any contract in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). The only variation in the requirement for such approval shall be in the event of urgent time constraints creating an emergency, in which event an expenditure in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) may be authorized upon personal verbal approval of a majority of the council members after explanation of the circumstances, subject to formal ratification at the first public city council meeting after authorization of the expenditures. (Ord. 2018-04-004 § 2, 4-5-2018)

1-10B-6: LOWEST RESPONSIBLE BIDDER:
A. Considerations: In awarding to the lowest responsible bidder, the city shall consider, in addition to price:
    1. The quality of supplies offered;
    2. The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the supplies or service required;
    3. Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the supplies promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference;
    4. The sufficiency of the bidder’s financial resources and the effect thereof on his ability to perform the contract or provide the supplies or services;
    5. The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder;
    6. The quality of the bidder’s performance on previous orders or contracts for the city or others;
    7. Litigation by or against the bidder, either pending or threatened, where claim is made that the bidder provided or furnished materially defective workmanship or materials to the city, or failed to substantially comply with bid specifications or contract terms and conditions;
    8. Any previous or existing noncompliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances of the city relating directly or indirectly to the subject of the contract;
    9. The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service, where such maintenance and service is essential;
    10. Possession or ability to obtain all necessary city and state licenses either at the time of bid or before doing business with the city, as specified by the contracting agent;
    11. A statement by bidder of all subcontractors he will use who may do or supply ten percent (10%) or more of the total contract being awarded, or a willingness to supply such listing of subcontractors at the time of bid award.
B. Award To Other Than Lowest Bidder: When the award is not given to the lowest bidder, a statement of the reasons therefor shall be presented by the department head involved, sent to and approved by the city manager and city attorney and filed with the purchasing manager along with any other papers related to the transaction.
C. Challenge To Action Of Purchasing Manager: Where a bid is protested by someone having standing to do so, or an irregularity is waived by the purchasing manager, written notice of such protest or waiver shall be given to each bidder immediately, advising the right of any person adversely affected to file a protest with the purchasing manager. Such protest must be in writing, made within seventy-two (72) hours after the bid tabulation or after receipt of the notice of protest or waiver from the purchasing manager. Failure to so file shall constitute a waiver of further challenge. Upon receipt of such challenge, the contract award process must cease until a decision of the hearing board unless the purchasing manager sets forth in writing particular facts and circumstances which require continuance of the contract award process without delay in order to avoid an immediate and serious danger to the public health, safety and welfare. An administrative hearing of the protest shall be held within fifteen (15) days. The hearing shall be conducted and decided by the city manager and two (2) department heads. Their decision shall be final. (Ord. 2018-04-004 § 2, 4-5-2018)

1-10B-7: EMERGENCY PURCHASES:
In case of an actual or apparent emergency which requires immediate procurement of supplies or contractual services, the affected department head may approve acquisition at the lowest attainable price without further compliance with the procedures provided herein. In such event, however, a full report of the circumstances of the emergency purchase shall be filed by the procuring department with the city manager. Upon approval of the city manager, the report will be filed with the purchasing manager and shall be open to public inspection. An “emergency” is any fact, circumstance or situation which threatens injury or damage as the result of any happening or circumstance which would delay the work of the city in such manner as to vitally affect life, health or convenience of the public. (Ord. 2018-04-004 § 2, 4-5-2018)

1-10B-8: INSURANCE AND BONDS:
A. General Requirements: When directed by the city council, city manager or purchasing manager, or when required by state statute or city ordinance, insurance certificates and/or bonds, whether permit, bid, performance or materialmen’s, shall be provided by a party contracting with the city to the purchasing manager in a form approved by the city attorney and in amounts recommended by the department head affected and the city attorney, and approved by the city manager. Such bonds or insurance shall: (1) name the city as an additional insured; (2) be cancelable; provided, that no cancellation thereof may be made without first giving the city at least ten (10) days’ prior written notice; and (3) be in sums sufficient to fully protect the city and its interests. All corporate guarantors or sureties shall be licensed to do business in the state and shall be sound and reputable firms, as determined acceptable to the city attorney.
B. Bid Security: 
    1. Bid security in an amount equal to at least five percent (5%) of the amount of the bid shall be required for all competitive sealed bidding for construction contracts where the total value of the contract is in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). Bid security shall be a bond provided by a surety company authorized to do business in this state, the equivalent in cash, or any other form satisfactory to the city.
    2. When a bidder fails to comply with the requirement for bid security set forth in the invitation for bids, the bids shall be rejected unless it is determined that the failure to comply with the security requirements is nonsubstantial.
    3. After the bids are opened, they shall be irrevocable for the period specified in the invitation for bids, except as provided below. If a bidder is permitted to withdraw a bid before award, no action shall be taken against the bidder or bid security.
    4. If after being accepted the bid fails, the bid security bond shall be forfeited unless there has been a mistake in the bid of such consequence as to make it apparent that: a) a meeting of the minds never occurred and that enforcement of the contract would be unconscionable; b) where the mistake related to a material feature of the contract; c) where the mistake does not constitute culpable negligence or violation of a positive legal duty; d) where the city has been placed in status quo so that it suffers no serious prejudice; or e) in such other circumstances as determined by the city council.
C. Performance Bonds: 
    1. The contractor on a project to construct public improvements shall be required to post a performance bond and a labor and materialmen’s bond; provided, however, that if the estimated construction cost is under two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), or if, in the opinion of the city council, the cost of requiring the bond will exceed the risk or benefit to the city, the city may waive the performance bond requirement, provided other arrangements are made to assure that laborers and materialmen on the project will be paid in full.
    2. The purchasing manager shall have the authority to require a performance bond before a contract is entered into to purchase or acquire supplies or services, in such amount as may be reasonably necessary to protect the best interest of the city. (Ord. 2018-04-004 § 2, 4-5-2018)

1-10B-9: PUBLIC RECORD:
The statement of reasons for rejection of a low bid as provided in subsection 1-10B-6B of this article, the reasons for an emergency purchase made pursuant to section 1-10B-7 of this article, any waiver pursuant to subsection 1-10B-6C of this article, and any estimate of the cost of public construction work made by the city engineer or water and power engineer pursuant to subsection 1-10B-3B of this article, where the estimate exceeds the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), shall become a part of the official records of the city and shall be made available to the public upon request. (Ord. 5-8-1988, 5-8-1988)

1-10B-10: SUBDIVISION OF CONTRACT OR PURCHASE PROHIBITED:
No contract or purchase shall be subdivided so as to avoid the requirements of this article. (Ord. 5-8-1988, 5-8-1988)

1-10B-11: INTERLOCAL COOPERATION:
Wherever the public benefit can be maximized and costs minimized by entering into joint agreements with other public agencies within the state for the purchase or construction of any commodity, service or public work, the city shall have the power to so agree upon approval and action by the city council. (Ord. 5-8-1988, 5-8-1988)

1-10B-12: PROHIBITED ACTS AND ACTIVITIES:
It shall be unlawful for any officer, agent or employee of the city, or any outside party or entity dealing or seeking to deal with the city to engage in any of the following practices:
A. Collusion or other agreement among bidders or prospective bidders, in restraint of freedom or competition, to fix or in any way rig prices or bids. In addition, any bid tainted with such collusion shall be voidable at the option of the city.
B. Disclosure in advance of the opening of bids of the amount or content of one bid to another bidder or potential bidder. If such disclosure is deemed sufficiently material by the city manager, it shall void the bidding process and require a new advertisement or request for bids.
C. Purchase of supplies or equipment for the personal use of an officer, agent or employee of the city in the name of the city, whether part of a city purchase or contract or separate, and whether paid for with city funds or personal funds of the purchaser. Sole exception shall be where the item or items purchased are required parts of a worker’s equipment or uniform and necessary to the successful performance of his duties as a city officer or employee, although personally owned by him. (Ord. 5-8-1988, 5-8-1988; amd. 2003 Code)

1-10B-13: PENALTY:
The penalty for actions made unlawful by this article shall be a class B misdemeanor or infraction, in the discretion of the charging city attorney, unless those actions involve conduct which would be a felony under the laws of the state, in which event the county or state may so charge the offense. Conviction of the offense, other than a felony offense, shall subject the violator to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this title. Imposition of a criminal penalty shall not affect the city’s right to take administrative action with regard to an employee, impose sanctions against a contractor or purchaser such as a refusal to deal with him further, or avail itself of any other right which it may have by law or otherwise. (Ord. 5-8-1988, 5-8-1988; amd. 2003 Code)

1-10B-14: COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL IMMIGRATION LAWS:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to promote compliance with federal laws governing employment eligibility and verification of workers by entities that contract for the provision of services to the city during the performance of the contract.
B. Requests: In the procurement of goods and services for the city of St. George, the city will require that all requests for bids, requests for services, and contractual agreements for the provision of such services contain the following statement in a conspicuous place:By submitting a proposal and/or by signing this contract, contractor certifies that it does not and will not during the performance of this contract knowingly employ, or subcontract with any entity which employs workers in violation of 8 USC § 1324a. Contractor agrees to produce, at the city’s request, such documents which are required to verify compliance with applicable State and Federal laws. If the contractor knowingly employs workers in violation of 8 USC § 1324a, such violation shall be cause for unilateral cancellation of the contract between contractor and the city. In the event this contract is terminated due to violation of 8 USC § 1324a by the contractor or by a subcontractor of the contractor, the contractor shall be liable for any and all costs associated with such termination including, but not limited to, any damages incurred by the city as well as attorney fees.
This statement shall also be accompanied by a signature line for the contractor to sign thereby acknowledging that the contractor has read, understands, and agrees to comply with the requirements of federal and state law regarding eligibility of workers.
C. Contracts: This section shall not apply to any contract which has been submitted for approval to an authorized representative of the city prior to the effective date hereof. (Ord. 2008-04-004, 4-17-2008)

ARTICLE C. BANK FEES


1-10C-1:     Bank Fees On Returned Checks And Other Returned Item Fees

1-10C-1: BANK FEES ON RETURNED CHECKS AND OTHER RETURNED ITEM FEES:
A. Definitions: 
    CHECK: A payment instrument on a depository institution including a check, draft, order, or other instrument.
    ISSUER: A person who makes, draws, signs, or issues a check, whether as a corporate agent or otherwise.
B. Fee: The city may charge a fee against the issuer of a check in favor of the city, if the check is drawn on insufficient funds, a closed account, or is for any other reason returned by the issuer’s bank, pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 7-15-1. Said fee recovered pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 7-15-1, may be added to the amount owing to the city, as represented by the bad check, and the city may treat the bill or account sought to be paid by the bad check as unpaid until both the original billing and the bad check penalty amount have been received in cash or equivalent. (Ord. 2017-06-007, 6-1-2017)

CHAPTER 11 CONSTITUTIONAL TAKING ISSUES


1-11-1:      Policy Considerations
1-11-2:      Defined
1-11-3:      Guidelines Advisory
1-11-4:      Review Of Decision
1-11-5:      Reviewing Guidelines
1-11-6:      Results Of Review

1-11-1: POLICY CONSIDERATIONS:
There is an underlying policy in the city strongly favoring the careful consideration of matters involving constitutional taking claims, in fairness to the owner of private property bringing the claim and in view of the uncertainty and expense involved in defending lawsuits alleging such issues. At the same time, the legitimate role of government in lawfully regulating real property must be preserved and the public’s right to require the dedication or exaction of property consistent with the constitution. Consistent with this policy, it is desired that a procedure be established for the review of actions that may involve the issue of a constitutional taking. These provisions are to assist city government in considering decisions that may involve constitutional takings. It is intended that a procedure for such a review be provided, as well as guidelines for such considerations. This chapter is further intended and shall be construed to objectively and fairly review claims by citizens that a specific government action should require payment of just compensation, yet preserve the ability of the city to lawfully regulate real property and fulfill its other duties and functions. (Ord. 11-1-1997, 11-6-1997)

1-11-2: DEFINED:
A. “Constitutional taking” issues means a city action that involves the physical taking or exaction of private real property that might require compensation to a private real property owner because of:
    1. The fifth or fourteenth amendment of the Constitution of the United States;
    2. Article 1, section 22 of the Utah constitution; or
    3. Any recent court rulings governing the physical taking or exaction of private real property by a government entity;
B. Actions by the city involving the physical taking or exaction of private real property is not a constitutional taking if the physical taking or exaction:
    1. Bears an essential nexus to a legitimate governmental interest; and
    2. A legitimate governmental interest exists for the action taken by the city; and
    3. Is roughly proportionate and reasonably related, on an individualized property basis, both in nature and extent, to the impact of the proposed development on the legitimate government interest. (Ord. 11-1-1997, 11-6-1997)

1-11-3: GUIDELINES ADVISORY:
The guidelines adopted and decisions rendered pursuant to the provisions of this chapter are advisory, and shall not be construed to expand or limit the scope of the city’s liability for a constitutional taking. The reviewing body or person shall not be required to make any determination under this chapter except pursuant to section 1-11-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 11-1-1997, 11-6-1997)

1-11-4: REVIEW OF DECISION:
Any owner of private real property who claims there has been a constitutional taking of their private real property shall request a review of a final decision of any officer, employee, board, commission or council of the city. The following are specific procedures established for such a review:
A. Final Determination Required: The owner of private real property requesting a review must have obtained a final and authoritative determination, internally, within the city, relative to the decision from which a review is requested.
B. Filing Of Request For Review: Within thirty (30) days from the date of the final decision that gave rise to the concern that a constitutional taking has occurred, the owner of private real property requesting the review shall file in writing, in the office of the city recorder, a request for review of that decision. A copy of the written request shall also be filed with the city attorney.
C. Time To Review Set: The city council, or an individual or body designated by the city council, shall immediately set a time to review the decision that gave rise to the constitutional takings claim.
D. Information Required Of Owner: In addition to the written request for review, the owner of the private real property shall submit, prior to the date of the review, the following:
    1. Name of the owner or the applicant requesting review;
    2. Name and business address of the current owner of the property, form of ownership, whether sole proprietorship, for profit or not for profit corporation, partnership, joint venture or other, and if owned by a corporation, partnership or joint venture, name and address of all principal shareholders or partners;
    3. A detailed description of the grounds for the claim that there has been a constitutional taking;
    4. A detailed description of the property taken;
    5. Evidence and documentation as to the value of the property taken, including the date and cost at the date the property was acquired. This should include any evidence of the value of that same property before and after the alleged constitutional taking, the name of the party from whom purchased, including the relationship, if any, between the person requesting a review and the party from whom the property was acquired;
    6. Nature of the protectable interest claimed to be affected, such as, but not limited to, fee simple ownership, leasehold interest;
    7. Terms (including sale price) of any previous purchase or sale of a full or partial interest in the property in the three (3) years prior to the date of application;
    8. All appraisals of the property prepared for any purpose, including financing, offering for sale, or ad valorem taxation, within the three (3) years prior to the date of application;
    9. The assessed value of and ad valorem taxes on the property for the previous three (3) years;
    10. All information concerning current mortgages or other loans secured by the property, including the name of the mortgagee or lender, current interest rate, remaining loan balance and term of the loan and other significant provisions, including, but not limited to, right of purchasers to assume the loan;
    11. All listings of the property for sale or rent, price asked and offers received, if any, within the previous three (3) years;
    12. All studies commissioned by the applicant or agents of the applicant within the previous three (3) years concerning the feasibility of development or the utilization of the property;
    13. For income producing property, all itemized income and expense statements from the property for the previous three (3) years;
    14. Information from a title policy or other source showing all recorded liens or encumbrances affecting the property; and
    15. The city council or their designee may request additional information reasonably necessary, in the city council’s or its designee’s opinion, to arrive at a conclusion concerning whether there has been a constitutional taking.
E. Complete Application: An application shall not be deemed to be complete or submitted until the reviewing body/designee certifies to the applicant that all the materials and information required above have been received by the city. The reviewing body/designee shall promptly notify the applicant of any incomplete application.
F. Hearing: The city council, or individual or body designated by them, shall hear all the evidence related to and submitted by the applicant, city or any other interested party.
G. Final Decision: A final decision on the review shall be rendered within fourteen (14) days from the date the complete application for review has been received by the city recorder. The city council’s, or its designee’s, decision concerning the results of the review shall be given in writing to the applicant and to the officer, employee, board, commission or council that rendered the final decision that gave rise to the constitutional takings claim.
H. Failure To Hear And Decide: If the city council, or individual or body designated by it, fails to hear and decide the review within fourteen (14) days, the decision appealed from shall be presumed to be approved. (Ord. 11-1-1997, 11-6-1997)

1-11-5: REVIEWING GUIDELINES:
The city council, or individual or body designated by it, shall review the facts and information presented by the applicant to determine whether or not the action by the city constitutes a “constitutional taking,” as defined in section 1-11-2 of this chapter. In doing so, they shall consider:
A. Whether the physical taking or exaction of the private real property bears an essential nexus to a legitimate governmental interest.
B. Whether a legitimate governmental interest exists for the action taken by the city.
C. Are the property and exaction taken, roughly proportionate and reasonably related, on an individual property basis, both in nature and extent, to the impact caused by the activities that are the subject of the decision being reviewed. (Ord. 11-1-1997, 11-6-1997)

1-11-6: RESULTS OF REVIEW:
After completing the review, the reviewing body shall make a determination regarding the above issues and, where determined to be necessary and appropriate, shall make a recommendation to the officer, employee, board, commission or council that made the decision that gave rise to the constitutional takings claim. (Ord. 11-1-1997, 11-6-1997)

CHAPTER 12 ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT HEARING PROGRAM


12A          General Provisions And Definitions
    1-12A-1:     Short Title
    1-12A-2:     Declaration Of Purpose
    1-12A-3:     Scope
    1-12A-4:     Existing Law Continued
    1-12A-5:     Criminal Prosecution Right
    1-12A-6:     Effect Of Heading
    1-12A-7:     Validity Of Chapter; Severability
    1-12A-8:     No Mandatory Duty; Civil Liability
    1-12A-9:     General Rules Of Interpretation
    1-12A-10:    Definitions
    1-12A-11:    Acts Include Causing, Aiding, And Abetting
    1-12A-12:    Service Of Process
    1-12A-13:    Constructive Notice Of Recorded Documents
    1-12A-14:    General Enforcement Authority
    1-12A-15:    Adoption Of Policy And Procedures
    1-12A-16:    Authority To Inspect
    1-12A-17:    Power To Arrest
    1-12A-18:    False Information Or Refusal Prohibited
    1-12A-19:    Failure To Obey A Subpoena
12B          Administrative Code Enforcement Procedures
    1-12B-1:     Administrative Abatement
        1-12B-1-1:   Authority
        1-12B-1-2:   Notice Of Violation
        1-12B-1-3:   Failure To Bring Property Into Compliance
        1-12B-1-4:   Inspections
    1-12B-2:     Emergency Abatement
        1-12B-2-1:   Authority
        1-12B-2-2:   Procedures
        1-12B-2-3:   Notice Of Emergency Abatement
    1-12B-3:     Demolitions
        1-12B-3-1:   Authority
        1-12B-3-2:   Procedures
    1-12B-4:     Administrative Citations
        1-12B-4-1:   Declaration Of Purpose
        1-12B-4-2:   Authority
        1-12B-4-3:   Procedures
        1-12B-4-4:   Contents Of Administrative Citation
        1-12B-4-5:   Civil Penalties Assessed
    1-12B-5:     Hearing Procedures
        1-12B-5-1:   Declaration Of Purpose
        1-12B-5-2:   Authority And Scope Of Hearings
        1-12B-5-3:   Request For Hearing
        1-12B-5-4:   Default Hearings And Orders
        1-12B-5-5:   Notification Of Hearing
        1-12B-5-6:   Disqualification Of Administrative Law Judge
        1-12B-5-7:   Powers Of Administrative Law Judge
        1-12B-5-8:   Procedures at Hearing
        1-12B-5-9:   Failure To Attend Hearing
        1-12B-5-10:  Administrative Code Enforcement Order
        1-12B-5-11:  Failure To Comply With Administrative Code Enforcement Order
    1-12B-6:     Appeals
        1-12B-6-1:   Appeal Of Administrative Code Enforcement Order
12C          Administrative And Judicial Remedies
    1-12C-1:     Recordation Of Notices Of Violation
        1-12C-1-1:   Declaration Of Purpose
        1-12C-1-2:   Authority
        1-12C-1-3:   Procedures For Recordation
        1-12C-1-4:   Service Of Notice Of Recordation
        1-12C-1-5:   Failure To Request
        1-12C-1-6:   Notice Of Satisfaction; Procedures
        1-12C-1-7:   Prohibition Against Issuance Of Municipal Permits
        1-12C-1-8:   Cancellation Of Recorded Notice Of Violation
    1-12C-2:     Administrative Civil Penalties
        1-12C-2-1:   Authority
        1-12C-2-2:   Procedures For Assessing Civil Penalties
        1-12C-2-3:   Determination Of Civil Penalties
        1-12C-2-4:   Modification Of Civil Penalties
        1-12C-2-5:   Failure To Pay Penalties
    1-12C-3:     Abatement Of Violation
        1-12C-3-1:   Authority To Abate
        1-12C-3-2:   Procedures For Abatement
    1-12C-4:     Costs
        1-12C-4-1:   Declaration Of Purpose
        1-12C-4-2:   Authority
        1-12C-4-3:   Notification Of Assessment Of Reinspection Fees
    1-12C-5:     Fees
        1-12C-5-1:   Administrative Fees
    1-12C-6:     Injunctions
        1-12C-6-1:   Civil Violations; Injunctions
    1-12C-7:     Bonds
        1-12C-7-1:   Performance Bond
12D          Recovery Of Code Enforcement Penalties And Costs
    1-12D-1:     Declaration Of Purpose
    1-12D-2:     Procedures For Tax Liens without A Judgment
    1-12D-3:     Procedures For Tax Liens With A Judgment
    1-12D-4:     Cancellation Of Code Enforcement Tax Lien
    1-12D-5:     Recovery Of Costs By Writ Of Execution
    1-12D-6:     Recovery Of Costs By Writ Of Garnishment
    1-12D-7:     Abatement Superfund
    1-12D-8:     Repayment To Abatement Superfund
    1-12D-9:     Code Enforcement Administrative Fees And Cost Fund
    1-12D-10:    Allocation Of Civil Penalties

ARTICLE A. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS


1-12A-1:     Short Title
1-12A-2:     Declaration Of Purpose
1-12A-3:     Scope
1-12A-4:     Existing Law Continued
1-12A-5:     Criminal Prosecution Right
1-12A-6:     Effect Of Heading
1-12A-7:     Validity Of Chapter; Severability
1-12A-8:     No Mandatory Duty; Civil Liability
1-12A-9:     General Rules Of Interpretation
1-12A-10:    Definitions
1-12A-11:    Acts Include Causing, Aiding, And Abetting
1-12A-12:    Service Of Process
1-12A-13:    Constructive Notice Of Recorded Documents
1-12A-14:    General Enforcement Authority
1-12A-15:    Adoption Of Policy And Procedures
1-12A-16:    Authority To Inspect
1-12A-17:    Power To Arrest
1-12A-18:    False Information Or Refusal Prohibited
1-12A-19:    Failure To Obey A Subpoena

1-12A-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT HEARING PROGRAM (ACE HEARING PROGRAM). This chapter shall also be known as CHAPTER 12 OF THE CITY CODE OF ST. GEORGE. It may be cited and pleaded under either designation. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12A-2: DECLARATION OF PURPOSE:
The city council of the city of St. George finds that the enforcement of this code and applicable state codes throughout the city is an important public service. Code enforcement is vital to the protection of the public’s health, safety, and quality of life. The city council recognizes that enforcement starts with the drafting of precise regulations that can be effectively applied in administrative code enforcement hearings and judicial proceedings. The city council further finds that a comprehensive code enforcement system that uses a combination of judicial and administrative remedies is critical to gain compliance with these regulations. Failure to comply with an administrative code enforcement action may require the city attorney to file a judicial action to gain compliance. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12A-3: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter may be applied to all violations of this code. It has been designed as an additional remedy for the city to use in achieving compliance of its ordinances. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12A-4: EXISTING LAW CONTINUED:
The provisions of this chapter do not invalidate any other chapter or ordinance, but shall be read in conjunction with those chapters and ordinances as an additional remedy available for enforcement of those ordinances. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12A-5: CRIMINAL PROSECUTION RIGHT:
The city has sole discretion in deciding whether to file a civil or criminal case for the violation of any of its ordinances. The city may choose to file both, or one or the other. The enactment of this administrative remedy shall in no way interfere with the city’s right to prosecute city ordinance violations as criminal offenses. The city may use any of the remedies available under the law in both civil and criminal prosecution. If the city chooses to file both civil and criminal charges for the same day of violation, no civil penalties may be assessed, but all other remedies are available. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12A-6: EFFECT OF HEADING:
Title, chapter, article, part and section headings contained in this chapter shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter, article, part, or section hereof. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12A-7: VALIDITY OF CHAPTER; SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, portion, or provision of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council hereby declares that it would have adopted this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, portion, or provision thereof, irrespective of the fact that one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases, portions, or provisions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. This section shall apply to all amendments heretofore or hereafter made to this chapter. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12A-8: NO MANDATORY DUTY; CIVIL LIABILITY:
It is the intent of the city council that in establishing performance standards or establishing an obligation to act by a city officer or employee, these standards shall not be construed as creating a mandatory duty for purposes of tort liability if the officer or employee fails to perform his or her directed duty or duties. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12A-9: GENERAL RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
For purposes of this chapter:
A. Any gender includes the other gender.
B. “Shall” is mandatory; “may” is permissive.
C. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.
D. Words used in the present tense include the past and future tense, and vice versa.
E. Words and phrases used in this chapter and not specifically defined shall be construed according to the context and approved usage of the language. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12A-10: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be constructed as defined in this section, unless a different meaning is specifically stated to apply:
ABATEMENT: Any action the city may take on public or private property and any adjacent property as may be necessary to remove or alleviate a violation, including, but not limited to, demolition, removal, repair, boarding, and securing or replacement of property.
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT HEARING PROGRAM ADMINISTRATOR OR ACE ADMINISTRATOR: Any person authorized by the mayor and city council to supervise, administer the administrative code enforcement hearing program, and enforce violations of this code or applicable state codes.
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT ORDER: An order issued by an administrative law judge. The order may include an order to abate the violation, pay civil penalties and administrative costs, or take any other action as authorized or required by this chapter and applicable state codes.
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE: The administrative law judge appointed by the mayor and city council to preside over the administrative code enforcement hearings established herein.
CITY: The city of St. George, a Utah municipal corporation, and the area within the territorial city limits of the city, and such territory outside of this city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or incorporation provisions or any law.
CITY CODE: This code of the city of St. George.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city of St. George.
CITY FEE SCHEDULE: The fee schedule adopted by the city council that sets forth civil penalties, administrative fees, abatement costs, and the applicable interest rate for enforcement of this chapter. The city fee schedule is on file in the office of the city recorder.
CODE ENFORCEMENT PERFORMANCE BOND: A bond posted by a responsible person to ensure compliance with this code, applicable state titles, a judicial action, or an administrative code enforcement order.
CODE ENFORCEMENT TAX LIEN: A lien recorded to collect outstanding civil penalties, administrative fees, and abatement costs.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL: Any person authorized to enforce violations of this code or applicable state codes.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION: Any person that holds a recorded mortgage or deed of trust on a property.
GOOD CAUSE: Incapacitating illness; death; lack of proper notice; unavailability due to unavoidable, unpreventable, or extenuating emergency or circumstance; if a required act causes an imminent and irreparable injury; and acts of nature adverse to performing required acts.
IMMINENT LIFE SAFETY HAZARD: Any condition that creates a present, extreme, and immediate danger to life, property, health, or public safety.
LEGAL INTEREST: Any interest that is represented by a document, such as a deed of trust, quitclaim deed, mortgage, judgment lien, tax or assessment lien, mechanic’s lien, or other similar instrument that is recorded with the Washington County recorder’s office.
NOTICE OF COMPLIANCE: A document issued by the city, representing that a property complies with the requirements outlined in the notice of violation.
NOTICE OF SATISFACTION: A document or form approved by the administrative law judge or his or her designee, which indicates that all outstanding civil penalties and costs have been either paid in full, or that the city has negotiated an agreed amount, or that a subsequent administrative or judicial decision has resolved the outstanding debt. In addition to the satisfaction of the financial debt, the property must also be in compliance with the requirements outlined in the notice of violation.
NOTICE OF VIOLATION: A written notice prepared by an enforcement official that informs a responsible person of code violations and orders the responsible person to take certain steps to correct the violations.
OATH: Includes affirmations and oaths.
PERSON: Any natural person, firm, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, sergeant, officer, or employee of any of them, or any other entity that is recognized by law as the subject of rights or duties.
PROPERTY OWNER: The record owner of real property based on the county assessor’s records.
PUBLIC NUISANCE: Any condition caused, maintained, or permitted to exist that constitutes a threat to the public’s health, safety, and welfare, or that significantly obstructs, injures, or interferes with the reasonable or free use of property in a neighborhood or community or by any considerable number of persons. A public nuisance also has the same meaning as set forth in the Utah Code Annotated and this code.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: A person who is responsible for causing or maintaining a violation of this code or applicable state codes. The property owner, tenant, person with a legal interest in the real property, or person in possession of the real property shall be liable for any violation maintained on the property. In all cases, the property owner shall be considered a responsible person.
WRITTEN: Includes handwritten, typewritten, photocopied, computer printed, or facsimile. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12A-11: ACTS INCLUDE CAUSING, AIDING, AND ABETTING:
Whenever any act or omission is made unlawful in this chapter, it shall include causing, permitting, aiding, or abetting such act or omission. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12A-12: SERVICE OF PROCESS:
A. Whenever service is required to be given under this chapter for enforcement purposes, the document shall be served by any of the following methods, unless different provisions are otherwise specifically stated to apply:
    1. Regular mail, postage prepaid, to the last known address of the owner(s) or other responsible person(s);
    2. Posting the notice conspicuously on or in front of the property. If not inhabited, the notice must also be mailed as in subsection A1 of this section. The form of the posted notice shall be approved by the ACE administrator or his or her designee;
    3. Personal service pursuant to Utah rules of civil procedure rule 4(e)(1) or rule 4(e)(5); or
    4. Published in a newspaper of general circulation where the identity or whereabouts of the person to be served are unknown and cannot be ascertained through reasonable diligence, where service is impracticable under the circumstances, or where there exists good cause to believe that the person to be served is avoiding service of process.
B. Service by regular mail in the manner described above shall be deemed served on the fifth day after the date of mailing.
C. If service complies with the requirements of this section, it shall be deemed a valid service even if a party claims not to have received the service and it shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter.
D. The failure to serve all responsible person(s) shall not affect the validity of any proceedings. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12A-13: CONSTRUCTIVE NOTICE OF RECORDED DOCUMENTS:
Whenever a document is recorded with the Washington County recorder as authorized or required by this chapter or applicable state codes, recordation shall provide constructive notice of the information contained in the recorded documents. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12A-14: GENERAL ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
Whenever the ACE administrator or any enforcement official finds that a violation of this code or applicable state codes has occurred or continues to exist, the appropriate administrative enforcement procedure may be used as outlined in this chapter. The ACE administrator or enforcement official has the authority and power necessary to gain compliance with the provisions of this code and applicable state codes. These powers include the power to issue notices of violation and administrative citations, inspect public and private property, abate public and private property, and use whatever judicial and administrative remedies are available under this code or applicable state codes. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12A-15: ADOPTION OF POLICY AND PROCEDURES:
The administrative law judge is authorized to develop policies and procedures relating to the hearing procedures, scope of hearings, subpoena powers, and other matters relating to the administrative code enforcement hearings program. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12A-16: AUTHORITY TO INSPECT:
As provided in this section, any enforcement official is authorized to enter upon any property or premises to ascertain whether the provisions of this code or state codes are being obeyed and to make any examinations and surveys as may be necessary in the performance of the enforcement duties. This may include the taking of photographs, samples, or other physical evidence. All entries onto private property shall be in compliance with Utah law and the fourth amendment of the United States Constitution. (Ord. 2015-08-008, 8-6-2015)

1-12A-17: POWER TO ARREST:
The ACE administrator or any enforcement official is authorized to arrest, without a warrant, any person whenever there is reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed a violation of this code or applicable state codes in the enforcement official’s presence. The ACE administrator or enforcement official can arrest a person only by issuing a misdemeanor citation or administrative citation. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12A-18: FALSE INFORMATION OR REFUSAL PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make a false statement or refuse to give his or her name or address with intent to deceive or interfere with the ACE administrator or an enforcement official when in the performance of his or her official duties under the provisions of this chapter. A violation of this section is a class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12A-19: FAILURE TO OBEY A SUBPOENA:
It is unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to obey a subpoena issued for an administrative code enforcement hearing. Failure to obey a subpoena constitutes contempt and may be prosecuted as a class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

ARTICLE B. ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES


1-12B-1:     Administrative Abatement
    1-12B-1-1:   Authority
    1-12B-1-2:   Notice Of Violation
    1-12B-1-3:   Failure To Bring Property Into Compliance
    1-12B-1-4:   Inspections
1-12B-2:     Emergency Abatement
    1-12B-2-1:   Authority
    1-12B-2-2:   Procedures
    1-12B-2-3:   Notice Of Emergency Abatement
1-12B-3:     Demolitions
    1-12B-3-1:   Authority
    1-12B-3-2:   Procedures
1-12B-4:     Administrative Citations
    1-12B-4-1:   Declaration Of Purpose
    1-12B-4-2:   Authority
    1-12B-4-3:   Procedures
    1-12B-4-4:   Contents Of Administrative Citation
    1-12B-4-5:   Civil Penalties Assessed
1-12B-5:     Hearing Procedures
    1-12B-5-1:   Declaration Of Purpose
    1-12B-5-2:   Authority And Scope Of Hearings
    1-12B-5-3:   Request For Hearing
    1-12B-5-4:   Default Hearings And Orders
    1-12B-5-5:   Notification Of Hearing
    1-12B-5-6:   Disqualification Of Administrative Law Judge
    1-12B-5-7:   Powers Of Administrative Law Judge
    1-12B-5-8:   Procedures at Hearing
    1-12B-5-9:   Failure To Attend Hearing
    1-12B-5-10:  Administrative Code Enforcement Order
    1-12B-5-11:  Failure To Comply With Administrative Code Enforcement Order
1-12B-6:     Appeals
    1-12B-6-1:   Appeal Of Administrative Code Enforcement Order

1-12B-1: ADMINISTRATIVE ABATEMENT:

1-12B-1-1: AUTHORITY:
Any condition caused, maintained, or permitted to exist in violation of any provisions of this code or applicable state codes that constitutes a violation may be abated by the city pursuant to the procedures set forth in this section 1-12B-1. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12B-1-2: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
A. Whenever the ACE administrator or any enforcement official determines that a violation of this code or applicable state codes has occurred or continues to exist, the ACE administrator or enforcement official may choose to proceed under the administrative abatement procedures. If this procedure is used, a notice of violation shall be issued to a responsible person. The notice of violation shall include the following information:
    1. Name of property owner;
    2. Street address of violation;
    3. Date violation observed;
    4. All code sections violated and description of condition of the property that violates the applicable codes;
    5. A statement explaining the type of remedial action required to permanently correct outstanding violations, which may include corrections, repairs, demolition, removal, or other appropriate action;
    6. Specific date to correct the violations listed in the notice of the violation, which date shall be at least the number of days set forth in the city fee schedule from the date of service;
    7. Explanation of the consequences should the responsible person fail to comply with the terms and deadlines as prescribed in the notice of violation, which may include, but is not limited to, criminal prosecution; civil penalties; revocation of permits; recordation of the notice of violation; withholding of future municipal permits; abatement of the violation; costs of abatement; lien on property; administrative fees; and any other legal remedies;
    8. That civil penalties will begin to accrue immediately on expiration of the date to correct violations;
    9. The amount of the civil penalty on each violation and that the penalty will accrue daily until the property is brought into compliance;
    10. That only one notice of violation is required for any twelve (12) month period, and that civil penalties begin immediately upon any subsequent violations of the notice. The responsible person may request a hearing on the renewed violations by following the same procedure as provided for the original notice.
    11. Procedures to request a hearing as provided in section 1-12B-5-3 of this article, and consequences for failure to request one.
B. The notice of violation shall be served by one of the methods of service listed in section 1-12A-12 of this chapter.
C. More than one notice of violation may be issued against the same responsible person, if it encompasses different dates or different violations. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12B-1-3: FAILURE TO BRING PROPERTY INTO COMPLIANCE:
A. If a responsible person fails to bring a violation into compliance within the time set forth on the notice of violation after service of the notice of violation, civil penalties shall be owed to the city for each and every subsequent day of violation.
B. Failure to comply with the notice of violation is a class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12B-1-4: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the responsible person served with a notice of violation to request an inspection when his or her property has been brought into compliance. It is prima facie evidence that the violation remains on the property if no inspection is requested. Civil penalties accumulate daily until the property has been inspected and a notice of compliance is issued. Reinspection fees shall be assessed pursuant to the “remedies” section of this chapter, if more than one inspection is necessary. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12B-2: EMERGENCY ABATEMENT:

1-12B-2-1: AUTHORITY:
A. Whenever the ACE administrator determines that an imminent life safety hazard exists that requires immediate correction or elimination, the administrator may exercise the following powers without prior notice to the responsible person:
    1. Order the immediate vacation of any tenants, and prohibit occupancy until all repairs are completed;
    2. Post the premises as unsafe, substandard, or dangerous;
    3. Board, fence, or secure the building or site;
    4. Raze and grade that portion of the building or site to prevent further collapse, and remove any hazard to the general public;
    5. Make any minimal emergency repairs as necessary to eliminate any imminent life safety hazard; or
    6. Take any other action appropriate to eliminate the emergency.
B. The ACE administrator or authorized representative has the authority, based on cause, to enter the property without a search warrant or court order to accomplish the above listed acts to abate the safety hazard.
C. The responsible person shall be liable for all costs associated with the abatement of the imminent life safety hazard. Costs may be recovered pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12B-2-2: PROCEDURES:
A. The ACE administrator shall pursue only the minimum level of correction or abatement as necessary to eliminate the immediacy of the hazard. Costs incurred by the city during the emergency abatement process shall be assessed and recovered against the responsible person through the procedures outlined in the “remedies” section of this chapter.
B. The ACE administrator may also pursue any other administrative or judicial remedy to abate any remaining violations. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12B-2-3: NOTICE OF EMERGENCY ABATEMENT:
After an emergency abatement, the city shall notify the property owner or responsible person of the abatement action taken. This notice shall be served within ten (10) days of completion of the abatement. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12B-3: DEMOLITIONS:

1-12B-3-1: AUTHORITY:
Whenever the ACE administrator, chief building inspector, or fire chief determines that a property or building requires demolition, any one of them may demolish or remove the offending structure, or exercise any or all of the powers listed in section 1-12B-2-1 of this article once appropriate notice has been given to a responsible person pursuant to the uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings or international fire code as required under state law. The responsible person shall be liable for all costs associated with the demolition. Costs may be recovered pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12B-3-2: PROCEDURES:
A. Once the ACE administrator has determined that the chief building inspector or the fire chief has complied with all of the notice requirements of the applicable laws, the property will be abated pursuant to the abatement remedy. Costs incurred by the city during the demolition process shall be assessed and recovered against the responsible person through the procedures outlined in the “remedies” section of this chapter.
B. The ACE administrator may also pursue any other administrative or judicial remedy. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12B-4: ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS:

1-12B-4-1: DECLARATION OF PURPOSE:
The city council finds that there is a need for an alternative method of enforcement for minor violations of this code and applicable state codes. The city council further finds that an appropriate method of enforcement is an administrative citation program.
The procedures established in this section 1-12B-4 shall be in addition to criminal, civil, or any other legal remedy established by law that may be pursued to address violations of this code or applicable state codes. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12B-4-2: AUTHORITY:
A. Any person violating this code or applicable state codes, where said violation is deemed minor by the ACE administrator, may be issued an administrative citation by an enforcement official as provided in this section 1-12B-4.
B. A civil penalty shall be assessed by means of an administrative citation issued by the enforcement official, and shall be payable directly to the city treasurer’s office.
C. Penalties assessed by means of an administrative citation shall be collected in accordance with the procedures specified in the “remedies” section of this chapter. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12B-4-3: PROCEDURES:
A. Upon discovering any violation of this code or applicable state codes, an enforcement official may issue an administrative citation to a responsible person in the manner prescribed in this section 1-12B-4 or as prescribed in section 1-12A-12 of this chapter. The administrative citation shall be issued on a form approved by the administrative law judge.
B. If the responsible person is a business, the enforcement official shall attempt to locate the business owner and issue an administrative citation to the business owner. If the enforcement official can only locate the manager of the business, the administrative citation may be given to the manager of the business. A copy of the administrative citation may also be mailed to the business owner or any other responsible person in the manner prescribed in section 1-12A-12 of this chapter.
C. Once the responsible person has been located, the enforcement official shall attempt to obtain the signature of that person on the administrative citation. If the responsible person refuses or fails to sign the administrative citation, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the citation and subsequent proceedings.
D. If the enforcement official is unable to locate the responsible person for the violation, then the administrative citation shall be mailed to the responsible person in the manner prescribed in section 1-12A-12 of this chapter.
E. If no one can be located at the property, then the administrative citation may be posted in a conspicuous place on or near the property and a copy subsequently mailed to the responsible person in the manner prescribed by section 1-12A-12 of this chapter.
F. The enforcement official shall sign the administrative citation.
G. The failure of any person with an interest in the property to receive notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this section 1-12B-4. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12B-4-4: CONTENTS OF ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION:
A. The administrative citation shall refer to the date and location of the violations and the approximate time the violations were observed.
B. The administrative citation shall refer to the code sections violated and the titles of those sections.
C. The administrative citation shall state the amount of penalty imposed for the violations.
D. The administrative citation shall explain how the penalty shall be paid, the time period by which the penalty shall be paid, and the consequences of failure to pay the penalty.
E. The administrative citation shall identify the right and the procedures to request a hearing.
F. The citation shall contain the signature of the enforcement official and the signature of the responsible person, if he or she can be located, as outlined in section 1-12B-4-3 of this article. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12B-4-5: CIVIL PENALTIES ASSESSED:
A. The administrative law judge shall establish policies to assist in the assessment of civil penalties or administrative citations.
B. Civil penalties shall be assessed immediately for each violation listed on the administrative citation. The penalties shall be those established in the city fee schedule.
C. Payment of the penalty shall not excuse the failure to correct the violations, nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12B-5: HEARING PROCEDURES:

1-12B-5-1: DECLARATION OF PURPOSE:
The city council finds that there is a need to establish uniform procedures for administrative code enforcement hearings conducted pursuant to this chapter. It is the purpose and intent of the city council to afford due process of law to any person who is directly affected by an administrative action. Due process of law includes notice, an opportunity to participate in the administrative hearing, and an explanation of the reasons justifying the administrative action. These procedures are also intended to establish a forum to efficiently, expeditiously, and fairly resolve issues raised in any administrative code enforcement action. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12B-5-2: AUTHORITY AND SCOPE OF HEARINGS:
Enforcement of city code violations may be conducted through the administrative code enforcement procedures established by this chapter, presided over by the administrative law judge. The administrative law judge shall develop policies and procedures to regulate the hearing process for any violation of this code and applicable state codes that are handled pursuant to the administrative abatement procedures, the emergency abatement procedures, the demolition procedures, or the administrative citation procedures. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12B-5-3: REQUEST FOR HEARING:
A. A person served with one of the following documents or notices has the right to request an administrative code enforcement hearing, if the request is filed within ten (10) calendar days from the date of service of one of the following notices:
    1. Notice of violation;
    2. Notice of itemized statement of costs;
    3. Administrative citation; or
    4. Notice of emergency abatement.
B. The request for hearing shall be made in writing and filed with the administrative law judge. The request shall contain the case number, the address of the violation, and the signature of the responsible party.
C. As soon as practicable after receiving the written notice of the request for hearing, the administrative law judge shall schedule a date, time, and place for the hearing.
D. Failure to request a hearing as provided shall constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing and a waiver of the right to challenge the action. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12B-5-4: DEFAULT HEARINGS AND ORDERS:
A. If the responsible person fails to request a hearing before the expiration of the ten (10) day deadline, the case shall be set for a default hearing. The administrative law judge shall schedule a default hearing. The responsible person shall be notified of the date, time, and place of the hearing by one of the methods listed in section 1-12A-12 of this chapter.
B. A default hearing shall be scheduled for all cases that have outstanding or unpaid civil penalties, administrative fees, and/or abatement costs due to the city before collection, if a hearing on that case has not already been held.
C. At the default hearing, the responsible person shall have the opportunity to present evidence to show that “good cause” exists, as defined in this chapter, to do one or more of the following:
    1. Waive or reduce the fines which have accumulated;
    2. Postpone an abatement action by the city; or
    3. Excuse the responsible person’s failure to request a hearing within the ten (10) day period.
D. 
    1. If the responsible person fails to establish good cause to take one or more of the actions set forth in subsection C of this section, the administrative law judge shall review the notice of violation and any other relevant information included in the case file. The administrative law judge shall not accept any other evidence.
    2. If the evidence shows that the violations existed, the administrative law judge shall enter an order requiring abatement of the violations, and the payment of all penalties, fees and costs. Penalties shall run until the city issues a notice of compliance stating when the violations were actually abated. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12B-5-5: NOTIFICATION OF HEARING:
A. Written notice of the day, time, and place of the hearing shall be served to a responsible person as soon as practicable prior to the date of the hearing.
B. The format and contents of the hearing notice shall be in accordance with rules and policies promulgated by the administrative law judge.
C. The notice of hearing shall be served by any of the methods of service listed in section 1-12A-12 of this chapter. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12B-5-6: DISQUALIFICATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE:
The administrative law judge is subject to disqualification for bias, prejudice, interest, or any other reason for which a judge may be disqualified in a court of law. Rules and procedures for disqualification and replacement shall be promulgated by the administrative law judge. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12B-5-7: POWERS OF ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE:
A. The administrative law judge has the authority to hold hearings, determine if violations of this code or applicable state codes exist, order compliance with this code or applicable state code, and enforce compliance as provided in this chapter on any matter subject to the provisions of this chapter.
B. The administrative law judge may continue a hearing based on good cause shown by one of the parties to the hearing. The administrative law judge must enter on the record the good cause on which a continuance is granted.
C. The administrative law judge, at the request of any party to the hearing, may sign subpoenas for witnesses, documents, and other evidence where the attendance of the witness for the admission of evidence is deemed necessary to decide the issues at the hearing. All costs related to the subpoena, including witness and mileage fees, shall be borne by the party requesting the subpoena. Said costs may be recovered by the city from the responsible party where the administrative law judge finds that a violation existed. The administrative law judge shall develop policies and procedures relating to the issuance of subpoenas in administrative code enforcement hearings, including the form of the subpoena and related costs.
D. The administrative law judge has continuing jurisdiction over the subject matter of an administrative code enforcement hearing for the purposes of granting a continuance; ordering compliance by issuing an administrative code enforcement order using any remedies available under the law; ensuring compliance of that order, which includes the right to authorize the city to enter and abate a violation; modifying an administrative code enforcement order; or, where extraordinary circumstances exist, granting a new hearing.
E. The administrative law judge has the authority to require a responsible person to post a code enforcement performance bond to ensure compliance with an administrative code enforcement order. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12B-5-8: PROCEDURES AT HEARING:
A. Administrative code enforcement hearings are intended to be informal in nature. Formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply; however, an informal exchange of discovery may be required. The request must be in writing. Failure to request discovery shall not be a basis for a continuance. Complainant information is protected and shall not be released unless the complainant is a witness at the hearing. The procedure and format of the administrative hearing shall follow the procedures promulgated by the administrative law judge.
B. The city bears the burden of proof at an administrative code enforcement hearing to establish the existence of a violation of this code or applicable state codes.
C. The standard of proof to be used by the administrative law judge in deciding the issues at an administrative hearing is whether the preponderance of the evidence shows that the violation(s) exist.
D. Each party shall have the opportunity to cross examine witnesses and present evidence in support of his or her case. A written declaration signed under penalty of perjury may be accepted in lieu of a personal appearance if the written declaration is provided to the opposing at least seven (7) days before the hearing. Testimony may be given by telephone or other electronic means.
E. All hearings are open to the public. They shall be recorded by audiotape. Hearings may be held at the location of the violation.
F. The responsible person has a right to be represented by an attorney. If an attorney will be representing the responsible person at the hearing, notice of the attorney’s name, address, and telephone number must be given to the city at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. If notice is not given, the hearing may be continued at the city’s request, and all costs of the continuance assessed to the responsible person.
G. No new hearing shall be granted, unless the administrative law judge determines that extraordinary circumstances exist which justify a new hearing. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12B-5-9: FAILURE TO ATTEND HEARING:
Any party whose property or actions are the subject of any administrative code enforcement hearing and who fails to appear at the hearing is deemed to waive the right to a hearing and will result in a default judgment for the city; provided, that proper notice of the hearing has been provided. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12B-5-10: ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT ORDER:
A. The city and the responsible party may enter into a stipulated agreement, which must be signed by both parties. This agreement shall be entered as the administrative code enforcement order. Entry of this agreement shall constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing and the right to appeal.
B. Once all evidence and testimony are completed, the administrative law judge shall issue an administrative code enforcement order that affirms, modifies, or rejects the notice or citation. The administrative law judge may increase or decrease the total amount of civil penalties and costs that are due pursuant to the city’s fee schedule and the procedures in this chapter.
C. The administrative law judge may order the city to enter the property and abate all violations, which may include removing animals kept in violation of this code.
D. The administrative law judge may revoke a kennel permit, an animal license, or the right to possess animals as provided in this code.
E. As part of the administrative code enforcement order, the administrative law judge may condition the parties assessment of civil penalties on the responsible person’s ability to complete compliance by specified deadlines.
F. The administrative law judge may schedule subsequent review hearings as may be necessary or as requested by a party to the hearing to ensure compliance with the administrative code enforcement order.
G. The administrative law judge may order the responsible person to post a performance bond to ensure compliance with the administrative code enforcement order.
H. The administrative code enforcement order shall become final on the date of the signing of the order.
I. The administrative code enforcement order shall be served on all parties by any one of the methods listed in section 1-12A-12 of this chapter. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12B-5-11: FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT ORDER:
A. Upon the failure of the responsible person to comply with the terms and deadlines set forth in the administrative code enforcement order, the city may use all appropriate legal means to recover the civil penalties and administrative costs to obtain compliance.
B. After the administrative law judge issues an administrative code enforcement order, the ACE administrator shall monitor the violations and determine compliance. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12B-6: APPEALS:

1-12B-6-1: APPEAL OF ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT ORDER:
A. Any person adversely affected by any decision made in the exercise of the provisions of this chapter may file a petition for review of the decision or order by the district court within thirty (30) days after the decision is rendered.
B. No person may challenge in district court an administrative law judge’s decision until that person has exhausted his or her administrative remedies.
C. 
    1. Within one hundred twenty (120) days after submitting the petition, the party petitioning for appeal shall request a copy of the record of the proceedings, including transcripts of hearings when necessary. The administrative law judge shall not submit copies of files or transcripts to the reviewing court until the party petitioning for appeal has paid all required costs. The petitioning party’s failure to properly arrange for copies of the record, or to pay the full costs for the record, within one hundred twenty (120) days after the petition for review was filed shall be grounds for dismissal of the petition.
    2. If a transcript of a hearing cannot be prepared because the tape recording is incomplete or unintelligible, the district court may, in its discretion, remand the matter to the administrative law judge for a supplemental proceeding to complete the record. The district court may limit the scope of the supplemental proceeding to issues that, in the court’s opinion, need to be clarified.
D. The district court’s review is limited to the record of the administrative code enforcement decision that is being appealed. The court shall not accept nor consider any evidence that is not part of the record of that decision.
E. The district court shall:
    1. Presume that the administrative law judge’s decision and orders are valid; and
    2. Review the record to determine whether or not the decision was arbitrary, capricious, or illegal. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

ARTICLE C. ADMINISTRATIVE AND JUDICIAL REMEDIES


1-12C-1:     Recordation Of Notices Of Violation
    1-12C-1-1:   Declaration Of Purpose
    1-12C-1-2:   Authority
    1-12C-1-3:   Procedures For Recordation
    1-12C-1-4:   Service Of Notice Of Recordation
    1-12C-1-5:   Failure To Request
    1-12C-1-6:   Notice Of Satisfaction; Procedures
    1-12C-1-7:   Prohibition Against Issuance Of Municipal Permits
    1-12C-1-8:   Cancellation Of Recorded Notice Of Violation
1-12C-2:     Administrative Civil Penalties
    1-12C-2-1:   Authority
    1-12C-2-2:   Procedures For Assessing Civil Penalties
    1-12C-2-3:   Determination Of Civil Penalties
    1-12C-2-4:   Modification Of Civil Penalties
    1-12C-2-5:   Failure To Pay Penalties
1-12C-3:     Abatement Of Violation
    1-12C-3-1:   Authority To Abate
    1-12C-3-2:   Procedures For Abatement
1-12C-4:     Costs
    1-12C-4-1:   Declaration Of Purpose
    1-12C-4-2:   Authority
    1-12C-4-3:   Notification Of Assessment Of Reinspection Fees
1-12C-5:     Fees
    1-12C-5-1:   Administrative Fees
1-12C-6:     Injunctions
    1-12C-6-1:   Civil Violations; Injunctions
1-12C-7:     Bonds
    1-12C-7-1:   Performance Bond

1-12C-1: RECORDATION OF NOTICES OF VIOLATION:

1-12C-1-1: DECLARATION OF PURPOSE:
The city council finds that there is a need for alternative methods of enforcement for violations of this code and applicable state codes that are found to exist on real property. The city council further finds that an appropriate method of enforcement for these types of violations is the issuance and recordation of notices of violation.
The procedures established in this section 1-12C-1 shall be in addition to criminal, civil, or any other remedy established by law that may be pursued to address the violation of this code or applicable state codes. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12C-1-2: AUTHORITY:
Whenever the ACE administrator determines that a property or violation has not been brought into compliance as required in this chapter, the ACE administrator has the authority to record the notice of violation or administrative code enforcement order with the Washington County recorder’s office. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12C-1-3: PROCEDURES FOR RECORDATION:
A. Once the ACE administrator or any enforcement official has issued a notice of violation to a responsible person, and the property remains in violation after the deadline established in the notice of violation, and no request for an administrative hearing has been filed, the ACE administrator shall record a notice of violation with the Washington County recorder’s office.
B. If an administrative hearing is held, and an order is issued in the city’s favor, the ACE administrator shall record the administrative code enforcement order with the Washington County recorder’s office.
C. The recordation shall include the name of the property owner, the parcel number, the legal description of the parcel, and a copy of the notice of violation or order.
D. The recordation does not encumber the property, but merely places future interested parties on notice of any continuing violation found upon the property. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12C-1-4: SERVICE OF NOTICE OF RECORDATION:
A notice of the recordation shall be served on the responsible person and the property owner pursuant to any of the methods of service set forth in section 1-12A-12 of this chapter. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12C-1-5: FAILURE TO REQUEST:
The failure of any person to file a request for an administrative code enforcement hearing when served with a notice of violation shall constitute a waiver of the right to an administrative hearing and shall not affect the validity of the recorded notice of violation. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12C-1-6: NOTICE OF SATISFACTION; PROCEDURES:
A. When the violations have been corrected, the responsible person or property owner may request an inspection of the property from the ACE administrator and the issuance of a notice of compliance or notice of satisfaction, as the case may be.
B. Upon receipt of a request for inspection, the ACE administrator or an enforcement official shall reinspect the property as soon as practicable to determine whether the violations listed in the notice of violation or the order have been corrected, and whether all necessary permits have been issued and final inspections have been performed.
C. The ACE administrator shall serve a notice of satisfaction to the responsible person or property owner in the manner provided in section 1-12A-12 of this chapter, if the ACE administrator determines that:
    1. All violations listed in the recorded notice of violation or order have been corrected;
    2. All necessary permits have been issued and finalized;
    3. All civil penalties assessed against the property have been paid or satisfied; and
    4. The party requesting the notice of satisfaction has paid all administrative fees and costs.
D. If the ACE administrator denies a request to issue a notice of satisfaction, upon request the ACE administrator shall serve the responsible person with a written explanation setting forth the reasons for the denial. The written explanation shall be served by any of the methods of service listed in section 1-12A-12 of this chapter. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12C-1-7: PROHIBITION AGAINST ISSUANCE OF MUNICIPAL PERMITS:
The city may withhold business licenses; permits for kennels; or permits for any alteration, repair, or construction pertaining to any existing or new structures or signs on the property; or any permits pertaining to the use and development of the real property or the structure when the ACE administrator or any enforcement official has served a notice of violation upon the responsible party. The city may withhold permits until a notice of satisfaction has been issued by the ACE administrator. The city may not withhold permits that are necessary to obtain a notice of satisfaction or that are necessary to correct serious health and safety violations. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12C-1-8: CANCELLATION OF RECORDED NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
The ACE administrator, an enforcement official, or the responsible person may record the notice of satisfaction with the Washington County recorder’s office. Recordation of the notice of satisfaction shall have the effect of canceling the recorded notice of violation. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12C-2: ADMINISTRATIVE CIVIL PENALTIES:

1-12C-2-1: AUTHORITY:
A. Any person violating any provision of this code or applicable state codes may be subject to the assessment of civil penalties for each violation.
B. Each and every day a violation of any provision of this code or applicable state codes exists is a separate violation subject to the assessment of civil penalties.
C. Civil penalties cannot be assessed when a criminal case has been filed for the same date and violation, because fines will be assessed with the criminal case. However, all other civil and administrative remedies are available.
D. Interest shall be assessed per the city fee schedule on all outstanding civil penalties, administrative fees, and/or abatement cost balances until the case has been paid in full.
E. Civil penalties for violations of any provision of this code or applicable state codes shall be assessed pursuant to the city fee schedule. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12C-2-2: PROCEDURES FOR ASSESSING CIVIL PENALTIES:
A. If a responsible person fails to bring a violation into compliance within the number of days prescribed in the notice of violation after service of the notice of violation, civil penalties shall be owed to the city for each and every subsequent day of violation.
B. Civil penalties are assessed and owing immediately for any violation of this code or applicable state codes for an administrative citation. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12C-2-3: DETERMINATION OF CIVIL PENALTIES:
A. Civil penalties shall be assessed per violation per day pursuant to the city fee schedule for a notice of violation.
B. Civil penalties shall continue to accrue until the violation(s) has/have been brought into compliance with this code or applicable state codes and a notice of compliance or notice of satisfaction, as the case may be, has been issued by the ACE administrator or enforcement official. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12C-2-4: MODIFICATION OF CIVIL PENALTIES:
A. Upon completion of the notice of violation or administrative code enforcement order, the administrative law judge may modify the civil penalties on a finding of good cause.
B. Civil penalties may be waived or modified by the administrative law judge if there is a finding of good cause based on the responsible person’s claim of legal nonconforming or conditional use, and:
    1. The city’s verification of the claim; or
    2. The responsible person’s filing of an application for the conditional use before expiration of the date to correct and said conditional use is approved by the city. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12C-2-5: FAILURE TO PAY PENALTIES:
The failure of any person to pay civil penalties assessed within the specified time is a violation of this chapter and may result in the ACE administrator’s pursuing any legal remedy to collect the civil penalties as provided in the law. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12C-3: ABATEMENT OF VIOLATION:

1-12C-3-1: AUTHORITY TO ABATE:
The ACE administrator is authorized to enter upon any property or premises to abate the violation of this code and applicable state codes. The ACE administrator is authorized to assess all costs for the abatement to the responsible person and use any remedy available under the law to collect the costs. If additional abatements are necessary within two (2) years, treble costs may be assessed against the responsible person(s) for the actual abatement. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12C-3-2: PROCEDURES FOR ABATEMENT:
A. Once the procedures set forth in this chapter have been completed, the violation may be abated by city personnel or by a private contractor acting under the direction of the city.
B. An enforcement official, city personnel, authorized representative (including a private contractor) may enter upon private property in a reasonable manner to abate the ordinance violation as specified in the notice of violation or administrative code enforcement order.
C. If the responsible person abates the violation before the city performs the actual abatement pursuant to a notice of violation or administrative code enforcement order, the ACE administrator may still assess all costs incurred by the city against the responsible person.
D. When the abatement is completed, a report describing the work performed and an itemized account of the total abatement costs shall be prepared by the ACE administrator. The report shall contain the names and addresses of the responsible persons of each parcel and the tax parcel number.
E. The ACE administrator shall serve the notice of costs and the itemized bill of costs by registered mail to the last known address of the responsible person(s). The notice shall demand full payment within twenty (20) days to the city treasurer.
F. The ACE administrator shall schedule an itemized bill for costs hearing, if requested in writing by any or all responsible persons. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12C-4: COSTS:

1-12C-4-1: DECLARATION OF PURPOSE:
A. The city council finds that there is a need to recover costs incurred by enforcement officials and other city personnel who spend considerable time inspecting and reinspecting properties throughout the city in an effort to ensure compliance with this code or applicable state codes.
B. The city council further finds that the assessment of costs is an appropriate method to recover expenses incurred for actual costs of abating violations, reinspection fees, filing fees, attorney fees, administrative law judge fees, title search, and any additional actual costs incurred by the city for each individual case. The assessment and collection of costs shall not preclude the imposition of any administrative or judicial civil penalties or fines for violations of this code or applicable state codes. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12C-4-2: AUTHORITY:
A. Whenever actual costs are incurred by the city on a property to obtain compliance with provisions of this code and applicable state codes, the ACE administrator may assess costs against the responsible person.
B. Once a notice of violation has been issued, the property will be inspected one time. Any additional inspections shall be subject to reinspection fees pursuant to the city fee schedule. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12C-4-3: NOTIFICATION OF ASSESSMENT OF REINSPECTION FEES:
A. Notification of reinspection fees shall be provided on the notice of violation served to the responsible person(s).
B. Reinspection fees assessed or collected pursuant to this section 1-12C-4 shall not be included in any other costs assessed.
C. The failure of any responsible person to receive notice of the reinspection fees shall not affect the validity of any other fees imposed under this section 1-12C-4. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12C-5: FEES:

1-12C-5-1: ADMINISTRATIVE FEES:
The ACE administrator or administrative law judge is authorized to assess administrative fees for costs incurred in the administration of this program, such as investigation of violations, preparation for hearings, hearings, and the collection process. The fee assessed shall be the amount set in the city fee schedule. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12C-6: INJUNCTIONS:

1-12C-6-1: CIVIL VIOLATIONS; INJUNCTIONS:
In addition to any other remedy provided under this code or state codes, including criminal prosecution or administrative remedies, any provision of this code may be enforced by injunction issued in the district court upon a suit brought by the city. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12C-7: BONDS:

1-12C-7-1: PERFORMANCE BOND:
A. As part of any notice, order, or action, the administrative law judge has the authority to require responsible persons to post a performance bond to ensure compliance with this code, applicable state codes, administrative code enforcement order, or any judicial action.
B. If the responsible person fails to comply with the notice, order, or action, the bond will be forfeited to the city. The bond will not be used to offset the other outstanding costs and fees associated with the case. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

ARTICLE D. RECOVERY OF CODE ENFORCEMENT PENALTIES AND COSTS


1-12D-1:     Declaration Of Purpose
1-12D-2:     Procedures For Tax Liens without A Judgment
1-12D-3:     Procedures For Tax Liens With A Judgment
1-12D-4:     Cancellation Of Code Enforcement Tax Lien
1-12D-5:     Recovery Of Costs By Writ Of Execution
1-12D-6:     Recovery Of Costs By Writ Of Garnishment
1-12D-7:     Abatement Superfund
1-12D-8:     Repayment To Abatement Superfund
1-12D-9:     Code Enforcement Administrative Fees And Cost Fund
1-12D-10:    Allocation Of Civil Penalties

1-12D-1: DECLARATION OF PURPOSE:
The city council finds that recordation of code enforcement tax liens will assist in the collection of civil penalties, abatement costs, and administrative fees assessed by the administrative code enforcement hearing program or judicial orders. The city council further finds that collection of civil penalties, costs, and fees assessed for code enforcement violations is important in deterring future violations and maintaining the integrity of the city’s code enforcement system. The procedures established in this article shall be used to complement existing administrative or judicial remedies that may be pursued to address violations of this code or applicable state codes. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12D-2: PROCEDURES FOR TAX LIENS WITHOUT A JUDGMENT:
A. Once the city has abated a property for weeds, garbage, refuse, or unsightly or deleterious objects or structures, the ACE administrator shall prepare three (3) copies of the itemized statement of costs incurred in the removal and destruction of the violations and deliver them to the city treasurer within ten (10) days after completion of the work of removing the violations.
B. The ACE administrator shall send, by registered mail to the property owner’s last known address, a copy of the itemized statement of costs informing him or her that a code enforcement tax lien is being recorded for the amount of actual costs of abatement. Payment shall be due within twenty (20) calendar days from the date of mailing.
C. Upon receipt of the itemized statement of costs, the city treasurer shall record a code enforcement tax lien against the property with the county treasurer’s office.
D. The failure of any person with a financial interest in the property to actually receive the notice of the lien shall not affect the validity of the lien or any proceedings taken to collect the outstanding costs of abatement. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12D-3: PROCEDURES FOR TAX LIENS WITH A JUDGMENT:
Once a judgment has been obtained from the appropriate court assessing costs against the responsible person(s), the ACE administrator may record a code enforcement tax lien against any real property owned by the responsible person(s). (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12D-4: CANCELLATION OF CODE ENFORCEMENT TAX LIEN:
Once payment in full is received for the outstanding civil penalties and costs, or the amount is deemed satisfied pursuant to a subsequent administrative or judicial order, the ACE administrator shall either record a notice of satisfaction of judgment, or provide the property owner or financial institution with the notice of satisfaction of judgment so that it can record this notice with the Washington County recorder’s office. The notice of satisfaction of judgment shall include the same information as provided for in the original code enforcement tax lien. Such notice of satisfaction of judgment shall cancel the code enforcement tax lien. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12D-5: RECOVERY OF COSTS BY WRIT OF EXECUTION:
After obtaining a judgment, the ACE administrator may collect the obligation by use of all appropriate legal means. This may include the execution on personal property owned by the responsible person by filing a writ with the applicable court. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12D-6: RECOVERY OF COSTS BY WRIT OF GARNISHMENT:
After obtaining a judgment, the ACE administrator may collect the obligation by use of all appropriate legal means. This may include the garnishment of paychecks, financial accounts, and other income or financial assets by filing a writ with the applicable court. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12D-7: ABATEMENT SUPERFUND:
There is hereby established a revolving fund to be known as the “abatement superfund” to defray costs of administrative and judicial abatements. The fund shall be reimbursed by collection from the property or property owner as specified in this chapter and by the courts. The city auditor shall establish accounting procedures to ensure proper account identification, credit, and collection. This fund may be operated and used in conjunction with procedures ordered or authorized under the abatement provision of this chapter. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12D-8: REPAYMENT TO ABATEMENT SUPERFUND:
All monies recovered from the sale or transfer of property or by payment for the actual abatement costs shall be paid to the city treasurer, who shall credit the appropriate amount to the abatement superfund. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12D-9: CODE ENFORCEMENT ADMINISTRATIVE FEES AND COST FUND:
Administrative fees and administrative costs, except for actual abatement costs, collected pursuant to this article shall be deposited in the code enforcement administrative fees and costs fund, as established by the ACE administrator for the enhancement of the city’s code enforcement efforts and to reimburse city departments for investigative costs and costs associated with the hearing process. Fees and costs deposited in this fund shall be appropriated and allocated in a manner determined by the ACE administrator. The city auditor shall establish accounting procedures to ensure proper account identification, credit, and collection. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

1-12D-10: ALLOCATION OF CIVIL PENALTIES:
Civil penalties collected pursuant to this article shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. Civil penalties deposited in this fund shall be appropriated and allocated in a manner determined by the city manager and the city council. The city auditor shall establish accounting procedures to ensure proper account identification, credit, and collection. (Ord. 2003-07-004, 7-17-2003)

CHAPTER 13 DISPOSAL OF CITY-OWNED REAL PROPERTY


1-13-1:      Definitions
1-13-2:      Public Comment
1-13-3:      Notice

1-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
CITY-OWNED REAL PROPERTY: Any parcel of real property owned by the city excluding real property held jointly with other entities under the Utah interlocal cooperation act, Utah Code Annotated 11-13-101 et seq., or real property purchased and held under the Utah redevelopment agencies act, Utah Code Annotated  17B-4-101  et seq.
DISPOSAL: The alienation of city owned real property by sale, trade, or transfer of title.
SIGNIFICANT PARCEL: Any parcel of real property with an estimated fair market value of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) or more. (Ord. 2004-01-007, 1-15-2004)

1-13-2: PUBLIC COMMENT:
The public shall be allowed to comment on any proposed disposal of a significant parcel of city owned real property. Comment shall be made in the following manner to be designated prior to the disposal by the city manager:
A. In writing, submitted to the city recorder by the time and date set by the city manager; or
B. In a public meeting, the time and date of which shall be set by the city council. (Ord. 2004-01-007, 1-15-2004)

1-13-3: NOTICE:
Not less than fourteen (14) days’ notice shall be given prior to the disposal of a significant parcel of city owned real property. The notice shall state whether public comment will be taken:
A. In writing along with the deadline for the submission; or
B. In a public meeting along with the date, time, and place of the meeting. Notice shall be by posting at the city office. (Ord. 2004-01-007, 1-15-2004)

CHAPTER 14 INSURANCE COVERAGE FOR CITY OWNED VEHICLES


1-14-1:      Election To Self-Insure
1-14-2:      Liability Coverage Under Self-Insurance
1-14-3:      Uninsured/Underinsured Motorist Coverage
1-14-4:      Filing Of Claims

1-14-1: ELECTION TO SELF-INSURE:
The city may elect from time to time to manage its liability risks by a combination of self-insurance and excess insurance, as permitted in Utah Code section 63-30d-801. (Ord. 2004-11-004, 11-4-2004)

1-14-2: LIABILITY COVERAGE UNDER SELF-INSURANCE:
With respect to motor vehicles owned or operated by the city, the liability coverage provided by this self-insurance is the minimum required by Utah Code section 31A-22-304 or as otherwise required by applicable law. (Ord. 2004-11-004, 11-4-2004)

1-14-3: UNINSURED/UNDERINSURED MOTORIST COVERAGE:
As permitted by Utah Code section 31A-22-305, the city elects not to provide uninsured/underinsured motorist coverage for city-owned vehicles, as employees operating city owned vehicles in the course of business are covered by the city’s workers’ compensation program. (Ord. 2004-11-004, 11-4-2004)

1-14-4: FILING OF CLAIMS:
All claims against the city must be filed in conformity with the requirements of Utah law. (Ord. 2004-11-004, 11-4-2004)

CHAPTER 15 ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS


1-15-1:      Authority
1-15-2:      Procedure
1-15-3:      Appeal Of Decision Of The Administrative Hearing Officer
1-15-4:      Stay Of Decision

1-15-1: AUTHORITY:
A. Appointment: The appeal of an administrative decision shall be conducted by an administrative hearing officer, who shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. Multiple administrative hearing officers may be appointed to hear appeals for the city. The administrative hearing officer shall be an independent contractor.
B. Qualifications: The administrative hearing officer should be a person with common sense, analytical abilities, ability to make decisions based on the law as it relates to the facts, ability to write decisions, conduct research, read briefs, make evidentiary rulings, and be trained or experienced in law, mediation or the topic being appealed.
C. Authority: The administrative hearing officer has the authority to hear and decide appeals which allege an error in any administrative decision made in the administration of the city code if the decision is a final written decision and no other administrative remedies are available. This includes administrative decisions made by the city council, the planning commission, and city employees. The administrative hearing officer has authority to hear appeals from:
    1. A request for a variance from any land use decision;
    2. Determinations regarding nonconforming uses and noncomplying structures;
    3. Determinations of violations of the storm water ordinances and any civil fines or costs imposed;
    4. Administrative actions taken pursuant to the animal services ordinances;
    5. Administrative actions taken pursuant to the health codes;
    6. Administrative actions taken pursuant to nuisance codes;
    7. Administrative actions taken pursuant to business license codes;
    8. Administrative actions taken pursuant to personnel codes and policies; and
    9. Other code sections as determined by the city.
D. Conflict Of Interest: An administrative hearing officer shall not participate in any appeal where the administrative hearing officer has a conflict of interest. (Ord. 2019-08-010 § 2, 8-8-2019)

1-15-2: PROCEDURE:
A. Parties Entitled To Appeal To The Administrative Hearing Officer: Any person or entity adversely affected by an administrative decision made by the city of St. George is entitled to appeal that decision to the administrative hearing officer if it is a final decision made in writing, unless other appeal procedures are specifically provided for in another section of the city code that apply to the issue being appealed.
B. Time To File Appeal And How: The party appealing a final written administrative decision of the city shall file the appeal in writing with the city recorder within ten (10) calendar days of the date the disputed administrative decision was put in writing. The written appeal must include the following or it will not be heard:
    1. Payment of applicable fees, if any;
    2. The name, street and mailing address, email, and phone number of the person appealing;
    3. A written statement that sets forth with specificity the grounds for appeal and all errors asserted;
    4. Every theory of relief they intend to raise in this appeal and a future appeal of the decision or order of the city; and
    5. All attachments, exhibits, a list of witnesses, a statement summarizing the witnesses’ testimony, and a copy of other evidence that the applicant will present. Information not included with the appeal shall not be received or considered by the administrative hearing officer.
C. Notice Of Hearing: After receiving an appeal, a hearing shall be scheduled. The city recorder shall publish a notice on the city’s website and the state public notice website. A notice of the hearing stating time, place and subject matter shall be given to the parties involved prior to any hearing. Notice may be served personally, by mail to the address on the appeal, or by electronic mail to the address provided on the appeal. No hearing, or the result thereof, shall be invalidated by any defect in giving notice to the parties at the addresses provided on the appeal. If the administrative hearing officer desires, they may require the parties to submit a pre-hearing outline.
D. Response: Prior to the hearing, the city may submit to the administrative hearing officer, and the other party, a response to the appeal and all documents and a copy of all evidence and information to be considered in the appeal.
E. Hearing: 
    1. Appeal hearings are intended to be informal in nature. Formal rules of evidence and civil procedure, including discovery, do not apply. The Utah rules of civil procedure and evidence shall be used as guidelines for the conduct of this hearing but shall not be binding. The administrative hearing officer may consider any relevant, nonprivileged oral or documentary evidence presented.
    2. All hearings are open to the public. The city recorder shall retain all documents considered. The proceedings of each appeal hearing shall be recorded on audio equipment. The audio recording of each appeal hearing shall be kept for a minimum of sixty (60) days. Upon the written request of any interested person, such audio recording shall be kept for a reasonable period of time beyond the sixty (60) day period, as determined by the administrative hearing officer. Copies of the tapes of such hearings may be provided, if requested, at the expense of the requesting party.
    3. At the hearing, the parties shall appear in person and may be represented by an attorney, call witnesses and present evidence. If the person appealing fails to appear at the hearing, without good cause, the failure to appear shall be deemed a withdrawal of the appeal and a waiver of any appeal rights.
    4. The parties may have witnesses testify and submit documents and other evidence in support of the case. Without a showing of good cause, evidence from the appealing party not included with the appeal application may not be received or considered by the administrative hearing officer. Each party shall have the opportunity to confront and cross examine the witnesses.
    5. The city may use any evidence submitted by the person appealing and any evidence considered or reviewed in making the decision or order that is the subject of the appeal, including but not limited to the testimony of individuals involved in the decision. Hearsay evidence is admissible, but the administrative hearing officer may not rely exclusively on hearsay evidence. The administrative hearing officer may ask questions of the witnesses.
    6. The appealing party has the burden of proving that the administrative decision was made in error unless otherwise stated in another section of the city code for a specific type of appeal being made. The burden to prove any affirmative defense shall be upon the person raising such defense.
F. Standard Of Review: The standard of review for an appeal shall be de novo unless otherwise stated in another section of the city code for a specific type of appeal being made.
G. Administrative Hearing Officer’s Decision: 
    1. After hearing the evidence presented, the administrative hearing officer shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law on the matter appealed and shall file the decision with the city recorder, whether it reverses or affirms, in whole or in part, the decision being appealed. The city recorder shall notify the parties of the administrative hearing officer’s decision by mail.
    2. If the administrative hearing officer affirms the administrative decision made by the city, the original order shall remain in effect. If the administrative hearing officer reverses the decision made by the city in whole or in part, the order will be adjusted accordingly. (Ord. 2019-08-010 § 2, 8-8-2019)

1-15-3: APPEAL OF DECISION OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER:
A. Any person adversely affected by a final decision made by the administrative hearing officer may file a petition for review of the decision with the district court within thirty (30) days after the decision is rendered unless another section of the city code specifically provides another appeal process for the type of appeal made, or unless Utah State law specifically provides another appeal process for the type of appeal made.
B. The standard of review shall, unless another section of the city code specifically provides another standard of review for the type of appeal made, or unless Utah State law specifically provides another standard of review for the type of appeal made:
    1. Be a review of the record of the hearing held by the administrative hearing officer and the decision rendered;
    2. Presume that the ordinance is valid and determine only whether:
        a. The ordinance is expressly preempted by, or was enacted contrary to, state or federal law; and
        b. It is reasonably debatable that the ordinance is consistent with state law; and
    3. Presume that the decision is valid; and
        a. Uphold the decision unless the decision is:
            (1) Arbitrary and capricious; or
            (2) Illegal. (Ord. 2019-08-010 § 2, 8-8-2019)

1-15-4: STAY OF DECISION:
When an appeal of the administrative hearing officer’s decision is made, the administrative hearing officer may stay the issuance of any permits or approvals, based on its decision, for thirty (30) days or until the decision is issued by the court hearing the appeal. (Ord. 2019-08-010 § 2, 8-8-2019)

TITLE 2 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS

Chapter
1            Planning Commission
2            City Employees And Employee Appeal Board
3            Dinosaur Discovery Site Advisory Board

CHAPTER 1 PLANNING COMMISSION


2-1-1:       Created; Membership
2-1-2:       Powers And Duties
2-1-3:       General Plan
2-1-4:       Public Hearings; Notice Requirements

2-1-1: CREATED; MEMBERSHIP:
A. Created: Pursuant to Title 10, Chapter 9a of the Utah Code Annotated, there is hereby created a planning commission consisting of seven (7) members who shall be nominated by the mayor and appointed by the city council from among the qualified electors of the city, and who shall remain at all times qualified electors of the city.
B. Appointment; Vacancies; Compensation: The mayor shall nominate a name for each vacant seat and the council shall, by majority vote, approve or deny the appointment of the nominee to fill the seat. Beginning on January 1, 2020, and thereafter, the term of office for each member shall be two (2) years. Four (4) members shall be appointed to two (2) year terms beginning on January 1 of even years, and the terms of three (3) members shall begin on January 1 of odd years. Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration of terms shall be filled by appointment as set forth in this subsection for the remaining balance of the term for the vacant seat. Members shall be selected without respect to political affiliations and shall serve without compensation, except for reasonable expenses.
C. Removal From Office: Any planning commission member may:
    1. Be removed from office for cause prior to the expiration of the term for which the member was appointed upon majority vote of the city council; or
    2. Be subject to forfeiture of membership on the commission, upon a majority vote of the council, for failing to attend two (2) or more commission meetings without advance notice in one (1) calendar year or failing to attend three (3) or more commission meetings in one (1) calendar year.
D. Officers; Organization; Records; Meetings: Beginning on the first regularly scheduled meeting of the planning commission in 2020, and annually thereafter, the planning commission shall select from its membership a chairperson and vice chairperson, who shall serve for one (1) year and until their successors are elected as set forth herein. The chairperson or vice chairperson, in the absence of the chairperson, shall preside at all meetings but continue to vote and exercise all rights of a member. The commission shall keep a public record of its proceedings, and all meetings shall be open to the public in accordance with the Utah Open and Public Meetings Act. (Ord. 2019-12-001 § 2 (Exh. A), 12-5-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-03-006 § 2 (Exh. A), 3-26-2020; Ord. 2020-05-005 § 2 (Exh.), 5-21-2020)

2-1-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. The planning commission shall review and make a recommendation to the city council in accordance with Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-302, for all items enumerated therein, including:
    1. A general plan and amendments to the general plan;
    2. Land use regulations, including:
        a. Ordinances regarding the subdivision of land within the municipality; and
        b. Amendments to existing land use regulations;
    3. An appropriate delegation of power to at least one (1) designated land use authority to hear and act on a land use application;
    4. An appropriate delegation of power to at least one (1) appeal authority to hear and act on an appeal from a decision of the land use authority; and
    5. Application processes that:
        a. May include a designation of routine land use matters that, upon application and proper notice, will receive informal streamlined review and action if the application is uncontested; and
        b. Shall protect the right of each:
            (1) Land use applicant and adversely affected party to require formal consideration of any application by a land use authority;
            (2) Land use applicant and adversely affected party to appeal a land use authority’s decision; and
            (3) Participant to be heard in each public hearing on a contested application.
B. For the purposes of subsection A5 of this section, “adversely affected party” is defined in accordance with Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-103.
C. Before making a recommendation to a legislative body on an item described in subsection A1 or A2 of this section, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing in accordance with state law.
D. The city council may adopt, modify, or reject the planning commission’s recommendation. The city council, in its sole discretion, may refer an item to the planning commission for further review and recommendation.
E. The city council, in its sole discretion, may consider the planning commission’s failure to make a timely recommendation as a negative recommendation, if the planning commission fails to take action on an item within sixty (60) days from the hearing date. If an applicant has requested that the planning commission not take action on an item, the sixty (60) day limit is tolled until the applicant makes a written request for planning commission consideration, again starting the sixty (60) day time limit.
F. Nothing in this section limits the right of the city to initiate or propose the actions described in this section.
G. The planning commission shall exercise any other powers delegated to it by the city council. (Ord. 2019-12-001 § 2 (Exh. A), 12-5-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-05-005 § 2 (Exh.), 5-21-2020)

2-1-3: GENERAL PLAN:
A. Plan Preparation: The planning commission shall recommend a general plan, or an amendment to the general plan, for the physical development and beautification of the city, pursuant to Utah law and with all elements required by Utah law. Before such recommendation to the city council, the commission shall hold public hearings within the city in conformance with Utah law. After public hearings, the commission may adopt or amend the general plan, and shall forward its recommendations to city council.
B. Adoption Or Amendment Of Plan: The city council may:
    1. Adopt, reject, or make any revisions to the proposed general plan or amendment that it considers appropriate; or
    2. If the city council rejects the proposed general plan or amendment, in its sole discretion, it may provide suggestions to the planning commission for the planning commission’s review and recommendation. (Ord. 2019-12-001 § 2 (Exh. A), 12-5-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-05-005 § 2 (Exh.), 5-21-2020)

2-1-4: PUBLIC HEARINGS; NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
Before holding any public hearings, the commission shall first give notice, in accordance with Utah law, fixing the time and the place of said public hearings. The notice shall be published at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the hearing in accordance with Utah law. (Ord. 2019-12-001 § 2 (Exh. A), 12-5-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-05-005 § 2 (Exh.), 5-21-2020)

CHAPTER 2 CITY EMPLOYEES AND EMPLOYEE APPEAL BOARD


2-2-1:       City Employees; Duration And Termination Of Employment; Exceptions
2-2-2:       Discharge, Suspension Without Pay, Or Involuntary Transfer; Appeal Procedure
2-2-3:       Employee Appeal Board; Created; Composition (Rep. by Ord. 2020-05-004, 5-14-2020)
2-2-4:       Reserved

2-2-1: CITY EMPLOYEES; DURATION AND TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT; EXCEPTIONS:
A. Except as provided in subsection B of this section, each employee of the city shall hold employment without limitation of time, being subject to discharge, suspension of over two (2) days without pay, or involuntary transfer to a position with less remuneration only as provided in section 2-2-2 of this chapter.
B. Subsection A of this section does not apply to the following:
    1. An officer appointed by the mayor or the city manager;
    2. The police chief;
    3. Any deputy police chief;
    4. The fire chief;
    5. Any deputy or assistant fire chief;
    6. Any department head;
    7. A deputy or assistant department head;
    8. A superintendent;
    9. A probationary employee;
    10. A part time employee; or
    11. A seasonal or temporary employee of the municipality.
C. Nothing in this section may be construed to limit the city’s ability to define cause for an employee termination or reduction in force. (Ord. 2004-10-001, 10-21-2004)

2-2-2: DISCHARGE, SUSPENSION WITHOUT PAY, OR INVOLUNTARY TRANSFER; APPEAL PROCEDURE:
A. An employee may not be discharged, suspended without pay, or involuntarily transferred to a position with less remuneration:
    1. Because of the employee’s politics or religious belief; or
    2. Incident to or through changes, either in the elected officials or heads of departments.
B. If an employee is discharged, suspended for more than two (2) days without pay, or involuntarily transferred from one (1) position to another with less remuneration for any disciplinary reason, the employee may appeal the action to an administrative hearing officer pursuant to title 1, chapter 15 of this code, this chapter, and the provisions of the city policy and procedures entitled “Discipline and Employee Appeal,” including all future amendments, deletions and additions made by the city.
C. The decision of the administrative hearing officer shall be certified to the city recorder within fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of the hearing, except, for good cause, the administrative hearing officer may extend the fifteen (15) day period to a maximum of sixty (60) calendar days, if the employee and the city both agree.
D. If the administrative hearing officer finds in favor of the employee, the administrative hearing officer shall provide that the employee shall receive:
    1. The employee’s salary for the period of time during which the employee is discharged or suspended without pay; or
    2. Any deficiency in salary for the period during which the employee was transferred to a position of less remuneration.
E. A final action or order of the administrative hearing officer may be appealed to the court of appeals by filing with that court a notice of appeal as provided by Utah law. (Ord. 2004-10-001, 10-21-2004; amd. Ord. 2019-08-010 § 2, 8-8-2019)

2-2-3: EMPLOYEE APPEAL BOARD; CREATED; COMPOSITION:
Rep. by Ord. 2020-05-004, 5-14-2020 (Ord. 2004-10-001, 10-21-2004)

2-2-4: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2004-10-001, 10-21-2004; amd. Ord. 2019-08-010 § 2, 8-8-2019)

CHAPTER 3 DINOSAUR DISCOVERY SITE ADVISORY BOARD


2-3-1:       Board Established
2-3-2:       Appointment; Membership
2-3-3:       Powers And Duties
2-3-4:       Meetings
2-3-5:       Quorum; Vote Required

2-3-1: BOARD ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a dinosaur discovery site advisory board to assist the city in the operation of the city owned property known as the St. George dinosaur discovery site at Johnson Farm. (Ord. 2004-11-009, 11-18-2004)

2-3-2: APPOINTMENT; MEMBERSHIP:
A. Appointment: The dinosaur discovery site advisory board shall consist of five (5) members, one member of which shall be a member of the Dinosaur Ah!torium Foundation board. All members shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. The board shall select a chairman and determine a meeting schedule.
B. Membership; Terms; Vacancies: The members of the dinosaur discovery site advisory board, appointed as provided above, shall serve for two (2) years on overlapping terms. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired portion of the term. (Ord. 2004-11-009, 11-18-2004)

2-3-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The dinosaur discovery site advisory board shall have the following responsibilities:
A. Recommending the mission, goals, objectives, short term plan, and long term plan related to the tracks and site.
B. Recommending policies and procedures for the operation of the site, including such things as admission fees and hours of operation.
C. Making budget recommendations.
D. Recommending a marketing plan, including design and content.
E. Making design and other recommendations for facilities as delegated by the city, based on space needed, available funding, cost effectiveness, and other relevant factors; and considering the possible need for additional buildings in the future.
F. Periodically reviewing the operations and financial viability of the site.
G. Recommending policies and procedures regarding agreements with other museums for the use and lending of tracks and other matters.
H. Any other task regarding the site as directed by the city council or the director of leisure services or designee of the director. (Ord. 2004-11-009, 11-18-2004)

2-3-4: MEETINGS:
Meetings of the dinosaur discovery site advisory board shall be held at the city offices, or such other city facility as determined from time to time by the board. Notice of the date, time, and location of the meeting, along with the agenda, shall be given to the city recorder not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the meeting. Exceptions to the notification requirement may be made with prior written approval of the city recorder. (Ord. 2004-11-009, 11-18-2004)

2-3-5: QUORUM; VOTE REQUIRED:
A quorum of the dinosaur discovery site advisory board shall be three (3) members; and a majority vote of a quorum shall be required for a decision of any matter before the board, but the minimum number of yes votes required for a decision shall never be less than three (3). If a quorum is not present, no meeting shall be held, and any items of business shall be continued to the next meeting of the board. (Ord. 2004-11-009, 11-18-2004)

TITLE 3 BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS

Chapter
1            General License Provisions
2            Special Business Requirements
    2A           Exhibitions, Concerts And Performers
    2B           Residential Solicitation
    2C           Occult Art Practitioners
    2D           Pawnbrokers, Swap Meets, Secondhand and Precious Metals/Gem Dealers
    2E           Amusement Devices And Businesses
    2F           Ambulances
    2G           Christmas Tree Businesses
    2H           Junk Dealers And Junkyards
    2I           Billboard Advertising
    2J           Mini Storage Rentals
    2K           Massage Establishments
    2L           Private Investigators
    2M           Employment Agencies
    2N           Collection Agencies
    2O           For Hire Vehicle Services
    2P           Motels
    2Q           Locksmith Services
    2R           Mobile Catering Units
    2S           Septic Tank Pumpers
    2T           Mail Delivery Agencies
    2U           Towing Services
    2V           Short Term Residential Rental Properties
3            Alcoholic Beverages
4            Taxes
    4A           Municipal Energy Sales And Use Tax
    4B           Telecommunications License Tax
    4C           Transient Room Tax
    4D           Sales And Use Tax
5            Alarm System Businesses
6            Telephone Solicitation And Marketing
7            Home Occupations
8            Sexually Oriented Businesses
9            Tobacco Products And Tobacco Paraphernalia
10           Special Events

CHAPTER 1 GENERAL LICENSE PROVISIONS1


3-1-1:       Applicability
3-1-2:       Purpose
3-1-3:       Definitions
3-1-4:       Compliance Requirements
3-1-5:       License Officer
3-1-6:       Receipt In Lieu Of License; Limitations
3-1-7:       Fees, Rates And Charges
3-1-8:       Renewal Of License
3-1-9:       Doing Business Previously Without A License
3-1-10:      Display Of License Required
3-1-11:      Transferability
3-1-12:      Acceptance Of Conditions; Consent To Inspections
3-1-13:      Insurance
3-1-14:      Surety; Cash Or Bond
3-1-15:      Expiration Of License
3-1-16:      Reserved
3-1-17:      Sublicense Business Activities
3-1-18:      Criminal History Checks
3-1-19:      Denial, Suspension, Revocation Of A Business Or Alcohol License
3-1-20:      Licensing After Revocation
3-1-21:      Penalty
1: See also section 7-4-4 of this code for licensing provisions for tree pruners.

3-1-1: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all business licenses required or granted by the city, including beer licenses described in chapter 3 of this title. (2003 Code)

3-1-2: PURPOSE:
Pursuant to powers granted by the state, the city intends by this title to license businesses and occupations within its corporate limits, and regulate businesses not otherwise regulated by an agency of the state; to maintain a current index of licensed businesses and occupations; and to raise revenue for municipal purposes, including, among other things, those costs of servicing businesses and administering this title, by imposing license fees upon such businesses and occupations. (2003 Code)

3-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this title, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings herein prescribed:
BUSINESS: Includes all kinds of vocations, occupations, professions, enterprises, establishments and all other kinds of activities and matters, together with all devices, machines, vehicles and appurtenances used therein, any of which are conducted for private profit, or benefit, either directly or indirectly, on any premises in the city.
CITY: The city of St. George.
EMPLOYEE: The operator, owner or manager of a place of business; any person or persons employed by an operator, owner or manager in the operation of a place of business in any capacity, whether part time or full time; and any sales persons, agents or independent contractors engaged in the furtherance of a business activity in any capacity, regardless of the method of compensation. As used herein, the term “employee” is intended to include everyone engaged in the operation of the business, including all owners if there be more than one.
FULL TIME EMPLOYEE: An employee who shall work a total of four hundred fifty (450) hours during any three (3) months of a license year, regardless of whether he works full time, part time or not at all during the other nine (9) months of the year.
HOME OCCUPATION: The conducting of any business, transaction or activity for which consideration of any nature is received that is conducted in accordance with chapter 7 of this title.
LICENSE: The certificate or document issued by the city evidencing permission or authority from the city to the holder named therein to carry on a particular business or to pursue a particular operation or occupation. To be valid, a license must be signed by the license officer.
LICENSE OFFICER: The employee of the city of St. George designated by the city manager for such purposes.
LICENSEE: The person to whom a license has been issued pursuant to the provisions of this title, and shall include individual persons, partnerships, joint ventures, associations, clubs, trusts, corporations or any other entity qualified by law to carry on any of the business activities referred to herein. The term “person,” as used herein, is either an applicant or “licensee,” as herein defined.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES: The average number of employees engaging in the furtherance of licensee’s business from a base within the city during each regular working day of the preceding calendar year. In the event of a new business, the number of employees shall be estimated subject to the filing of an amended application as provided by subsection 3-1-7D of this chapter.
OFFSITE IMPACT: The effects on the neighborhood and community which are created as a result of the business, where the combined effects of the home-based business and the primary residential use, materially exceeds the offsite impact of the primary residential use alone.
PART TIME EMPLOYEE: An employee who shall work less than four hundred fifty (450) total hours during those three (3) months of the license year which are his highest employment months. (Ord. 2006-09-005, 9-21-2006; amd. Ord. 2018-02-008, 2-1-2018)

3-1-4: COMPLIANCE REQUIREMENTS:
A. License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person, either directly or indirectly, to commence, conduct or carry on any business, or to commence, conduct or carry on any nonprofit enterprise in the city without first having procured a license from the city. No license shall be required for a business that is operated only occasionally by an individual who is under eighteen (18) years of age or as otherwise provided in this title. It shall be unlawful for any person, either directly or indirectly, to continue a business or nonprofit enterprise when a license pertaining thereto has been suspended or revoked. (Ord. 2018-02-008, 2-1-2018)
B. Compliance With Other Laws: No license shall be issued to a person required to comply with any other law, regulation or licensing requirement in the conduct of his business or nonprofit enterprise until the applicant demonstrates the fact of such compliance. Compliance with zoning laws is required in all cases.
C. Applicable To Single Act Of Business: For the purpose of this title, any person shall be deemed to be in business or to be engaging in a nonprofit enterprise, and thus subject to the requirements of subsection A of this section, when he does one act of:
    1. Selling any goods or services;
    2. Soliciting business or offering goods or services for sale or hire; or
    3. Acquiring or using any real or personal property in the city for a business purpose.
D. Responsibility For Obtaining License: It shall be the responsibility of a person engaging in business within the city to voluntarily apply for and maintain in full force and effect a valid license. The agents or other representatives of nonresidents who are doing business in this city shall be personally responsible for the compliance of their principals and of the businesses they represent with the terms of this title. (2003 Code)
E. Application For License: The application shall be made to the license officer on a form provided by the city and shall contain the following information: 1) business name; 2) general description of business to be engaged in; 3) business mailing address and telephone number; 4) owner’s name, residence address and phone number; 5) tax number and licensing information, and such other information as the license officer may deem reasonable and necessary; and 6) applicant shall sign a statement that says:By submitting a signed application, applicant certifies that the business does not and will not during the licensing period knowingly employ, or subcontract with any entity which employs workers in violation of 8 USC § 1324a.
By signing, the applicant acknowledges that the applicant has read, understands, and agrees to comply with the requirements of federal and state law regarding eligibility of workers. (Ord. 2008-11-001, 11-6-2008)
F. Separate License For Branch Establishment: A separate license must be obtained for each branch established or each separate place of business in which the business activities of a licensee are carried on, except that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business licensed under the provisions of this title shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments.
G. Nature And Location Of Business To Be Specified: Each license shall authorize the person obtaining it to carry on, pursue or conduct only that type of general business described in the license and only at the location which is indicated thereon. The carrying on of a different type of general business activity shall require issuance of a separate license, and carrying on of the business at a location different from that indicated on the license shall be considered a branch establishment and require a separate license.
H. Joint License: A person engaged in two (2) or more businesses at the same location may be required to obtain separate licenses for conducting each of such businesses, but, in the discretion of the license officer, when such businesses are complementary, a single license may be issued which shall specify on its face all such businesses operated at that location. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the city from requiring that a person obtaining a license under chapter 3 of this title for the sale of beer must obtain both the applicable business license required by this chapter and the beer license required by chapter 3 of this title. (2003 Code)

3-1-5: LICENSE OFFICER:
The license officer shall issue licenses in the name of the city to all persons qualified under the provisions of this title and shall remit all license fees collected to the city treasurer. All information furnished to or secured by the license officer under the authority of this title shall be subject to the provisions of the Utah Government Records Access and Management Act, Utah Code Annotated section 63-2-101 et seq. The license officer shall have the power to:
A. Adopt Forms: Adopt all forms and prescribe the information required therein as to all matters relevant for the issuance of a license hereunder.
B. Investigate: Investigate, or cause the applicant or licensee to be investigated, and determine the eligibility of any applicant or licensee either at the time of issuance of a license or at any time after its issuance in such manner as may be reasonable and necessary for the proper administration and enforcement of this title. In the case of persons licensed by an agency of the state, verification of such licensure may suffice without further inquiry into the qualifications.
C. Inspection Of Premises And Records: Inspect, or cause to be inspected, prospective or existing places of business to ensure compliance with building, safety and health codes, and inspect books and records of any applicant or licensee to determine the number of employees, or any other information reasonably necessary to the administration and enforcement of this title; provided, that all such inspections shall be at reasonable times, upon advance notice to the applicant or licensee, and in full compliance with all laws affecting the right to inspect.
D. Reserved: 
E. Reserved: 
F. Good Standing Of Applicant Or Licensee: Require that the applicant or licensee not be in default or violation of the provisions of any city ordinance, nor indebted nor obligated in any manner to the city or the utilities operated by it, to not be in violation of any city zoning regulations by reason of the condition of business premises or the use to be made thereof.
G. Require Affidavits: Require, when considered necessary in the discretion of the license officer, affidavits regarding the license history of the applicant indicating whether such person, in previous business operations in this or another state, has had a business license revoked or suspended, together with the reasons therefor; to require a criminal history of the applicant or licensee when determined by the license officer to be necessary and desirable.
H. Require Financial Records: Require a person doing business in the city to produce for inspection financial records, including applicable tax records, as proof that said business has gross sales of less than three thousand dollars ($3,000.00). (2003 Code; amd. Ord. 2019-01-005 § 2, 1-3-2019)

3-1-6: RECEIPT IN LIEU OF LICENSE; LIMITATIONS:
In the event the license officer has not completed any of the steps set forth in section 3-1-5 of this chapter that appear necessary at the time the applicant or licensee pays for a license or renewal thereof, the city treasurer may issue a receipt for the money paid but it shall not be construed as the approval of the license officer for the issuance of a license, nor shall it entitle or authorize the applicant or licensee to open or maintain any business until such time as the license itself has been issued. (2003 Code)

3-1-7: FEES, RATES AND CHARGES:
A. Due And Payable: All license fees shall be paid in advance at the office of the city treasurer. Annual license fees shall be due and payable the day after the expiration date on the license. The license fee of any business commenced for its first year in business six (6) months or later into the license year, shall be reduced by one-half (1/2). (Ord. 2018-02-008, 2-1-2018)
B. Levied; Exemptions: 
    1. General Business License Fee: The license fee for all businesses shall be in such amount as established by resolution of the city council, together with a fee per year for each person more than one employed by or engaged in such business, not to exceed, however, an annual amount as established by resolution of the city council annually. The additional employee fee shall be reduced as established by resolution of the city council for each part time employee. The number of employees, and their status as full time or part time, shall be verified by an applicant or licensee through submission of payroll records to the license officer upon reasonable request.
    2. Applicability: The general business license fee shall apply to all businesses except for those specifically noted as exempt from such fee and those specifically covered in subsequent chapters of this title, and the fee for such licenses shall be determined in accordance with the specific sections pertaining to their specific business.
    3. Exemptions: Those businesses having gross sales of less than three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) a year and nonprofit enterprises shall be exempt from the payment of a fee in connection with licenses issued to them. The word “nonprofit” shall mean a business in which no part of the revenue produced from its activity is distributable or intended to be distributable to its owners, members or operators, unless such owner or operator shall be a religious or eleemosynary institution. (2003 Code)
C. Late Penalty: A license application renewal which is not submitted until sixty (60) days after its due date shall pay a late fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city council.
D. Year End Fee Adjustment: If an applicant or licensee discovers by the end of any license year that the number of employees utilized by him at the beginning of that license year to determine the amount of license fee payable was an improper estimate, and the business did in fact during the year employ more or less persons than the number used as a basis for that fee, an amended application for that year shall be filed within thirty (30) days after the expiration of that license year’s license setting forth the actual number of employees during that license year just completed, and the license fee already paid shall be adjusted in accordance with the amended application. The license officer shall have the right to verify through inspection of the business payroll and personnel records the accuracy of any amended application.
E. Rebate Of Fee: No rebate or refund of any license fee or part thereof shall be made by reason of the non-use of such license or by reason of a change of location or type of business rendering the use of such license ineffective, except in the following instances:
    1. When a license fee is collected in error;
    2. When a licensee has been prevented from enjoying the full license term due to death or physical incapacity to engage in business;
    3. When a licensee is rendered unable to conduct business because he has entered the armed services of the United States; or
    4. When the licensed business is destroyed by fire or other casualty through no fault of the licensee. In the event of the applicability of an exception, the rebate shall be reduced by one-half (1/2) if the cause for the exception occurred six (6) months after the issuance of the license for that license year. (Ord. 2018-02-008, 2-1-2018)

3-1-8: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
The applicant for renewal of a license shall submit an application for renewal of such license to the license officer on such form as that officer may direct, and shall disclose thereon such information concerning the conduct and operation of such licensee’s business during the preceding licensing period as may be reasonably required by the license officer and may be reasonably necessary for determination of the licensee’s eligibility for a renewal license and possible adjustment of the license fee. Unless otherwise notified by the licensee, the license officer is entitled to presume the continued operation of any business licensed in the preceding year. (2003 Code)

3-1-9: DOING BUSINESS PREVIOUSLY WITHOUT A LICENSE:
In the event it is discovered that any applicant for a new business license has done business in the city during a previous year without a proper license as required by this or a previous city ordinance, the license officer shall not issue a license to such applicant for the current year until and unless said applicant pays to the city the license fee which would have been applicable for his business during the preceding year when the applicant failed to apply and obtain such license, together with a penalty in such amount as established by resolution of the city council for such preceding year that would be payable pursuant to the provisions of subsection 3-1-7C of this chapter. (2003 Code)

3-1-10: DISPLAY OF LICENSE REQUIRED:
Every licensee shall display and exhibit the license while the same is in force in some conspicuous part of the premises where business activities are conducted. Every licensee not having a fixed place of business shall carry the license with him at all times while carrying on the business for which the license is issued, producing the same for inspection when requested to do so by any person at a reasonable time. When a license has been lost, stolen, defaced or destroyed, without any willful conduct on the part of the licensee, upon the filing by licensee of an affidavit sworn to before a notary public of this state attesting to such fact and paying to the license officer a fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city council, a duplicate license shall be issued by such officer. (2003 Code)

3-1-11: TRANSFERABILITY:
A business license issued hereunder shall not be transferable to a new owner of any licensed business, or to a new entity owning or operating such business wherein the previous licensee is not the owner of a majority interest in the new entity. An existing license may be transferred from one location to another, where the business is operated at a fixed location, only after obtaining approval of the license officer, having a new license issued indicating the new location, and paying an additional fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city council. The license officer shall not approve the transfer of a license to a new location operated by the same licensee where the basic type of business in which the licensee shall engage is changed from the former business. Upon the termination of business, the expiration of a license year, or the revocation of a license, the previous license permit shall be destroyed or surrendered to the license officer. (2003 Code)

3-1-12: ACCEPTANCE OF CONDITIONS; CONSENT TO INSPECTIONS:
As a condition of his right to do business in the city, each applicant and licensee accepts all regulations and provisions of the ordinances of the city as they may apply to any aspect of the applicant or licensee’s business and agrees to comply with the same. The applicant or licensee shall permit all lawful and reasonable inspections of business operations and premises as provided hereunder for the purpose of ascertaining such compliance with the laws and regulations of the city in areas of health, fire prevention, safety and consumer protection, together with such examination of his business books and records as may be necessary to ascertain the number of employees and other basis for determining the payment of fees hereunder. (2003 Code)

3-1-13: INSURANCE:
Where the license officer deems it necessary and advisable, the license officer may require the applicant or licensee to maintain casualty or liability insurance in an amount and of a nature to be prescribed during all periods that the licensee engages in business in the city in order to afford adequate protection to those who patronize such business, and an applicant or licensee accepts such requirement as a further condition of the licensee’s right to do business in the city. (2003 Code)

3-1-14: SURETY; CASH OR BOND:
A. In connection with the issuance of a license to any of those businesses not regulated by the state, the posting of a cash or corporate surety bond shall be required in addition to the regular license fee otherwise required. Such bond may be waived where the applicant is the owner of real property in the city with an equity valued in excess of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), or where the license officer determines that a bond is not necessary in light of the type of business being conducted and its history in the community. In the event of a surety bond, the bond shall indemnify and run to the city and any person injured or damaged through dealing with said licensee, their employees or agents, and shall be in full force and effect for the term of the license issued. It shall be conditioned on the fact that the bonded licensee will fully comply with all of the provisions of the ordinances of the city and the statutes of the state regulating and concerning the conduct of the business contemplated, will not practice any fraud, deceit or make any material misrepresentation of fact with reference to merchandise or services sold, and will pay all damages which may be sustained by any person by reason of any fraud, deceit, negligence or wrongful act on the part of the licensee, his agents or employees. The amount of the bond shall be determined by the city license officer in an amount not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor more than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), depending upon the background of the applicant, the nature of the business to be conducted, the regulatory duties to be imposed upon various city departments, the opportunity to defraud consumers that may be inherent in the type of business undertaken, or any combination of these. Action on such bond may be brought in the name of the city for its own benefit, to the use or benefit of the aggrieved person injured by the negligent, willful, malicious or wrongful act of the principal, agent, servant or employee in the conduct of a licensed business. (Ord. 1-1-1987, 1-18-1987)
B. Upon surrender or expiration of the license, the bond shall be refunded or exonerated, providing there does not exist a violation of city or state law and that no aggrieved person has made claim thereon. For purposes of making determination of the existence of violations or aggrieved parties, the city license officer may delay refunding or exonerating the bond for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days following the surrender or expiration of the license. In the event of a revocation of a license, the city license officer shall have the option of retaining all or any part of the bond for the purposes herein set out. (Ord. 11-21-1985, 11-21-1985)

3-1-15: EXPIRATION OF LICENSE:
All business licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year, except licenses required pursuant to section 4-7-3 shall expire on June 30 of each year. (Ord. 2006-09-005, 9-21-2006)

3-1-16: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2018-02-008, 2-1-2018)

3-1-17: SUBLICENSE BUSINESS ACTIVITIES:
Where a licensee provides facilities for lease by others who intend to vend a product or carry on a business of a type different from that of the licensee, a sublicense shall be obtained by each such lessee of facilities in advance of doing business in the city for purposes of registration and accountability. An application shall be prepared containing the identity of the owner of the business, the identity of the operator of the business, the permanent or home address of the vendor, a driver’s license number if the lessee is not already holder of a business license at another location within the city, tax number, and the nature of business and type of goods or services to be merchandised. The license officer may request copies of sales material or other information pertaining to the sublicensee and its business to supplement the application if it is necessary and reasonable to do so. Applications shall be submitted, together with the appropriate fee, through the licensee, and each such lessee shall then become a sublicensee for the purposes stated in the submitted application only. A sublicense for five (5) days or less, or a sublicense for thirty (30) days, shall be in such amount as established by resolution of the city council. In either case, a license shall expire subject to renewal at the end of the period specified. Issuance and renewal of sublicenses shall be subject to all the provisions of this chapter and may be refused in the discretion of the license officer if it appears that the sublicensee intends to operate a business for more than three (3) months, in which event the regular licensing requirements shall apply. (Ord. 12-2-1990, 12-13-1990; amd. 2003 Code)

3-1-18: CRIMINAL HISTORY CHECKS:
Wherever in this title there is a requirement for review of the criminal history of an applicant for a license or an employee of such applicant, the consent and authorization of such individual for a criminal history check shall be provided on an authorization form supplied by the city attorney. After request by the license officer, no license, permit, certification or approval shall thereafter be issued until such consent and authorization is provided and the criminal history check is completed, and the individual shall be so advised. A reasonable fee may be charged by the police department for checking criminal history, and such amount shall be remitted along with the authorization provided for herein. Any individual shall have the right to refuse such authorization, but in that event the city shall not be required to issue the license, permit or certificate requested by the individual or his employer. (Ord. 3-2-1991, 3-21-1991)

3-1-19: DENIAL, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OF A BUSINESS OR ALCOHOL LICENSE:
A. Reasons For Denial, Suspension, Or Revocation Of A Business Or Alcohol License: After a person has made application to, or has obtained from, the city a business or alcohol license, the application or license may be denied, suspended or revoked for any of the following reasons:
    1. Does not meet the qualifications for a licensee as provided under this title;
    2. For a new application, nonpayment of a returned check for the required license fees at the time the application is made. For a license renewal application, nonpayment of the required license fees plus penalty three (3) months after it is due;
    3. One (1) of the reviewing departments or divisions of the city has disapproved the application pursuant to any applicable provision of the city code;
    4. False or incomplete information given on the application or renewal form;
    5. Noncompliance with any requirement or condition set by the city;
    6. Noncompliance with any city, state or federal statutes or any health department regulations governing the applicant/licensee’s business;
    7. The license was obtained by deceit, fraud or misrepresentation or other crime;
    8. The applicant/licensee is more than sixty (60) days past due on any debt owed to the city;
    9. The applicant/licensee has refused authorized representatives of the city to make an inspection or has interfered with such representatives while in the performance of such inspection;
    10. Violation of this title by the agents or employees of a licensee and violations of any other laws by the agents or employees committed while acting as an agent or employee of the licensee;
    11. The licensee attempts to, or does, assign, transfer or sell a license in violation of this chapter; or
    12. Any other reason expressly provided for in this title.
B. Enforcement: 
    1. Authority: The license officer may, without a hearing, deny, suspend or revoke a license for the reasons provided in this title. However, if a license is suspended or revoked, the suspension or revocation shall not take effect until the time for appealing the decision has passed.
    2. Provedure For Denial, Suspension Or Revocation: The license officer shall cause written notice to be personally served upon the person affected or deposited in the United States mail addressed to the address provided to the business license office by the licensee, which shall advise the licensee of the specific violation, that the license has been denied, suspended or revoked, the licensee’s right to appeal the licensing officer’s decision and have a hearing and the appeal procedure. For suspensions and revocations, the notice shall include that operation of the business after the effective date is a Class “B” misdemeanor.
    3. Appeal Procedure: Appeals of the license officer’s decision may be made by filing a written notice of appeal with the license officer within ten (10) calendar days after personal service or mailing of the notice. The written notice of appeal shall set forth with specificity the reasons why the applicant/licensee believes the denial, suspension or revocation was in error and how the applicant/licensee is in compliance with all requirements in this title. If an appeal is filed, the suspension or revocation shall not take effect until after the time for appealing the decision of the hearing officer has expired. If an appeal is withdrawn, the suspension or revocation shall take effect immediately.
    4. Hearing: 
        a. The license officer shall schedule the hearing as soon as possible but no later than thirty (30) days after receipt of the notice of appeal, then advise the licensee of the hearing date.
        b. A hearing officer, designated by the city manager, shall hear the appeal. The following rules shall apply to the hearing:
            (1) The hearing shall be recorded.
            (2) The city shall present the reasons for the decision to deny, suspend or revoke the license.
            (3) The applicant/licensee, in person or through an attorney, may present evidence to show why the decision was in error.
            (4) All witnesses shall be sworn to testify truthfully.
            (5) Both parties are entitled to cross-examine the witnesses.
            (6) The hearing shall be informal and the rules of evidence shall not apply.
            (7) Hearsay evidence shall be admissible. The hearing officer shall determine the weight given to the hearsay evidence.
            (8) All privileged, irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded.
            (9) The hearing officer does not have the authority to waive compliance with applicable provisions of the ordinances or change the substance or form of the ordinances.
        c. The hearing officer, after hearing all the evidence, shall make a factual determination, based on the preponderance of the evidence, whether the alleged grounds for enforcement have been proven. The decision shall be rendered in writing within fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of the hearing. The hearing officer may either affirm or reverse the decision of the licensing officer or modify the order of the licensing officer. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final for purposes of appeal.
    5. Appeal Of Hearing Officer’s Decision: Either party may file a petition with the district court for review of the decision. The petition must be filed within thirty (30) calendar days after the decision is rendered. The district court’s review is limited to the record of the decision that is being appealed. The court shall not accept or consider any evidence that is not part of the record of that decision. The district court shall presume that the hearing officer’s decision and orders are valid and review the record to determine whether or not the decision was arbitrary, capricious, or illegal.
C. Civil Suit: The city attorney may institute a civil suit to enjoin the operation of any business being operated without the license required hereunder, or he may seek the criminal sanctions provided in section 3-1-21.
D. State Law Applicability: Enforcement provisions hereunder shall not apply to any aspect of regulation where enforcement is preempted by state law. (2003 Code; amd. Ord. 2019-01-005 § 2, 1-3-2019)

3-1-20: LICENSING AFTER REVOCATION:
No person whose license has been revoked under the provisions of this title shall be granted a license under the provisions of this title for a period of six (6) months following such revocation. (2003 Code; amd. Ord. 2019-01-005 § 2, 1-3-2019)

3-1-21: PENALTY:
Violations of any of the licensing provisions of this title shall constitute a Class B misdemeanor and shall be prosecuted under Utah Code Annotated section 76-8-410. (Ord. 2018-02-008, 2-1-2018)

CHAPTER 2 SPECIAL BUSINESS REQUIREMENTS


3-2-1:       Classification Of Business; Hearing
3-2-2:       Bond Required
3-2-3:       Commercial Activities; Bond Or Other Conditions
2A           Exhibitions, Concerts And Performers
    3-2A-1:      Applicability
    3-2A-2:      Fee For License; Exemptions
    3-2A-3:      License Requirements
    3-2A-4:      Public Dance Halls
2B           Residential Solicitation
    3-2B-1:      Purpose
    3-2B-2:      Definitions
    3-2B-3:      No Other City License Or Approval Required
    3-2B-4:      Exemptions From Article
    3-2B-5:      Solicitation Prohibited
    3-2B-6:      Registration Of Solicitors
    3-2B-7:      Application Form
    3-2B-8:      Written Disclosures
    3-2B-9:      When Registration Begins
    3-2B-10:     Issuance Of Certificates
    3-2B-11:     Form Of Certificate And Identification Badge
    3-2B-12:     Maintenance Of Registry
    3-2B-13:     Nontransferability Of Certificates
    3-2B-14:     Denial, Suspension Or Revocation Of A Certificate Of Registration
    3-2B-15:     Appeal
    3-2B-16:     Deceptive Soliciting Practices Prohibited
    3-2B-17:     “No Solicitation” Notice
    3-2B-18:     Duties Of Solicitors
    3-2B-19:     Time Of Day Restrictions
    3-2B-20:     Buyer’s Right To Cancel
    3-2B-21:     Penalties
2C           Occult Art Practitioners
    3-2C-1:      Applicability
    3-2C-2:      Fee For License
    3-2C-3:      License Requirements
2D           Pawnbrokers, Swap Meets, Secondhand and Precious Metals/Gem Dealers
    3-2D-1:      Applicability
    3-2D-2:      Definitions
    3-2D-3:      Fee For License
    3-2D-4:      Operational Requirements
    3-2D-5:      Failure To Comply; Enforcement
2E           Amusement Devices And Businesses
    3-2E-1:      Applicability
    3-2E-2:      Fee For License
    3-2E-3:      License Requirements
    3-2E-4:      Operational Requirements
    3-2E-5:      Pool Halls
2F           Ambulances
    3-2F-1:      Definitions
    3-2F-2:      Applicability
    3-2F-3:      Operational Requirements
    3-2F-4:      Personnel
    3-2F-5:      Facilities
    3-2F-6:      Ambulance Requirements
    3-2F-7:      Response Time Performance
    3-2F-8:      Customer Service Performance
    3-2F-9:      Annual Report
    3-2F-10:     Dispatch Communications Agreement
    3-2F-11:     Enforcement, Appeals And Penalties
2G           Christmas Tree Businesses
    3-2G-1:      Definitions
    3-2G-2:      Business Requirements
    3-2G-3:      Unlawful To Possess Or Sell Untagged Trees
    3-2G-4:      Application For License
    3-2G-5:      Zoning Requirements
    3-2G-6:      Fee For License
    3-2G-7:      Clean Up Deposit
2H           Junk Dealers And Junkyards
    3-2H-1:      Applicability
    3-2H-2:      Fee For License
    3-2H-3:      Operational Requirements
2I           Billboard Advertising
    3-2I-1:      Applicability; Fee For License
2J           Mini Storage Rentals
    3-2J-1:      Applicability; Fee For License
2K           Massage Establishments
    3-2K-1:      Definitions
    3-2K-2:      Business License Required
    3-2K-3:      Qualifications Of Licensee
    3-2K-4:      Prohibited Acts
    3-2K-5:      Display Of License
2L           Private Investigators
    3-2L-1:      License Required
    3-2L-2:      Exception To License Requirement
    3-2L-3:      Application For License
    3-2L-4:      Bond Required
    3-2L-5:      Fee For License
    3-2L-6:      License Not Issued To Certain Persons
    3-2L-7:      Identification Card Carried By Licensee
    3-2L-8:      License Nontransferable
    3-2L-9:      False Representation Prohibited
    3-2L-10:     Impersonations
2M           Employment Agencies
    3-2M-1:      Defined
    3-2M-2:      Licensed Premises
    3-2M-3:      Utah Industrial Commission License
    3-2M-4:      Time Limit For Issuance Of License
    3-2M-5:      Bond Required
    3-2M-6:      Referrals On Bona Fide Orders Only
    3-2M-7:      Taking Commission In Advance Unlawful
    3-2M-8:      Commission Returned If Employment Not Secured
    3-2M-9:      Schedule Of Fees; Limitations
    3-2M-10:     Register Of Employers
    3-2M-11:     Register Of Applicants
    3-2M-12:     Statement Furnished To Applicants
    3-2M-13:     Dividing Of Fees Prohibited
    3-2M-14:     Religious Or Charitable Associations Excepted
    3-2M-15:     Copies Of Law Posted
    3-2M-16:     Violations; Penalty
2N           Collection Agencies
    3-2N-1:      Applicability
    3-2N-2:      Attorneys, Banks And Trust Companies Excepted
2O           For Hire Vehicle Services
    3-2O-1:      Defined
    3-2O-2:      Application Information
    3-2O-3:      Maintenance Of For Hire Vehicle
    3-2O-4:      Distinctive Color Scheme
    3-2O-5:      Insurance Required
    3-2O-6:      For-Hire Driver’s Permit
    3-2O-7:      Form And Terms Of Permit
    3-2O-8:      Display Of Permit
    3-2O-9:      Rates And Fares
    3-2O-10:     Rules, Regulations And Requirements
    3-2O-11:     Intoxicating Liquors
    3-2O-12:     Revocation Or Suspension Of License
    3-2O-13:     Penalty
2P           Motels
    3-2P-1:      Definitions
    3-2P-2:      Applicability
    3-2P-3:      Operational Requirements
    3-2P-4:      Advertisement Of Rates
    3-2P-5:      Penalty
2Q           Locksmith Services
    3-2Q-1:      Definitions
    3-2Q-2:      Rights Of License
    3-2Q-3:      Application Information
    3-2Q-4:      Police Investigation
    3-2Q-5:      Bond Required
    3-2Q-6:      License Records
    3-2Q-7:      Exceptions
2R           Mobile Catering Units
    3-2R-1:      Applicability
    3-2R-2:      Exceptions
    3-2R-3:      Portable Facility Defined
    3-2R-4:      Operational Requirements
    3-2R-5:      Revocation; Penalty
2S           Septic Tank Pumpers
    3-2S-1:      Applicability
    3-2S-2:      Fee For License
    3-2S-3:      License Requirements
2T           Mail Delivery Agencies
    3-2T-1:      Applicability
    3-2T-2:      Operational Requirements
2U           Towing Services
    3-2U-1:      Definitions
    3-2U-2:      License Requirements
    3-2U-3:      Display Of Licenses And Certificate
    3-2U-4:      Rotation
    3-2U-5:      City Impounds
2V           Short Term Residential Rental Properties
    3-2V-1:      License And Operational Requirements

3-2-1: CLASSIFICATION OF BUSINESS; HEARING:
A. Application: In the event the license officer determines that a business falls within one of the categories set forth in this chapter, an applicant may contest such classification by the officer by submitting with the application a written request for hearing as to the propriety of the classification. The business license officer shall submit any request for hearing so received to the city council, and the city council shall notify such applicant in writing that on a day and at a time and place therein specified, the city council shall take up for hearing the question as to whether said classification is proper or not, at which time and place the applicant may appear and be heard.
B. Determination; Order: At the time and place named in said notice, the city council shall take up the matter and determine said question upon the facts presented to it, and it shall enter an order according to its judgment upon the facts so presented. If it shall be determined that the classification is proper, the applicant shall comply as requested by the business license officer. If the city council determines that the classification is improper, the business license officer shall accept a new application under a general business classification or other specific classification. (2003 Code)

3-2-2: BOND REQUIRED:
A. Required: All businesses under this chapter shall be subject to the bonding requirements as described in section 3-1-14 of this title.
B. Objection: In the event an applicant or licensee for whom a bond is required because of any of the classifications referred to herein shall object to the size of such bond, the applicant or licensee may request a hearing before the city council as to the amount of bond set by the business license officer in like manner as set forth in section 3-2-1 of this chapter, and the city council shall either approve the bond as set by the business license officer or reconsider the amount of the bond required. (2003 Code)

3-2-3: COMMERCIAL ACTIVITIES; BOND OR OTHER CONDITIONS:
Any commercial activity listed in this chapter or any other activity which is determined by the chief of police, the fire chief, or the business license officer to have a higher than average risk of potential harm to public safety or welfare, or risk of potential consumer fraud, either because of the nature of the activity, its location or past experience with similar activities, may be required to operate under a license providing for a bond and other reasonable conditions limiting conduct of the licensed activity. Where it is found that the commercial activity is likely to result in violation of a state law or city ordinance, the business license officer may refuse to issue a business license. Any actions of the license officer under the provisions of this section may be appealed in the manner provided in section 3-2-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 10-3-1989, 10-19-1989)

ARTICLE A. EXHIBITIONS, CONCERTS AND PERFORMERS


3-2A-1:      Applicability
3-2A-2:      Fee For License; Exemptions
3-2A-3:      License Requirements
3-2A-4:      Public Dance Halls

3-2A-1: APPLICABILITY:
Any individual or group putting on performances, exhibitions, concerts or other entertainment activities for which a fee is charged, either to the public or to the hiring entity, including, but not limited to, musical aggregations, circuses, carnivals, rodeos, fight promoters, racing promoters, displays and exhibitions, live shows and entertainers of any kind, shall obtain a license. (2003 Code)

3-2A-2: FEE FOR LICENSE; EXEMPTIONS:
A. Required: All individuals or groups coming under this article shall pay a license fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city council for each twenty-four (24) hour period during which they present a public performance, concert or exhibition. If the group to be entertained consists of more than three hundred (300) persons, based upon seating capacity, number of tickets sold, or any other reasonable criteria, the license fee shall be in such amount as established by resolution of the city council for each twenty-four (24) hour period in which exhibitions, concerts or performances are presented.
B. Exemptions: No fee shall be required for the license issued to any person or group in this category which is raising funds exclusively for religious or charitable purposes. (2003 Code)

3-2A-3: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
The applicant shall disclose to the license officer prior to the issuance of a license the exact location of the proposed exhibition, concert or performance, together with the number of admissions anticipated or available for sale. Permission shall then be given for inspection prior to the issuance of such business license to satisfy the license officer that the said location complies with all applicable laws and meets those standards of public health, safety and general welfare which are deemed necessary in light of the potential number of spectators and type of performance. Such inspection shall include, but not be limited to, seating, lighting, ventilation, exits, parking and proximity of residences that could be affected. If applicable, inspection required hereby may extend to and include bleachers, Ferris wheels and other temporary structures or equipment to be operated in connection with the exhibition, concert or performance. Further, if the business activity referred to herein extends over a period of more than one day, the rights of inspection conferred herein shall be made at reasonable intervals thereafter. The licensee shall provide at its own expense such private security as may be deemed necessary to properly enforce the provisions of this article or the ordinances of the city. The license officer may require information relative to the applicant’s moral character, reputation, felony or misdemeanor convictions involving moral turpitude, and prior business experience, in addition to any other information normally required from an applicant. (2003 Code)

3-2A-4: PUBLIC DANCE HALLS:
A. Defined: The term “public dance,” as used in this section, shall include any dance to which admission is charged, directly or indirectly, including the sale of a service or product at a cost in excess of the competitive market value of such service or product, or the sale of a membership for which the primary benefit is admission to dances. Dances held in a tavern or restaurant shall be considered “public dances” for the purpose of this section when dancing is permitted or sponsored on such premises as an inducement to the public to utilize the restaurant or tavern facilities. All public dance halls shall be open at all times to the visit, inspection or supervision of any executive or peace officer of the city, and an application for license hereunder shall be deemed permission for any such officer to enter the premises to make reasonable inspection thereof.
B. Requirements: No license for a public dance hall shall be issued until the applicable requirements of section 3-2A-3 of this article have been complied with, and the location of the dance hall shall have been approved by the city council. Compliance with the following requirements shall be conditions of such license:
    1. It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining a public dance hall, or having control thereof, to permit any dance or dancing or the playing of music for a public dance between the hours of one o’clock (1:00) A.M. and six o’clock (6:00) A.M. of the following day, except for Sunday when the same shall not be permitted between the hour of one o’clock (1:00) A.M. and six o’clock (6:00) A.M. the following Monday.
    2. Any person leaving the dance hall shall be required to pay the regular admission fee in order to regain readmittance again to the same dance.
    3. Unnecessary loud playing, use or operation of any radio, musical instrument, band, audio equipment or other device for the production or reproduction of sound for dancing purposes shall be unlawful, and such musical sounds shall be considered unnecessarily loud if they can be heard distinctly more than one hundred feet (100') from the building or structure wherein the dance is operated. It shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of the noise standard if all or any portion of the music sounds, such as the bass rhythm, can be heard distinctly outside the said distance limit.
    4. It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining or having control of a public dance hall to allow or permit an intoxicated or disorderly person to enter, be upon, or remain within such hall. The licensee shall be required to provide adequate security personnel at all times the dance hall is open to the public, and such personnel shall be over the age of twenty-one (21) years and shall not have been convicted of an offense involving alcohol or moral turpitude during the period of such employment or within two (2) years prior to their employment. Persons employed as such security personnel shall either be private security officers licensed by the state or shall be approved by the chief of police. (Ord. 5-1-1990, 5-10-1990)

ARTICLE B. RESIDENTIAL SOLICITATION


3-2B-1:      Purpose
3-2B-2:      Definitions
3-2B-3:      No Other City License Or Approval Required
3-2B-4:      Exemptions From Article
3-2B-5:      Solicitation Prohibited
3-2B-6:      Registration Of Solicitors
3-2B-7:      Application Form
3-2B-8:      Written Disclosures
3-2B-9:      When Registration Begins
3-2B-10:     Issuance Of Certificates
3-2B-11:     Form Of Certificate And Identification Badge
3-2B-12:     Maintenance Of Registry
3-2B-13:     Nontransferability Of Certificates
3-2B-14:     Denial, Suspension Or Revocation Of A Certificate Of Registration
3-2B-15:     Appeal
3-2B-16:     Deceptive Soliciting Practices Prohibited
3-2B-17:     “No Solicitation” Notice
3-2B-18:     Duties Of Solicitors
3-2B-19:     Time Of Day Restrictions
3-2B-20:     Buyer’s Right To Cancel
3-2B-21:     Penalties

3-2B-1: PURPOSE:
Residents of the city have an inalienable interest in their personal safety, well being, and privacy in their residences, as well as their ability to provide or receive information regarding matters of personal belief, political or charitable activities, and goods and services lawfully in commerce. The city has a substantial interest in protecting the well being, tranquility, personal safety, and privacy of its citizens, which includes the ability to protect citizens from unwanted intrusions upon residential property. The city also has a substantial interest in protecting citizens from fraud or otherwise unfair consumer sales practices as well as criminal activity.
There must be a balance between these substantial interests of the city and its citizens, and the effect of the regulations in this article on the rights of those who are regulated. Based on the collective experiences of city officials derived from regulating business activity, protecting persons and property from criminal conduct, responding to the inquiries of citizens regarding door to door solicitation, the experience of its law enforcement officers and those affected by door to door canvassing and solicitation, as well as judicial decisions outlining the boundaries of constitutional protections afforded and denied persons seeking to engage in door to door solicitation, the city adopts this article to promote the city’s substantial interests in:
A. Respecting citizens’ decisions regarding privacy in their residences;
B. Protecting persons from criminal conduct;
C. Providing equal opportunity to advocate for and against religious belief, political position, or charitable activities; and
D. Permitting truthful and nonmisleading door-to-door solicitation regarding lawful goods or services in intrastate or interstate commerce.
The city finds that the procedures, rules and regulations set forth in this article are narrowly tailored to preserve and protect the city interests referred to herein while at the same time balancing the rights of those regulated. (Ord. 2006-09-003, 9-7-2006)

3-2B-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
ADVOCATING: Speech or conduct intended to inform, promote, or support religious belief, political position, or charitable activities.
APPEALS OFFICER: The city council or designee of the city responsible for receiving the information from the city and appellant regarding the denial or suspension of a certificate and issuing a decision as required by this article.
APPELLANT: The person or entity appealing the denial or suspension of a certificate, either personally as an applicant or registered solicitor, or on behalf of the applicant or registered solicitor.
APPLICANT: An individual who is at least sixteen (16) years of age and not a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or other lawful entity who applies for a certificate permitting door to door solicitation.
APPLICATION FORM: A standardized form provided by the city to an applicant to be completed and submitted as part of registration.
BCI: An original or copy, dated no older than one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the date of the application, of either: a) a Utah Department of Public Safety Bureau of Criminal Identification verified criminal history report personal to the applicant; or b) verification by the Utah Department of Public Safety Bureau of Criminal Identification that no criminal history rising to the level of a disqualifying status exists for the applicant.
BUSINESS: A commercial enterprise licensed by the city as a person or entity under this title, having a fixed or temporary physical location within the city.
CERTIFICATE: A temporary, annual, or renewal certificate permitting door to door solicitation in the city applied for or issued pursuant to the terms of this article.
CHARITABLE ACTIVITIES: Advocating by persons or entities that either are, or support, a charitable organization.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION: Includes any person, joint venture, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, association, group, or other entity:
    A. That is:
        1. A benevolent, educational, voluntary health, philanthropic, humane, patriotic, religious or eleemosynary, social welfare or advocacy, public health, environmental or conservation, or civic organization;
        2. For the benefit of a public safety, law enforcement, or firefighter fraternal association; or
        3. Established for any charitable purpose; and
    B. That is tax exempt under applicable provisions of the internal revenue code of 1986, as amended, and qualified to solicit and receive tax deductible contributions from the public for charitable purposes.
    C. Charitable organization includes a chapter, branch, area, or office, or similar affiliate or any person soliciting contributions within the state for a charitable organization that has its principal place of business outside the city or state of Utah1.
COMPETENT INDIVIDUAL: A person claiming or appearing to be at least eighteen (18) years of age and of sufficiently sound mind and body to be able to engage in rational thought, conversation, and conduct.
COMPLETED APPLICATION: A fully completed application form, a BCI, two (2) copies of the original identification relied on by the applicant to establish proof of identity, and the tendering of fees.
CRIMINALLY CONVICTED: The final entry of a conviction, whether by a plea of no contest, guilty, entry of a judicial or jury finding of guilt, which has not been set aside on appeal or pursuant to a writ of habeas corpus. The criminal conviction is that offense of which the applicant or registered solicitor was convicted, without regard to the reduced status of the charge after completion of conditions of probation or parole, and charges dismissed under a plea in abeyance or diversion agreement.
DISQUALIFYING STATUS: Anything specifically defined in this article as requiring the denial or suspension of a certificate, and any of the following:
    A. The applicant or registered solicitor has been criminally convicted of: 1) felony homicide, 2) physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting a minor, 3) the sale or distribution of controlled substances, or 4) sexual assault of any kind;
    B. Criminal charges are currently pending against the applicant or registered solicitor for: 1) felony homicide, 2) physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting a minor, 3) the sale or distribution of controlled substances, or 4) sexual assault of any kind;
    C. The applicant or registered solicitor has been criminally convicted of a felony within the last ten (10) years;
    D. The applicant or registered solicitor has been incarcerated in a federal or state prison within the past five (5) years;
    E. The applicant or registered solicitor has been criminally convicted of a misdemeanor within the past five (5) years involving a crime of: 1) moral turpitude which includes, but is not limited to: possession of a controlled substance, theft, fraud, falsification in official matters, offenses against privacy, lewdness, and voyeurism or 2) violent or aggravated conduct involving persons or property;
    F. A final civil judgment has been entered against the applicant or registered solicitor within the last five (5) years indicating that: 1) the applicant or registered solicitor had either engaged in fraud, or intentional misrepresentation, or 2) that a debt of the applicant or registered solicitor was nondischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 USC section 523(a)(2), (a)(4), (a)(6), or (a)(19);
    G. The applicant or registered solicitor is currently on parole or probation to any court, penal institution, or governmental entity, including being under house arrest or subject to a tracking device;
    H. The applicant or registered solicitor has an outstanding arrest warrant from any jurisdiction; or
    I. The applicant or registered solicitor is currently subject to a protective order based on physical or sexual abuse issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
DOOR TO DOOR SOLICITATION: The practice of engaging in or attempting to engage in conversation with any person at a residence, whether or not that person is a competent individual, while making or seeking to make or facilitate a home solicitation sale, or attempting to further the sale of goods and/or services.
ENTITY: Includes a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or other lawful entity, organization, society or association.
FEES: The cost charged to the applicant or registered solicitor for the issuance of a certificate and identification badge, which shall not exceed the reasonable costs of processing the application and issuing the certificate and identification badge.
FINAL CIVIL JUDGMENT: A civil judgment that would be recognized under state law as a judgment to which collateral estoppal would apply.
GOODS: One or more tangible items, wares, objects of merchandise, perishables of any kind, subscriptions, or manufactured products offered, provided, or sold.
HOME SOLICITATION SALE: To make or attempt to make a sale of goods or services by a solicitor at a residence by means of door to door solicitation, regardless of:
    A. The means of payment or consideration used for the purchase;
    B. The time of delivery of the goods or services; or
    C. The previous or present classification of the solicitor as a solicitor, peddler, hawker, itinerant merchant, or similar designation.
LICENSING OFFICER: The city employee(s) or agent(s) responsible for receiving from an applicant or registered solicitor the completed application and either granting, suspending, or denying the applicant’s certificate.
NO SOLICITATION SIGN: A reasonably visible and legible sign that states “No Soliciting”, “No Solicitors”, “No Salespersons”, “No Trespassing”, or words of similar import.
POLITICAL POSITION: Any actually held belief, or information for, against, or in conjunction with any political, social, environmental, or humanitarian belief or practice.
REGISTERED SOLICITOR: Any person who has been issued a current certificate by the city.
REGISTRATION: The process used by the city licensing officer to accept a completed application and determine whether or not a certificate will be denied, granted, or suspended.
RELIGIOUS BELIEF: Any sincerely held belief, or information for, against, or in conjunction with, any theistic, agnostic, or atheistic assumption, presumption or position, or religious doctrine, dogma, or practice regardless of whether or not the belief or information is endorsed by any other person or public or private entity.
RESIDENCE: Any living unit contained within any building or structure that is occupied by any person as a dwelling consistent with the zoning laws of the city, together with the lot or other real property on which the living unit is located. This does not include the sidewalk, public street or public right-of-way.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON OR ENTITY: That person or entity responsible to provide the following to an applicant, registered solicitor, and the competent individual in a residence to whom a sale of goods or services is made or attempted to be made by means of a home solicitation sale:
    A. Maintaining a state sales tax number, a special events sales tax number, computing the sales taxes owing from any sale of goods or services, paying the sales taxes, and filing any required returns or reports;
    B. Facilitating and responding to requests from consumers who desire to cancel the sale pursuant to applicable contractual rights or law; and
    C. Refunding any monies paid or reversing credit card charges to those persons who timely rescind any sale pursuant to applicable contractual rights or law.
SALE OF GOODS OR SERVICES: The conduct and agreement of a solicitor and the competent individual in a residence regarding a particular good(s) or service(s) that entitles the consumer to rescind the same within three (3) days under any applicable federal, state, or local law.
SERVICES: Those intangible goods or personal benefits offered, provided, or sold to a competent individual of a residence.
SOLICITING OR SOLICIT OR SOLICITATION: Any of the following activities:
    A. Seeking to obtain sales or orders for the exchange of goods, wares, merchandise or perishables of any kind, for any kind of remuneration or consideration, regardless of whether advance payment is sought.
    B. Seeking to obtain prospective customers to apply for or to purchase insurance, subscriptions to publications, or publications.
    C. Seeking to obtain contributions of money or any other thing of value for the benefit of any person or entity.
    D. Seeking to obtain orders or prospective customers for goods or services.
    E. Seeking to engage an individual in conversation at a residence for the purpose of promoting or facilitating the receipt of information regarding religious belief, political position, charitable conduct, or a home solicitation sale.
    F. Other activities falling within the commonly accepted definition of soliciting, such as hawking or peddling.
SOLICITOR OR SOLICITORS: A person(s) engaged in door to door solicitation.
SUBMITTED IN WRITING: The information for an appeal of a denial or suspension of a certificate, submitted in any type of written statement to the city offices by certified, registered, priority, overnight or delivery confirmation mail, facsimile, or hand delivery.
SUBSTANTIATED REPORT: An oral, written, or electronic report:
    A. That is submitted to and documented by the city;
    B. By any of the following:
        1. A competent individual who is willing to provide law enforcement or other city employees with publicly available identification of their name, address, and any other reliable means of contact;
        2. City law enforcement or licensing officer; or
        3. Any other regularly established law enforcement agency at any level of government;
    C. That provides any of the following information regarding a registered solicitor:
        1. Documented verification of a previously undisclosed disqualifying status of a registered solicitor;
        2. Probable cause that the registered solicitor has committed a disqualifying status which has not yet been determined to be a disqualifying status;
        3. Documented, eyewitness accounts that the registered solicitor has engaged in repeated patterns of behavior that demonstrates failure by the registered solicitor to adhere to the requirements of this article; or
        4. Probable cause that continued licensing of the registered solicitor creates exigent circumstances that threaten the health, safety, or welfare of any individuals or entities within the city.
WAIVER: The written form provided to applicant by the city wherein applicant agrees that the city may obtain a name and date of birth BCI background check on the applicant for licensing purposes under this article, and which contains applicant’s notarized signature. (Ord. 2006-09-003, 9-7-2006)
1Charitable solicitation act UCA §§ 13-22-2(1)(a) and (b).

3-2B-3: NO OTHER CITY LICENSE OR APPROVAL REQUIRED:
A. Registered solicitors and persons exempt from registration need not apply for, nor obtain, any other license, permit, or registration from the city to engage in door to door solicitation.
B. Any business licensed by the city under another city ordinance that uses employees, independent contractors, or agents for door to door solicitation in an effort to provide any tangible or intangible benefit to the business, shall be required to have such solicitors obtain a certificate, unless otherwise exempt from registration.
C. Those responsible persons or entities associated with registered solicitors need not apply for, nor obtain, any other license, permit, or registration from the city, provided they do not establish a temporary or fixed place of business in the city.
D. Nothing herein is intended to interfere with or supplant any other requirement of federal, state, or other local government law regarding any license, permit, or certificate that a registered solicitor is otherwise required to have or maintain. (Ord. 2006-09-003, 9-7-2006)

3-2B-4: EXEMPTIONS FROM ARTICLE:
The following are exempt from registration under this article:
A. Persons specifically invited to a residence by a competent individual prior to the time of the person’s arrival at the residence;
B. Persons whose license, permit, certificate or registration with the state of Utah permits them to engage in door to door solicitation to offer goods or services to an occupant of the residence;
C. Persons delivering goods to a residence pursuant to a previously made order, or persons providing services at a residence pursuant to a previously made request by a competent individual;
D. Persons advocating or disseminating information for, against, or in conjunction with, any religious belief, or political position regardless of whether goods, services, or any other consideration is offered or given, with or without any form of commitment, contribution, donation, pledge, or purchase; and
E. Persons representing a charitable organization. The charitable exemption shall apply to students soliciting contributions to finance extracurricular social, athletic, artistic, scientific or cultural programs; provided, that the solicitation has been approved in writing by the school administration, and that such student solicitors carry current picture student identification from the educational institution for which they are soliciting.
Those persons exempt from registration are not exempt from the duties and prohibitions outlined in sections 3-2B-17, 3-2B-18 and 3-2B-19 of this article while advocating or soliciting. (Ord. 2006-09-003, 9-7-2006)

3-2B-5: SOLICITATION PROHIBITED:
Unless otherwise authorized, permitted, or exempted pursuant to the terms and provisions of this article, the practice of being in and upon a private residence within the city by solicitors, for the purpose of home solicitation sales or to provide goods or services, is prohibited and is punishable as set forth in this article. (Ord. 2006-09-003, 9-7-2006)

3-2B-6: REGISTRATION OF SOLICITORS:
Unless otherwise exempt under this article, all persons desiring to engage in door to door solicitation within the city, prior to doing so, shall submit a completed application to the licensing officer and obtain a certificate. (Ord. 2006-09-003, 9-7-2006)

3-2B-7: APPLICATION FORM:
The licensing officer shall provide a standard application form for use for the registration of solicitors. Upon request to the licensing officer, or as otherwise provided, any person or entity may obtain in person, by mail, or facsimile, a copy of this application form. Each application form shall require disclosure and reporting by the applicant of the following information, documentation, and fee:
A. Review Of Written Disclosures: An affirmation that the applicant has received and reviewed the disclosure information required by this article.
B. Contact Information: 
    1. Applicant’s true, correct and legal name, including any former names or aliases used during the last ten (10) years;
    2. Applicant’s telephone number, home address and mailing address, if different;
    3. If different from the applicant, the name, address, and telephone number of the responsible person or entity; and
    4. The address by which all notices to the applicant required under this article are to be sent.
C. Proof Of Identity: An in-person verification by the licensing officer of the applicant’s true identity by use of any of the following which bear a photograph of said applicant:
    1. A valid driver’s license issued by any state;
    2. A valid passport issued by the United States;
    3. A valid identification card issued by any state;
    4. A valid identification issued by a branch of the United States military.
    Upon verification of identity, the original identification submitted to establish proof of identity shall be returned to the applicant.
D. Proof Of Registration With Department of Commerce: The applicant shall provide proof that either the applicant, or the responsible person or entity, has registered with the Utah State Department of Commerce.
E. Special Events Sales Tax Number: The applicant shall provide a special events sales tax number for either the applicant, or for the responsible person or entity for which the applicant will be soliciting.
F. Marketing Information: 
    1. The goods or services offered by the applicant, including any commonly known, registered or trademarked names;
    2. Whether the applicant holds any other licenses, permits, registrations, or other qualifications required by federal or state law to promote, provide, or render advice regarding the offered goods or services.
G. BCI Background Check: The applicant shall provide:
    1. An original or a copy of a BCI background check as defined in section 3-2B-2 of this article; and
    2. A signed copy of a waiver whereby applicant agrees to allow the city to obtain a name/date of birth BCI background check on applicant for purposes of enforcement of this article1.
H. Responses To Questions Regarding “Disqualifying Status”: The applicant shall be required to affirm or deny each of the following statements on the application form:
    1. Has the applicant been criminally convicted of: a) felony homicide, b) physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting a minor, c) the sale or distribution of controlled substances, or d) sexual assault of any kind;
    2. Are any criminal charges currently pending against the applicant for: a) felony homicide, b) physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting a minor, c) the sale or distribution of controlled substances, or d) sexual assault of any kind;
    3. Has the applicant been criminally convicted of a felony within the last ten (10) years;
    4. Has the applicant been incarcerated in a federal or state prison within the past five (5) years;
    5. Has the applicant been criminally convicted of a misdemeanor within the past five (5) years involving a crime of: a) moral turpitude, or b) violent or aggravated conduct involving persons or property;
    6. Has a final civil judgment been entered against the applicant within the last five (5) years indicating that: a) the applicant had either engaged in fraud, or intentional misrepresentation, or b) that a debt of the applicant was nondischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 USC section 523(a)(2), (a)(4), (a)(6), or (a)(19);
    7. Is the applicant currently on parole or probation to any court, penal institution, or governmental entity, including being under house arrest or subject to a tracking device;
    8. Does the applicant have an outstanding arrest warrant from any jurisdiction; or
    9. Is the applicant currently subject to a protective order based on physical or sexual abuse issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
I. Fee: The applicant shall pay such fees as determined applicable by the city, which shall not exceed the reasonable cost of processing the application and issuing the certificate and identification badge.
J. Execution Of Application: The applicant shall execute the application form, stating upon oath or affirmation, under penalty of perjury, that based on the present knowledge and belief of the applicant, the information provided is complete, truthful and accurate. (Ord. 2006-09-003, 9-7-2006)
1UCA § 53-10-108(1)(b).

3-2B-8: WRITTEN DISCLOSURES:
The application form shall be accompanied by written disclosures notifying the applicant of the following:
A. The applicant’s submission of the application authorizes the city to verify information submitted with the completed application including:
    1. The applicant’s address;
    2. The applicant’s and responsible person’s or entity’s state tax identification and special use tax numbers, if any;
    3. The validity of the applicant’s proof of identity;
B. The city may consult any publicly available sources for information on the applicant, including, but not limited to, databases for any outstanding warrants, protective orders, or civil judgments;
C. Establishing proof of identity is required before registration is allowed;
D. Identification of the fee amount that must be submitted by applicant with a completed application;
E. The applicant must submit a BCI background check with a completed application;
F. To the extent permitted by state and/or federal law, the applicant’s BCI background check shall remain a confidential, protected, private record not available for public inspection;
G. The city will maintain copies of the applicant’s application form, proof of identity, and identification badge. These copies will become public records available for inspection on demand at the city offices whether or not a certificate is denied, granted, or renewed;
H. The criteria for disqualifying status, denial, or suspension of a certificate under the provisions of this article;
I. That a request for a temporary certificate will be granted or denied the same business day that a completed application is submitted. (Ord. 2006-09-003, 9-7-2006)

3-2B-9: WHEN REGISTRATION BEGINS:
The licensing officer shall not begin the registration process unless the applicant has submitted a completed application. The original identification submitted to establish proof of identity shall be returned after the licensing officer verifies the applicant’s identity. A copy of the identification may be retained by the licensing officer. If an original BCI background check is submitted by the applicant, the licensing officer shall make a copy of the BCI and return the original to the applicant. (Ord. 2006-09-003, 9-7-2006)

3-2B-10: ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATES:
The licensing officer shall review the completed application submitted by the applicant and issue a certificate in accordance with the following:
A. Temporary Certificate: 
    1. A temporary certificate shall be issued allowing the applicant to immediately begin door-to-door solicitation upon the following conditions:
        a. Applicant’s submission of a completed application;
        b. Applicant’s submission of the required fee;
        c. Applicant establishes proof of identity;
        d. The applicant’s representations on the application form do not affirmatively show a disqualifying status;
        e. The BCI does not affirmatively show a disqualifying status; and
        f. The applicant has not previously been denied a certificate by the city, or had a certificate revoked for grounds that still constitute a disqualifying status under this article.
    2. A temporary certificate will automatically expire after twenty-five (25) calendar days from issuance, or upon grant or denial of an annual certificate, whichever period is shorter.
B. Annual Certificate: Within twenty-five (25) calendar days of the issuance of a temporary certificate the city shall:
    1. Take any and all actions it deems appropriate to verify the truthfulness and completeness of the information submitted by the applicant, including, but not limited to, those disclosed with the application form.
    2. Issue written notice to the applicant and the responsible person or entity, if any, that the applicant either:
        a. Will be issued an annual certificate, eligible for renewal one year from the date of issuance of the temporary certificate; or
        b. Will not be issued an annual certificate for reasons cited in section 3-2B-14 of this article.
C. Renewal Certificate: An annual certificate shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance of the temporary certificate and shall expire at twelve o’clock (12:00) midnight on the anniversary date of issuance. Any annual certificate that is not suspended, revoked, or expired may be renewed upon the request of the registered solicitor and the submission of a new completed application and payment of the fee, unless any of the conditions for the denial, suspension or revocation of a certificate are present as set forth in section 3-2B-14 of this article, or a disqualifying status is present. (Ord. 2006-09-003, 9-7-2006)

3-2B-11: FORM OF CERTIFICATE AND IDENTIFICATION BADGE:
A. Certificate Form: Should the licensing officer determine that the applicant is entitled to a certificate, the licensing officer shall issue a certificate to the applicant. The certificate shall list the name of the registered solicitor and the responsible person or entity, if any, and the date on which the certificate expires. The certificate shall be dated and signed by the licensing officer. The certificate shall be carried by the registered solicitor at all times while soliciting in the city.
B. Identification Badge: With both the temporary and annual certificates, the city shall issue each registered solicitor an identification badge that shall be worn prominently on his or her person while soliciting in the city. The identification badge shall bear the name of the city and shall contain: 1) the name of the registered solicitor; 2) address and phone number of the registered solicitor, or the name, address, and phone number of the responsible person or entity is provided; 3) recent photograph of the registered solicitor; and 4) the date on which the certificate expires. (Ord. 2006-09-003, 9-7-2006)

3-2B-12: MAINTENANCE OF REGISTRY:
The licensing officer shall maintain and make available for public inspection a copy or record of every completed application received and the certificate or written denial issued by the city. The applicant’s BCI background check shall remain a confidential, protected, private record not available for public inspection. The licensing officer may furnish to the head of the city’s law enforcement agency a listing of all applicants, those denied, and those issued a certificate. (Ord. 2006-09-003, 9-7-2006)

3-2B-13: NONTRANSFERABILITY OF CERTIFICATES:
Certificates shall be issued only in the name of the applicant and shall list the responsible party or entity, if any. The certificate shall be nontransferable. A registered solicitor desiring to facilitate or attempt to facilitate home solicitation sales with different: a) goods or services; or b) responsible person or entity, from those designated in the originally submitted completed application, shall submit a written change request to the licensing officer. A new certificate based on the amended information shall issue for the balance of time remaining on the solicitor’s previous certificate before the amendment was filed. Before the new certificate is given to the registered solicitor, the registered solicitor shall obtain a revised identification badge from the city, after payment of the fee for the identification badge. (Ord. 2006-09-003, 9-7-2006)

3-2B-14: DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF A CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION:
A. Denial: Upon review, the licensing officer shall refuse to issue a certificate to an applicant for any of the following reasons:
    1. Denial Of Temporary Certificate: 
        a. The application form is not complete;
        b. The applicant fails to: 1) establish proof of identity, 2) provide a BCI, or (3) pay the fees;
        c. The completed application or BCI indicates that the applicant has a disqualifying status; or
        d. The applicant has previously been denied a certificate by the city, or has had a certificate revoked for grounds that still constitute a disqualifying status under this article.
    2. Denial Of Annual Certificate: 
        a. The information submitted by the applicant at the time of the granting of the temporary certificate is found to be incomplete or incorrect;
        b. Since the submission of the completed application, the applicant is subject to a previously undisclosed or unknown disqualifying status;
        c. Failure to complete payment of the fees;
        d. Since the submission of the application, the city has received a substantiated report regarding the past or present conduct of the applicant;
        e. Since the submission of the application, the city or other governmental entity has either criminally convicted or obtained a civil injunction against the applicant for violating this article or similar federal, state, or municipal laws in a manner rising to the level of a disqualifying status; or
        f. Since the submission of the application, a final civil judgment has been entered against the applicant indicating that: 1) the applicant had either engaged in fraud, or intentional misrepresentation, or 2) that a debt of the applicant was nondischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 USC section 523(a)(2), (a)(4), (a)(6), or (a)(19).
    3. Denial Of Annual Certificate Renewal: 
        a. The information submitted by the applicant when seeking renewal of a certificate is found to be incomplete or incorrect;
        b. Since the submission of the renewal application, the applicant is subject to a previously undisclosed or unknown disqualifying status;
        c. Failure to complete payment of the fees;
        d. Since the submission of the application or granting of a certificate, the city has received a substantiated report regarding the past or present conduct of the solicitor;
        e. The city or other governmental entity has either criminally convicted or obtained a civil injunction against the applicant for violating this article or similar federal, state, or municipal laws in a manner rising to the level of a disqualifying status; or
        f. Since the submission of the application, a final civil judgment has been entered against the applicant indicating that: (1) the applicant had either engaged in fraud, or intentional misrepresentation, or (2) that a debt of the applicant was nondischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 USC section 523(a)(2), (a)(4), (a)(6), or (a)(19).
B. Suspension Or Revocation: The city shall either suspend or revoke a certificate when any of the reasons warranting the denial of a certificate occurs.
C. Notice Of Denial Or Suspension: Upon determination of the licensing officer to deny an applicant’s completed application or to suspend a registered solicitor’s certificate, the city shall cause written notice to be sent to the applicant or registered solicitor by the method indicated in the completed application. The notice shall specify the grounds for the denial or suspension, the documentation or information the city relied on to make the decision, the availability of the documentation for review by applicant upon one business day’s notice to the city, and the date upon which the denial or suspension of the certificate shall take effect. It shall further state that the applicant or registered solicitor shall have ten (10) business days from the receipt of the notice of denial or suspension to appeal the same. The denial or suspension of the certificate shall be effective no sooner than two (2) calendar days from the date the notice is sent, unless that suspension is because of exigent circumstances outlined in subsection C4 of the definition of “substantiated report” in section 3-2B-2 of this article, in which case, the suspension is effective immediately. The denial or suspension shall remain effective unless and until the order is rescinded, overturned on appeal, or determined by a court to be contrary to equity or law. Failure to appeal the suspension of a certificate automatically results in its revocation. (Ord. 2006-09-003, 9-7-2006)

3-2B-15: APPEAL:
An applicant or registered solicitor whose certificate has been denied or suspended shall have the right to appeal to the city council or its designee. Any appeal must be submitted by either the applicant, the responsible person or entity, or legal counsel for either who: a) documents the relationship with the applicant or responsible person or entity; or b) is licensed or authorized by the state of Utah to do so, and makes the assertion of an agency relationship. The following procedures and requirements shall apply:
A. Any appeal must be submitted in writing to the city recorder with a copy to the licensing officer within ten (10) business days of the decision from which the appeal is taken. Such appeal shall describe in detail the nature of the appeal, the action complained of and the grounds for appeal.
B. Upon request of the applicant or registered solicitor, within one business day, the city will make available any information upon which it relied in making the determination to either deny or suspend the certificate.
C. The appeals officer shall review, de novo, all written information submitted by the applicant or registered solicitor to the licensing officer, any additional information relied upon by the licensing officer as the basis for denial, suspension or revocation, and any additional information supplied by the city, applicant or registered solicitor. Any additional information submitted by any party to the appeal to the appeals officer shall be simultaneously submitted to the opposing party. If desired, any party shall have three (3) business days to submit rebuttal documentation to the appeals officer regarding the additional information submitted by the opposing party.
D. The appeals officer will render a decision no later than fifteen (15) calendar days from the date the appeal was taken, unless an extension of time is agreed upon by the parties. In the event that any party to the appeal submits rebuttal information as allowed in subsection C of this section, the fifteen (15) calendar days shall be extended to include the additional three (3) days for rebuttal.
    1. The denial or suspension of the certificate shall be reversed by the appeals officer if upon review of the written appeal and information submitted, the appeals officer finds that the licensing officer made a material mistake of law or fact in denying or suspending the applicant or registered solicitor’s certificate.
    2. If the written appeal and information submitted indicates that the licensing officer properly denied or suspended the certificate of the applicant or registered solicitor, the denial or suspension of the certificate shall be affirmed and constitute a determination that the suspended certificate is revoked.
    3. The decision of the appeals officer shall be delivered to the applicant or registered solicitor by the means designated in the completed application, or as otherwise agreed upon when the appeal was filed.
E. After the ruling of the appeals officer, the applicant or solicitor is deemed to have exhausted all administrative remedies with the city.
F. Nothing herein shall impede or interfere with the applicant’s, solicitor’s, or city’s right to seek relief in a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 2006-09-003, 9-7-2006)

3-2B-16: DECEPTIVE SOLICITING PRACTICES PROHIBITED:
A. No solicitor shall intentionally make any materially false or fraudulent statement in the course of soliciting.
B. A solicitor shall immediately disclose to the consumer during face to face solicitation: 1) the name of the solicitor; 2) the name and address of the entity with whom the solicitor is associated; and 3) the purpose of the solicitor’s contact with the person and/or competent individual. This requirement may be satisfied through the use of the badge and an informational flyer.
C. No solicitor shall use a fictitious name, an alias, or any name other than his or her true and correct name.
D. No solicitor shall represent directly or by implication that the granting of a certificate of registration implies any endorsement by the city of the solicitor’s goods or services or of the individual solicitor. (Ord. 2006-09-003, 9-7-2006)

3-2B-17: “NO SOLICITATION” NOTICE:
A. Any occupant of a residence may give notice of a desire to refuse solicitors by displaying a “no solicitation” sign which shall be posted on or near the main entrance door or on or near the property line adjacent to the sidewalk leading to the residence.
B. The display of such sign or placard shall be deemed to constitute notice to any solicitor that the inhabitant of the residence does not desire to receive and/or does not invite solicitors.
C. It shall be the responsibility of the solicitor to check each residence for the presence of any such notice.
D. The provisions of this section shall apply also to solicitors who are exempt from registration pursuant to the provisions of this article. (Ord. 2006-09-003, 9-7-2006)

3-2B-18: DUTIES OF SOLICITORS:
A. Every person soliciting or advocating shall check each residence for any “no soliciting” sign or placard or any other notice or sign notifying a solicitor not to solicit on the premises, such as, but not limited to, “no solicitation” signs. If such sign or placard is posted such solicitor shall desist from any efforts to solicit at the residence or dwelling and shall immediately depart from such property. Possession of a certificate of registration does not in any way relieve any solicitor of this duty.
B. It is a violation of this article for any person soliciting or advocating to knock on the door, ring the doorbell, or in any other manner attempt to attract the attention of an occupant of a residence that bears a “no solicitation” sign or similar sign or placard for the purpose of engaging in or attempting to engage in advocating, a home solicitation sale, door to door soliciting, or soliciting.
C. It is a violation of this article for any solicitor through ruse, deception, or fraudulent concealment of a purpose to solicit, to take action calculated to secure an audience with an occupant at a residence.
D. Any solicitor who is at any time asked by an occupant of a residence or dwelling to leave shall immediately and peacefully depart.
E. The solicitor shall not intentionally or recklessly make any physical contact with, or touch another person without the person’s consent.
F. The solicitor shall not follow a person into a residence without their explicit consent.
G. The solicitor shall not continue repeated soliciting after a person and/or competent individual has communicated clearly and unequivocally their lack of interest in the subject, goods or services of the solicitor.
H. The solicitor shall not use obscene language or gestures. (Ord. 2006-09-003, 9-7-2006)

3-2B-19: TIME OF DAY RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether licensed or not, to solicit at a residence before nine o’clock (9:00) A.M. or after nine o’clock (9:00) P.M. Mountain Time, unless the solicitor has express prior permission from the resident to do so. (Ord. 2006-09-003, 9-7-2006)

3-2B-20: BUYER’S RIGHT TO CANCEL:
In any home solicitation sale, unless the buyer requests the solicitor to provide goods or services without delay in an emergency, the seller or solicitor shall present to the buyer and obtain buyer’s signature to a written statement which informs the buyer of the right to cancel within the third business day after signing an agreement to purchase. Such notice of “buyer’s right to cancel” shall be in the form required by section 70C-5-103, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, or a current version thereof or any state or federal law modifying or amending such provision. (Ord. 2006-09-003, 9-7-2006)

3-2B-21: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any term or provision of this article shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 2006-09-003, 9-7-2006)

ARTICLE C. OCCULT ART PRACTITIONERS


3-2C-1:      Applicability
3-2C-2:      Fee For License
3-2C-3:      License Requirements

3-2C-1: APPLICABILITY:
Fortune tellers, mediums, astrologers, palm readers, hypnotists, other than entertainers or members of a medical or healing profession, and all other practitioners of unusual or occult arts or sciences or those holding themselves out to be such shall obtain a business license. (2003 Code)

3-2C-2: FEE FOR LICENSE:
An applicant under this article shall pay a daily fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city council for each day that they engage in business in the city. (2003 Code)

3-2C-3: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Information Required: Applicant shall provide all information required by subsection 3-1-4E of this title.
B. Additional Information And Requirements: Applicant shall provide upon request of the license officer, at the time of application for a business license, information relative to the types and locations of previous business experience, moral character and reputation, including felony or misdemeanor convictions, if any, involving moral turpitude and such other information as may be reasonably calculated to assist in determination of the applicant’s ability to engage in business in a manner compatible with the public health, safety and general welfare. (2003 Code)

ARTICLE D. PAWNBROKERS, SWAP MEETS, SECONDHAND AND PRECIOUS METALS/GEM DEALERS


3-2D-1:      Applicability
3-2D-2:      Definitions
3-2D-3:      Fee For License
3-2D-4:      Operational Requirements
3-2D-5:      Failure To Comply; Enforcement

3-2D-1: APPLICABILITY:
Any person engaged in the business of a pawnbroker, swap meet operator, secondhand dealer, antique dealer, precious metals/gem dealer, or numismatic dealer, as those terms are defined in section 3-2D-2 of this article, shall obtain a license upon the conditions contained in this article and specifying the category applicable. (Ord. 4-3-1998, 4-16-1998)

3-2D-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the meaning as herein defined:
ANTIQUE DEALER: A person engaging in the business or purchasing, bartering, exchanging or selling of old or archaic items representative of an older culture, excluding numismatic items and precious metals/gems. Any licensee who received antique items that contain precious metals/gems must also obtain a secondhand metal/gem dealer’s license.
NUMISMATIC DEALER: Any person engaging in the business of purchasing, bartering, exchanging or selling for a value, other than its face value, any coins or any currency of the world which, in its original form, was minted or manufactured for the purpose or use as legal tender in the nation or country of origin, including those coins and currency which are or were minted or manufactured for commemorative purposes, providing the commemorative coins were made for use as legal tender in the nation or country of origin, but shall exclude gold or silver marketed as commodity items.
PAWNBROKER: Any person who loans money on deposit of personal property, or deals in the purchase, exchange or possession of personal property on condition of selling the same back again to the pledger or depositor, or who loans or advances money on personal property by taking such property into his or her possession as security, and who sells the unredeemed pledges together with such new merchandise as will facilitate the sale of same.
SECONDHAND DEALER: Any person engaging in the business of purchasing, bartering, exchanging or selling any secondhand merchandise for value, but it shall not include any person who:
    A. Deals solely in the purchasing, bartering, exchanging or selling of used motor vehicles or trailers;
    B. Is required to be licensed under article H of this chapter, or is a recycler of waste containers, paper, glass, etc.;
    C. Is a charitable organization operating a store, office or place of business which acquires secondhand goods or merchandise exclusively by donation;
    D. Engages in the business of selling antiques, coins or currency, or secondhand precious metals/gems; or
    E. Is a person who deals solely in the sale of used clothing, furniture or household goods that do not include electrical appliances/apparatus, jewelry, furs, original paintings or silverware.
SECONDHAND PRECIOUS METALS/GEM DEALER: Any person engaging in the business of purchasing, bartering, exchanging or selling, in any form, secondhand gold, silver, platinum or other precious metals, secondhand gems or any secondhand articles containing any precious gems. (Ord. 4-3-1998, 4-16-1998)

3-2D-3: FEE FOR LICENSE:
The fee required by subsection 3-1-7B1 of this title, shall apply to each category for which a license is obtained unless, in the opinion of the chief of police, the business becomes an enforcement problem, as defined in section 3-2D-5 of this article, in which event licensee shall pay a weekly license fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city council for each type of license held under this article for so long as the license officer is advised by the chief of police that the business continues to be an enforcement problem. (Ord. 4-3-1998, 4-16-1998; amd. 2003 Code)

3-2D-4: OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
All licensees to whom this article applies shall be subject to the following conditions: (Ord. 4-3-1998, 4-16-1998)
A. Records Required: It shall be unlawful for any person licensed by this article to fail to keep upon the licensed premises a record in which shall be entered at the time of receiving any item or goods, including those on consignment and including coins and currency (if obtained at a price other than face value), an accurate description of the article received, including serial numbers or other identifying marks if available, the amount of any money paid or value of property traded, the date of receiving such items, the name, address and description of the person making the transaction, and a numerical identifier obtained from identification containing a photograph of the person making the transaction. The person presenting the identification must be the same person whose photograph appears upon the identification. The date of sale, disposal or scrapping of the item shall be added when the item is sold, scrapped or otherwise disposed of. (Ord. 4-3-1998, 4-16-1998; amd. 2003 Code)
B. Ticket Required: Each licensee receiving an article or goods in the course of any business licensed hereunder shall also make out a serially numbered three (3) part ticket, one part to be retained by the licensee, one part to be retained by the pledger/seller, and one part containing the information required by this article, together with a legible fingerprint of the person making the transaction, preferably the right thumb print. The ticket shall bear a legible signature of the person making the transaction together with the person receiving the item on behalf of the licensee. If a general ticket is used it shall be adapted in each instance to show whether it receipts delivery of pawn or specific type of secondhand goods. A dealer licensed for one (1) category of goods hereunder is not automatically licensed to deal with goods of another named category.
C. Dealing With Specific Persons; False Information; Liability: It shall be unlawful for any licensee to receive items from a person who is under eighteen (18) years of age, or who is either intoxicated or obviously mentally deficient. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully give the licensee (agents or employees) false or misleading information which the licensee is required by this article to obtain from such person. A licensee under this article is strictly liable for any and all acts of his or her own employees for any violation by them of any provisions of this article.
D. Bond Required: Unless lowered by the license officer based upon considerations unique to a particular licensee which would tend to minimize public health, safety and welfare concerns, the bond required by section 3-1-14 of this title in the case of any license issued or received after the passage of this article shall be in an amount no less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), conditioned upon the faithful performance by the licensee of all requirements of this article.
E. Retention: No article or goods taken in by a licensee hereunder shall be disposed of or altered within a period of thirty (30) days from the date of receiving such items, unless expressly permitted to do so by the police department prior to the expiration of the thirty (30) day period. Such items shall be available for inspection by any police officer during reasonable business hours while in the licensee’s possession or control. Upon reasonable request by a police officer, any item received by the licensee must be retained and held until released by the police department or placed in the custody of that department to be held as evidence. These retention provisions shall not apply to pawn items redeemed by the person identified on the pawn records as the original pledger or depositor thereof. (Ord. 4-3-1998, 4-16-1998)
F. Hours Of Business: No licensee hereunder shall keep his or her place of business open before the hour of seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. or after seven o’clock (7:00) P.M. of any day or on Sunday; provided, however, that on Saturday of each week and on days other than Sundays preceding legal holidays, and the last fifteen (15) days of December other than Sundays of each year, it shall be lawful for a licensee to keep his or her place of business open until eleven o’clock (11:00) P.M. (Ord. 4-3-1998, 4-16-1998; amd. 2003 Code)

3-2D-5: FAILURE TO COMPLY; ENFORCEMENT:
A business shall be considered an enforcement problem in the event of a failure to comply with the operational requirements of this article or in the event of violation by licensee or its employees of any other city ordinance which involves any aspect of its business activity harmful to the health, safety and welfare of the city. (Ord. 4-3-1998, 4-16-1998)

ARTICLE E. AMUSEMENT DEVICES AND BUSINESSES


3-2E-1:      Applicability
3-2E-2:      Fee For License
3-2E-3:      License Requirements
3-2E-4:      Operational Requirements
3-2E-5:      Pool Halls

3-2E-1: APPLICABILITY:
Any machine, device, electronic mechanism or other contrivance legal under city and state law, which is designed or intended to be operated or used for amusement or the playing of a game upon or in response to the payment of some charge or the insertion of a coin or other object, must be licensed in addition to the business license of their proprietor. (2003 Code)

3-2E-2: FEE FOR LICENSE:
A fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city council shall be paid for each amusement device, and every person who owns and operates three (3) or more such devices shall be considered to be in the amusement device business and shall pay an annual license fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city council for a business license in addition to the license required for any different type of business on whose premises the individual amusement device may be located. The total fee payable by a person engaged in the ownership and operation of amusement devices shall not exceed a total license fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city council. (2003 Code)

3-2E-3: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Information Required: Applicant shall provide all information required by subsection 3-1-4E of this title.
B. Location Of Devices Specified: The owner shall provide the license officer with the location of all amusement devices operated by him in the city and keep the list updated from time to time as may be necessary. (2003 Code)

3-2E-4: OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Gambling Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any amusement device to be rigged, operated or utilized in any way for gambling purposes, and any operation of any mechanical amusement device contrary to the ordinances of the city or laws of the state shall be grounds for revocation by the license officer of the licenses for all other mechanical amusement devices within the city owned by the same owner. The city shall have power to seize, impound and dispose of any amusement device used for gambling purposes pursuant to the procedures established in the applicable sections of Utah Code Annotated. (2003 Code)
B. Hours Of Operation: It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having charge of any place of amusement, including a shooting gallery, motion picture house, skating rink, or any other place of amusement operated within the city, to conduct or operate the same as a place of amusement between the hours of twelve thirty o’clock (12:30) A.M. and six o’clock (6:00) A.M. of any day or on any Sunday, except upon permission of the city council, to do so having been first obtained. It shall further be unlawful for any person to operate any such place of amusement after the hour of twelve o’clock (12:00) midnight on any Saturday night, except upon permission from the city council being first obtained. (1962 Code § 5-4-3; amd. 2003 Code)

3-2E-5: POOL HALLS:
It is unlawful for any person to keep open any pool or billiard room between the hours of twelve o’clock (12:00) midnight and six o’clock (6:00) A.M. of the following day. (1962 Code § 5-4-4; amd. 2003 Code)

ARTICLE F. AMBULANCES


3-2F-1:      Definitions
3-2F-2:      Applicability
3-2F-3:      Operational Requirements
3-2F-4:      Personnel
3-2F-5:      Facilities
3-2F-6:      Ambulance Requirements
3-2F-7:      Response Time Performance
3-2F-8:      Customer Service Performance
3-2F-9:      Annual Report
3-2F-10:     Dispatch Communications Agreement
3-2F-11:     Enforcement, Appeals And Penalties

3-2F-1: DEFINITIONS:
AGREEMENT: The ambulance services agreement required by this article between the city and the ambulance services provider that specifies the number of ambulances maintained in the city and for the provision of dispatch services.
AMBULANCE: A vehicle that transports patients, is used to provide emergency medical services, and is required to obtain a permit under Utah Code Annotated section 26-8a-304 to be operated in the state.
AMBULANCE SERVICES PROVIDER: An emergency medical service provider that has been licensed by the state of Utah and the city to operate within the city to transport patients and provide emergency medical care to patients. Ambulance services provider does not mean an interfacility ambulance provider.
DISPATCH: The St. George communications center. The St. George communications center is the public safety answering point (PSAP) for the city.
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES: Medical services, transportation services, or both rendered to a patient.
INTERFACILITY AMBULANCE SERVICES PROVIDER: An interfacility ambulance service provider licensed by the state of Utah that is owned and operated by a hospital also licensed by the state of Utah.
PROVIDER: An ambulance services provider and an interfacility ambulance services provider collectively. (Ord. 2014-11-003, 11-13-2014)

3-2F-2: APPLICABILITY:
No provider shall operate or be operated in the city without first obtaining a license and meeting the requirements of sections 3-1-4 and 3-1-7 of this title and those set forth in this article. (Ord. 2014-11-003, 11-13-2014)

3-2F-3: OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Excessive Rates: No provider shall charge rates in excess of those fixed and approved by the state of Utah.
B. Number Of Ambulances: Ambulance services providers shall maintain within the city at all times sufficient ambulances to achieve compliance with this article and the agreement.
C. Response To Calls: Ambulance services providers shall respond to all calls for emergency and medically necessary nonemergency ambulance service. Ambulance services providers shall not refuse to transport any patient that meets any of the requirements of Utah Code Annotated section 26-8a-305.
D. Ambulance Services Provider Operating Procedures: All applicable operating procedures and policies of an ambulance services provider shall comply with the national incident management system (NIMS).
E. Ambulance Services Provider Supervisory And Management Personnel: Ambulance services providers shall ensure that supervisory or management personnel are available at all times. Ambulance services providers shall designate a contact person who shall be authorized to make operational decisions, direct ambulance services provider personnel, and commit ambulance services provider resources for use. The contact person shall reside in Washington County and shall be the contact person for dispatch, the city fire department, and the city police department when needed in cases of emergencies or for deployment of resources as needed.
F. Ambulance Services Provider Medical Control: Ambulance services providers shall employ the services of a licensed physician with a specialization in emergency care. The licensed physician shall practice within and have privileges at a hospital emergency room located within the city and practice in the city. The licensed physician shall:
    1. Ensure that the ambulance services provider is compliant with state regulations; and
    2. Develop and evaluate protocols; and
    3. Oversee training of ambulance services provider personnel.
G. Advertising Of Service: Providers shall not provide, market themselves as providing, or advertise the ability to provide a service that the provider is not licensed and authorized to provide in this article or under Utah state law. Advertising any telephone number other than 911 on any ambulance or provider vehicle is prohibited. Advertising or marketing in any way a telephone number other than 911 for emergency or transport services on any document or advertisement distributed or disseminated electronically or in print to the general public is prohibited. (Ord. 2014-11-003, 11-13-2014)

3-2F-4: PERSONNEL:
A. Enforcement Of Ambulance Services Provider Policies And Procedures, Filing With City Fire Chief: Ambulance services providers shall ensure that their personnel comply with their medical services protocols while on duty. A current copy of the ambulance services provider’s medical services protocols and any subsequent amendments thereto shall be filed with the city fire chief.
B. Staffing Of Ambulance Services Provider Ambulances: Each ambulance, when scheduled for 911 service to respond to emergency calls, shall be staffed by two (2) paramedics trained and certified in NIMS ICS 100 and ICS 700, and appropriately licensed by the state of Utah.
C. Emergencies: The city may authorize deviation from this section during any state of emergency as declared by the governor of the state of Utah or local emergency as declared by the city in accordance with state law.
D. Ambulance Services Provider Employee Information: Ambulance services providers shall maintain files on all certified or licensed EMT, AEMT, EMT-paramedic and other clinical personnel employed on a full time or part time basis. Each file shall contain all information as required by law including valid copies of the employee’s certification or licenses as required by the state of Utah and other city ordinances.
E. Insignia Identification: Provider’s ambulance personnel certified or licensed as EMT, AEMT, or paramedic shall wear an insignia or label that clearly identifies his/her level of certification/licensure to the public and other first responder personnel. (Ord. 2014-11-003, 11-13-2014)

3-2F-5: FACILITIES:
A. Base Facility: The ambulance services provider shall maintain a base facility or facilities of operation and administration within the city.
B. Facility Requirements: Ambulance services providers employing personnel on scheduled shifts greater than twelve (12) hours in duration shall provide crews quarters with food preparation, restroom, bathing and sleeping facilities, and heating and cooling. (Ord. 2014-11-003, 11-13-2014)

3-2F-6: AMBULANCE REQUIREMENTS:
All ambulances operated by providers shall comply with the following:
A. Equipment: All in service ambulances shall be equipped with the safety and emergency equipment required for ambulances by the Utah department of health, bureau of emergency medical services. The city fire department may conduct unannounced ambulance inspections for compliance with state safety and emergency equipment requirements. The city may remove an ambulance from service for noncompliance with state requirements.
B. Information: Each provider shall have a photocopy or original copy of valid registration, valid insurance information, and valid ambulance identification card or ambulance inspection form indicating authorization from Utah department of health bureau of emergency medical services present on each ambulance subject to call or service.
C. Maintenance, Safety Inspection: Each provider shall have a written preventive mechanical maintenance program for ambulances so as to ensure compliance with Utah department of health, bureau of emergency services regulations. Each provider shall ensure that all ambulances subject to call or service are mechanically sound and safe to operate at all times. Annual mechanical safety inspections may be performed by the city upon five (5) days’ notice to providers. (Ord. 2014-11-003, 11-13-2014)

3-2F-7: RESPONSE TIME PERFORMANCE:
A. Ambulance Services Provider Responsibilities: Ambulance services providers shall be responsible to meet or exceed the response time standards set forth below. The city, however, in its sole discretion, retains the right to vary the standards when circumstances arise that may cause the ambulance services provider to be unable to meet the standards. An ambulance services provider shall use its best effort to minimize variations or fluctuations in response time performances according to time of day, day of the week, or week of the month.
B. Minimum Ambulance Response Time Standards: 
    1. Compliance is achieved when ninety percent (90%) or more of calls for each priority in the city meets the specified response time criteria during the calendar month. For example, to be in compliance, an ambulance services provider would place an ambulance on the scene of each life threatening emergency call within eight (8) minutes not less than ninety percent (90%) of the time for all priority 1 calls for service within the city in any calendar month.
    2. Ambulance services providers are required to meet the response times in the table below for each zone of the city. Zones shall be designated and agreed upon between the ambulance services providers and dispatch. Ambulance services providers will take precautions to assure that no zone is underserved.
    3. Maximum Response Times:
    +---------------+---------------+---------------+
    | Priority Code | Response Time | Dispatch Code |
    +---------------+---------------+---------------+
    | 1             | 8 min         | Echo          |
    |               |               | Delta         |
    |               |               | Charlie       |
    +---------------+---------------+---------------+
    | 2             | 12 min        | Bravo         |
    |               |               | Alpha         |
    +---------------+---------------+---------------+
    For purposes of determining compliance with the listed response times, the call is not considered late until sixty (60) seconds has elapsed beyond the listed response time. In other words, all maximum response times listed in the table above and referenced throughout this article include an additional fifty nine (59) seconds of time before the call is deemed late. 0:00 indicates “on time” performance with scheduled on scene time. Consideration will be given for charlie codes that fit into another category.
    +-------------------+----------------------------+---------------+---------------+-----------------+
    | Response Priority |  Response Time Definition  | EMD Response  | Minimum Time  | Time Compliance |
    |       Code        |                            |     Level     |  Compliance   |   Combination   |
    |                   |                            |               |   Standard    |                 |
    +-------------------+----------------------------+---------------+---------------+-----------------+
    | 1                 | Life threatening           | – All echo    | Not less than | Priority 1      |
    |                   | prehospital emergencies    | calls         | 90 percent    |                 |
    |                   | – All prehospital          | – All delta   | per month     |                 |
    |                   | life threatening           | calls         | by EOA        |                 |
    |                   | emergency requests,        | – All charlie |               |                 |
    |                   | as determined by           | calls         |               |                 |
    |                   | the dispatcher in          |               |               |                 |
    |                   | strict accordance          |               |               |                 |
    |                   | with city authorized       |               |               |                 |
    |                   | EMD protocol.              |               |               |                 |
    +-------------------+----------------------------+---------------+---------------+-----------------+
    | 2                 | Time sensitive prehospital | – All bravo   | Not less than | Priority 2      |
    |                   | emergencies                | and alpha     | 90 percent    |                 |
    |                   | – All prehospital          | calls where   | per month     |                 |
    |                   | nonlife threatening        | hot response  | by EOA        |                 |
    |                   | emergency requests,        | is authorized |               |                 |
    |                   | including emergency        |               |               |                 |
    |                   | standby requests,          |               |               |                 |
    |                   | as determined by           |               |               |                 |
    |                   | the dispatcher in          |               |               |                 |
    |                   | strict accordance          |               |               |                 |
    |                   | with city authorized       |               |               |                 |
    |                   | EMD protocol.              |               |               |                 |
    +-------------------+----------------------------+---------------+---------------+-----------------+
C. Response Time Measurement: 
    1. Response time for priority 1 and 2 calls will be calculated from dispatch time to arrive at scene time or cancellation time of the first transport capable ambulance. Authorized first responders may make cancellations in compliance with city dispatch requirements.
    2. “Arrived at scene” means the time the assigned ambulance arrives at the requested call location or scene, wheels stopped, and dispatch is notified. In situations where the ambulance has responded to a location other than the scene (e.g., staging areas for hazardous scenes), arrived at scene shall be the time the ambulance arrives at the designated staging location, wheels stopped and dispatch is notified. For priority 1 or 2 responses, the response time standard to staging area shall not be relaxed unless the public safety agency has instructed the ambulance services provider to stage for law enforcement or fire, in order to ensure the scene is safe. If staging for such a purpose, the required response time shall be the same as a priority 2 response. The response mode shall be in accordance with dispatch policies and procedures.
    3. Arrived at scene time is to be reported to dispatch by a manual action of the ambulance crew. This requirement is typically satisfied by voice radio transmission or the use of a manually activated digital status reporting device. Arrival times automatically captured solely by automated vehicle locater AVL/GPS positioning reporting shall not be used.
    4. For incidents requiring more than one ambulance, the first ambulance to arrive at the scene of an incident shall be used for calculation of response time standards. Ambulance services providers shall use their best efforts to place additional ambulances on scene expeditiously.
D. Response Time Exceptions And Exemption Requests: 
    1. Ambulance services providers shall use their best efforts to maintain mechanisms for reserve service capacity and to increase response service capability should temporary system overload persist. However, it is understood that from time to time unusual factors beyond the ambulance services provider’s reasonable control affect the achievement of the specified response time standards. These unusual factors include, but are not limited to, local emergencies, declared disasters, declared disasters in another county or state where ambulance services provider’s ambulances are sent for mutual aid, severe weather, or periods of unusually high demand for ambulance services. Authorized categories for minimum response time standards exceptions are as follows:
        a. A local declared disaster involving mass casualties;
        b. If it can be demonstrated that providing emergency mutual aid into another ambulance services provider’s operating area caused a shortage of resources that is directly attributable for a late response within the city;
        c. During certain weather or roadway conditions that prohibit safe ambulance operation to meet response time standards or the specified call location is inaccessible by conventional ground ambulances;
        d. During a period of unusually high demand. To request an exemption for a period of unusually high demand, ambulance services providers must demonstrate that, at the moment the call was received, the number of emergency calls dispatched and being worked simultaneously caused an unexpected shortage of resources that was directly attributable to the late response within the city;
        e. Any delay caused by dispatch error.
        Any response time exceptions granted by the city shall be in the sole discretion of the city.
    2. Equipment failures, traffic congestion, ambulance failures, inability to staff units, and other similar causes will not be grounds for granting an exception to compliance with the response standards.
    3. If an ambulance services provider believes that any response or group of responses should be excluded from the calculation of the response time standards, the ambulance services provider may request a review by the city. With its request, the ambulance services provider shall submit a detailed statement explaining why the response time should be excluded and all other available documentation that supports the request. The exclusion request must be made in writing. The city will review the request and issue a final determination.
E. Aggregate Monthly Response Time Measurement: 
    1. All ambulance responses over each calendar month will be separated by priority code, and then analyzed for compliance with the minimum ninety percent (90%) standard. The number of calls within standard for a specific priority code and response time zone shall be divided by the total number of calls for that priority code and response time zone to determine the aggregate percentage compliance within each zone. Monthly response times may be reported with decimals, but no rounding factor will be used in determining compliance.
    2. Aggregate monthly response time performance will be applied to each priority code. Any priority code resulting in less than the ninety percent (90%) response time performance is noncompliant with the response time. The city shall endeavor to respond to requests from an ambulance services provider for information regarding response times as soon as is practical, but in no case shall it be more than ten (10) business days after the request is made. (Ord. 2014-11-003, 11-13-2014)

3-2F-8: CUSTOMER SERVICE PERFORMANCE:
Ambulance services providers shall provide a customer service program that addresses complaints or concerns raised either verbally or in writing from patients or families of patients, oversight agencies, hospitals, emergency department physicians or nurses, other healthcare facilities, fire service agencies, and law enforcement agencies. City shall notify ambulance services providers of any complaint or concern received by city from patients or families of patients, oversight agencies, hospitals, emergency department physicians or nurses, other healthcare facilities, fire service agencies, and law enforcement agencies within twenty-four (24) hours. Ambulance services providers shall make initial contact with the agency or person expressing the complaint or concern within twenty-four (24) hours. Ambulance services providers shall investigate complaints or concerns in a timely manner. All verbal or written complaints or concerns shall be documented by the ambulance services provider for completion and follow through. The documentation shall note the nature of the complaint or concern and the resolution or proposed resolution of the complaint or concern by the ambulance services provider. The documentation of any concerns or complaints shall be submitted to the city fire chief on a monthly basis. The ambulance services provider shall allow the city to audit the customer service program upon request; however medical information may be withheld to the extent required by applicable federal or state law. (Ord. 2014-11-003, 11-13-2014)

3-2F-9: ANNUAL REPORT:
On or before April 15 of each year, each ambulance services provider will prepare and submit to the city an annual report for the preceding year (January 1 through December 31). This report will be in a format acceptable to the city, and the report will indicate the extent of compliance with all performance provisions of this article and state standards. Additional achievements may also be required or submitted.
A. At a minimum the report must contain:
    1. Call volume of responses by priority code and by time.
    2. Response time compliance by month and by priority.
    3. Volume of calls where service was requested and the ambulance services provider failed to respond.
    4. Volume of mutual aid given and received by the ambulance services provider.
    5. Listing of community service and public education events conducted by month, including multi-agency training, drills and exercises.
    6. Any other information the city may need or request for use in preparing the annual report. (Ord. 2014-11-003, 11-13-2014)

3-2F-10: DISPATCH COMMUNICATIONS AGREEMENT:
The city and ambulance services provider shall enter into an agreement for the provision of dispatch services. The agreement shall conform to state law and be approved by the city and the ambulance services provider. (Ord. 2014-11-003, 11-13-2014)

3-2F-11: ENFORCEMENT, APPEALS AND PENALTIES:
A. Compliance Committee, Annual Review, And City Manager Determination: Compliance with the standards and requirements of this article shall be determined by a committee comprised of the city’s police chief, fire chief, dispatch communications manager, medical control doctor for dispatch, and attorney or their designees. Review for compliance with the standards and requirements of this article shall be on at least an annual basis, or as often as the committee determines is necessary to ensure compliance. The committee shall meet with each provider to review all information considered by the committee before making any recommendation. Any recommendation of the committee regarding compliance or noncompliance and any recommended penalties, along with supporting documentation, shall be made in writing to the city manager. The city manager shall make a determination in writing of compliance or noncompliance for each provider including, if needed, the imposition of any penalties.
B. Appeal: A provider may appeal in writing a determination of noncompliance or any penalty imposed by the city manager by filing the appeal with the city recorder within ten (10) business days of the determination of noncompliance or imposition of a penalty. The city manager shall hear the appeal of a provider within ten (10) business days of receipt of the appeal from the provider. The city manager shall issue a decision in writing within ten (10) business days of the appeal hearing with the provider.
A provider may appeal a noncompliance decision or the imposition of a penalty by the city manager to the mayor and council by filing a notice of appeal with the city recorder within ten (10) business days of the issue date of the decision of the city manager. The mayor and council shall hear the appeal of the provider within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the notice of appeal by the city recorder. The mayor and city council shall issue a determination in writing within thirty (30) days after the hearing. The decision of the mayor and council is final.
C. Penalties: Penalties for noncompliance may be one, or a combination of one or more, of the following:
    1. Written warning with a written improvement plan which includes action items needed to comply with the standards and requirements of this section.
    2. Probation period for up to twelve (12) months in addition to the written warning. Any violations by a provider within the probationary period may result in a recommendation for revocation of the ambulance services provider’s business license.
    3. Revocation of the provider’s business license. (Ord. 2014-11-003, 11-13-2014)

ARTICLE G. CHRISTMAS TREE BUSINESSES


3-2G-1:      Definitions
3-2G-2:      Business Requirements
3-2G-3:      Unlawful To Possess Or Sell Untagged Trees
3-2G-4:      Application For License
3-2G-5:      Zoning Requirements
3-2G-6:      Fee For License
3-2G-7:      Clean Up Deposit

3-2G-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this article shall have the following meaning unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
CHRISTMAS TREE: A cut tree, usually fir or evergreen, but including any tree sold to be decorated and used as part of the Christmas commemoration and celebration.
CHRISTMAS TREE BUSINESS: To sell, offer to sell or display for sale Christmas trees, to the public, for profit. Each location at which Christmas trees are sold, offered or displayed for sale shall be considered a separate business. (2003 Code)

3-2G-2: BUSINESS REQUIREMENTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to operate a Christmas tree business without meeting the requirements of this article and obtaining a business license as required by this chapter. (2003 Code)

3-2G-3: UNLAWFUL TO POSSESS OR SELL UNTAGGED TREES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession for sale, or to sell or offer for sale in this city, trees from within the public domain of the United States, or of the state, or from any private lands, within or without the state, without written authority having been first obtained from the United States, state or from the owner of such private lands, as the case may be, to cut and remove such trees. The trees shall have been officially tagged with a tag furnished or approved either by the United States Forest Service or the department of forestry of the state. (2003 Code)

3-2G-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
In addition to the information required by section 3-2G-3 of this article, an application to sell and dispose of Christmas trees within the city shall specifically state and set forth the source of title to the trees to be sold and whether the trees or any of them were cut or procured within any public domain of the United States, or of the state, or from any private lands, either within or without the state. Applicants shall be required in connection with such application to furnish the business license officer with evidence of ownership of such trees and/or authority to cut and procure the same from the public domain or from private lands. (2003 Code)

3-2G-5: ZONING REQUIREMENTS:
A license to operate a Christmas tree business shall be limited to operation in an area zoned commercial. A license to operate a Christmas tree business shall not be issued to any applicant who does not meet such other zoning requirements as may be applicable. The application shall be reviewed and approved by the planning and zoning department and city attorney’s office prior to issuance of a license. (2003 Code)

3-2G-6: FEE FOR LICENSE:
The fee for operating a Christmas tree business on a seasonal basis in the city shall be required in such amount as established by resolution of the city council. There shall be no fee for a Christmas tree business operated by a nonprofit organization. (2003 Code)

3-2G-7: CLEAN UP DEPOSIT:
A clean up deposit shall be required of the licensee to assure the removal of unsold trees and related debris remaining on the premises at the conclusion of the license period. The deposit shall be refunded to the licensee, provided the premises are left clean and free of the unsold trees and related debris as determined by inspection. The amount of the deposit shall be in such amount as established by resolution of the city council. (2003 Code)

ARTICLE H. JUNK DEALERS AND JUNKYARDS


3-2H-1:      Applicability
3-2H-2:      Fee For License
3-2H-3:      Operational Requirements

3-2H-1: APPLICABILITY:
Any person engaging in the business of purchasing, bartering, exchanging or selling: a) secondhand metals other than precious metals; or b) glass, rags, rubber, paper or other articles commonly known as “junk”; or any person who gathers or collects such items for those purposes shall obtain a license on the conditions herein set forth. Anyone who maintains a lot for the purpose of storing used metal materials, wood material, cement material, plastic material, auto bodies or parts thereof, or refuse material of any kind for the purpose of reselling, bartering or exchanging all or any part thereof to the public, shall be considered to be a junk dealer for the purposes of this article. Receipt of glass, metal or plastic containers and receptacles, newspaper and similar waste paper products for the purpose of recycling the same shall not be considered as junk dealers requiring a license under this article. (Ord. 4-3-1998, 4-16-1998)

3-2H-2: FEE FOR LICENSE:
Each applicant operating a business as described in this article shall pay a license fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city council per year. (Ord. 4-3-1998, 4-16-1998; amd. 2003 Code)

3-2H-3: OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
All licensees to whom this article applies shall be subject to the following conditions:
A. Retention: It shall be unlawful for any licensee hereunder to dispose of or alter any items received in the course of business activity hereunder for a period of thirty (30) days from the date of receiving such items, unless expressly permitted to do so by the police department. Such items received shall be available for inspection by any police officer during reasonable business hours while in the licensee’s possession or control. Upon reasonable request by the police department, any item received by the licensee must be retained and held until released by the police department or placed in the custody of that department to be held as evidence.
B. Records Maintained: 
    1. It shall be unlawful for any person licensed by this article to fail to keep upon the licensed premises a record in which shall be entered at the time of receiving any item an accurate description of the article received, including serial numbers if available, the amount of any money paid or value of property traded, the date of receiving such items, the name, address and description of the person making the transaction, and a numerical identifier obtained from identification containing a photograph of the person making the transaction. The person presenting the identification must be the same person whose photograph appears upon the identification. The date of sale, disposal or scrapping of the item shall be added when the item is sold, scrapped or otherwise disposed of.
    2. All record entries shall be made in a legible manner. The records required to be maintained by this subsection shall be maintained by the business for a period of two (2) years from the day of the transaction. The police department shall be permitted to have access, during business hours, to all premises licensed under this article for the purpose of inspection of such premises and records. The police department shall have the right to either remove records temporarily for the purpose of copying, or require the licensee to provide a copy of such entries as may be required by that agency.
C. Dealing With Specific Persons; Altered Or Defaced Items: It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this article, or any employee of such licensee, to receive any items from a person who is under eighteen (18) years of age, or who is either intoxicated or obviously mentally deficient. It shall also be unlawful to receive any item which has obviously had the manufacturer’s serial number or an owner’s personal identification mark altered, defaced or purposely mutilated or removed.
D. Liability: The holder of a license under this article is strictly liable for any and all acts of his or her employees and for any violation by them of any provisions of this article. (Ord. 4-3-1998, 4-16-1998; amd. 2003 Code)

ARTICLE I. BILLBOARD ADVERTISING


3-2I-1:      Applicability; Fee For License

3-2I-1: APPLICABILITY; FEE FOR LICENSE:
Every person engaged in the business of supplying space for hire for outdoor advertising shall pay the general license fee required under subsection 3-1-7B of this title and, in addition to that fee, shall pay an annual fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each billboard owned or operated by the licensee within the city. (2003 Code)

ARTICLE J. MINI STORAGE RENTALS


3-2J-1:      Applicability; Fee For License

3-2J-1: APPLICABILITY; FEE FOR LICENSE:
A person engaged in the business of offering individual storage units for rent, or a mini storage operator, shall pay the general license fee required under subsection 3-1-7B of this title and, in addition to that fee, for each storage or mini storage unit over thirty (30), he shall pay an additional fee of five dollars ($5.00) per unit, with a maximum of three hundred dollars ($300.00) as total license fee. (2003 Code)

ARTICLE K. MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS


3-2K-1:      Definitions
3-2K-2:      Business License Required
3-2K-3:      Qualifications Of Licensee
3-2K-4:      Prohibited Acts
3-2K-5:      Display Of License

3-2K-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this article shall have the following meaning unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
MASSAGE: The practice whereby a person, either by the hands or with a mechanical or electrical apparatus, administers to another person effleurage (stroking), friction (rubbing), petrissage (kneading), tapotement (percussion) and vibration (shaking or trembling), or variations of these, and the use of rehabilitative procedures involving the muscles by nonintrusive means and without spinal manipulation. The practice of “massage” may include the use of oil rubs, heat lamps, salt glows, hot and cold packs, or tub, shower, steam or cabinet baths.
MASSAGE APPRENTICE: A person who is licensed as a massage apprentice by the state of Utah.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS: Any place where massages are given for hire.
MASSAGE TECHNICIAN: A person who is licensed as a massage technician by the state of Utah.
SEXUAL ACTIVITY: The massaging, touching or applying of any instrument or device by a licensee in the course of practicing or engaging in massage therapy to:
    A. The genitals or anus; or
    B. Breasts of a female patron, except when a female patron requests breast massage, as may be further defined by the state of Utah, division of occupational and professional licensing rule, and signs a written consent form, which must also include the signature of a parent or legal guardian if the person is a minor, authorizing the procedure and outlining the reason for it before the procedure is performed. (2003 Code)

3-2K-2: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person or entity to operate a massage establishment without meeting the requirements of this article and obtaining a business license as required by this chapter. (2003 Code)

3-2K-3: QUALIFICATIONS OF LICENSEE:
Each individual desiring a massage establishment license shall:
A. Be an individual at least twenty-one (21) years of age;
B. Have no convictions of crimes involving moral turpitude within the past five (5) years. (2003 Code)

3-2K-4: PROHIBITED ACTS:
The following acts are prohibited:
A. It is unlawful for any person to practice or engage in or attempt to practice or engage in massage without first being licensed by the state as a massage technician or massage apprentice.
B. It is unlawful for any massage establishment to employ, for the purpose of performing massage, any individual who is not licensed by the state as a massage technician or massage apprentice.
C. It is unlawful to serve, store, allow to be served, or allow to be consumed any alcoholic beverage on the licensed premises of a massage establishment.
D. It is unlawful for a massage technician, massage apprentice, or any employee of a massage establishment to touch or offer to touch or massage the genitalia of customers.
E. It is unlawful for the massage technician, massage apprentice, or any customer or employee of the massage establishment to display to any other person any specified anatomical area or to engage in any specified “sexual activity”, as defined in section 3-2K-1 of this article, while on the premises of the massage establishment. (2003 Code)

3-2K-5: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
A. City License: Every massage establishment licensed under this article shall display its massage establishment license in a conspicuous place on the premises.
B. State License: Every massage technician or massage apprentice, while on the premises of a licensed massage establishment, shall maintain in his or her possession or immediate presence his or her state massage technician or massage apprentice license. (2003 Code)

ARTICLE L. PRIVATE INVESTIGATORS


3-2L-1:      License Required
3-2L-2:      Exception To License Requirement
3-2L-3:      Application For License
3-2L-4:      Bond Required
3-2L-5:      Fee For License
3-2L-6:      License Not Issued To Certain Persons
3-2L-7:      Identification Card Carried By Licensee
3-2L-8:      License Nontransferable
3-2L-9:      False Representation Prohibited
3-2L-10:     Impersonations

3-2L-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of private detective or investigator for a fee or reward unless such person first applies for and obtains a city private investigator’s business license.
B. No private investigator’s business license shall be issued for any private investigator’s business unless the licensee has complied in all respects with the provisions contained in this article. (2003 Code)

3-2L-2: EXCEPTION TO LICENSE REQUIREMENT:
Nothing in this article shall be construed as requiring a license from any watchman or person regularly employed as a watchman by any firm or corporation or any person investigating credit records or insurance claims, or any security personnel licensed pursuant to Utah Code Annotated title 41, chapter 13a. (2003 Code)

3-2L-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
A. Every person applying for a private investigator’s business license under this article shall obtain an identification card from the police department after the chief of police, or his or her designee, reviews the experience, qualifications and other basic requirements for a private investigator’s business license.
B. If the applicant is a partnership, each member of the partnership shall be required to obtain an identification card from the police department.
C. If the applicant is a corporation, each officer and active member of the corporation shall obtain an identification card from the police department.
D. Each applicant, including members of a partnership and officers and employees of a corporation, shall submit to being photographed and fingerprinted by the police department. (2003 Code)

3-2L-4: BOND REQUIRED:
Each application for a private investigator’s business license under this article shall be accompanied by a corporate surety bond in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the state, and conditioned that the person applying for the private investigator’s business license will comply with all of the laws and ordinances regulating the business of a private investigator and all lawful requirements made by the city council, and shall pay all damages occasioned to any person by reason of any misstatement, misrepresentation, fraud or deceit of the licensed person, agent or employee, or which may result from any other violation of law or ordinance in carrying on the business licensed. (2003 Code)

3-2L-5: FEE FOR LICENSE:
The annual fee for a private investigator’s business license shall be in such amounts and under such conditions as established by resolution of the city council. In addition to the above annual fee, each individual required to obtain an identification card from the police department shall pay the fees for the photograph, fingerprints and identification card set forth in the police department fee schedule. (2003 Code)

3-2L-6: LICENSE NOT ISSUED TO CERTAIN PERSONS:
A. No private investigator’s business license or identification card shall be issued to any person who:
    1. Is under the age of twenty-one (21) years;
    2. Has been convicted of a felony by any state or United States court, or who has been convicted anywhere of an act or acts which, if done in Utah, would constitute an assault, theft, larceny, unlawful entry, extortion, buying or receiving stolen property, unlawfully using or possessing or carrying weapons or burglar’s tools, or having been guilty of an escape from lawful custody, or of a crime or crimes involving moral turpitude, or who has been convicted in any other state of acts which, if done in Utah, would be a felony;
    3. Makes any false statement in his or her application for a private investigator’s business license or identification card, and any false statement shall be grounds for immediate revocation of any license issued hereunder.
B. Any current private investigator’s business license holder who no longer meets the requirements of this section may have his or her license or identification card revoked or suspended as set forth in this title. (2003 Code)

3-2L-7: IDENTIFICATION CARD CARRIED BY LICENSEE:
Each person licensed according to this article shall carry a valid identification card issued by the police department on his or her person at all times. (2003 Code)

3-2L-8: LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE:
No private investigator’s business license granted under the provisions of this article shall be transferable. (2003 Code)

3-2L-9: FALSE REPRESENTATION PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to represent to any other person that he or she is duly licensed as a private investigator or is employed by a private investigation agency when he or she is not so licensed or employed. (2003 Code)

3-2L-10: IMPERSONATIONS:
No person licensed according to this article shall impersonate or hold themselves out as a peace officer, or use, wear or display any insignia, badge or indicia of a peace officer, nor shall such person operate or permit to be operated a motor vehicle with a siren, red light (flashing or steady beam), or with any insignia thereon bearing likeness to the insignia used by peace officers. (2003 Code)

ARTICLE M. EMPLOYMENT AGENCIES


3-2M-1:      Defined
3-2M-2:      Licensed Premises
3-2M-3:      Utah Industrial Commission License
3-2M-4:      Time Limit For Issuance Of License
3-2M-5:      Bond Required
3-2M-6:      Referrals On Bona Fide Orders Only
3-2M-7:      Taking Commission In Advance Unlawful
3-2M-8:      Commission Returned If Employment Not Secured
3-2M-9:      Schedule Of Fees; Limitations
3-2M-10:     Register Of Employers
3-2M-11:     Register Of Applicants
3-2M-12:     Statement Furnished To Applicants
3-2M-13:     Dividing Of Fees Prohibited
3-2M-14:     Religious Or Charitable Associations Excepted
3-2M-15:     Copies Of Law Posted
3-2M-16:     Violations; Penalty

3-2M-1: DEFINED:
“Employment agency” means a business opened, established or operating for the purpose of procuring or obtaining, for money or other valuable consideration, either directly or indirectly, any work, employment or occupation for persons seeking the same, or otherwise to engage in the business or in any way to act as a broker or go-between, between employers and persons seeking work. (Ord. 2002-02-002, 2-7-2002)

3-2M-2: LICENSED PREMISES:
A business license shall not be granted to any person to conduct the business of an employment agency within the city to be exercised in any room or rooms or in connection with any room or rooms used as living or sleeping places by any person or persons, or in which sleeping rooms are rented, or meals served to the public. (Ord. 2002-02-002, 2-7-2002)

3-2M-3: UTAH INDUSTRIAL COMMISSION LICENSE:
A duplicate copy of the license issued to the applicant by the Utah industrial commission shall be submitted at the time of making application, and no business license shall be issued without a state license and a copy of the same filed with the business license officer. (Ord. 2002-02-002, 2-7-2002)

3-2M-4: TIME LIMIT FOR ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
The business license officer shall either deny or issue the business license within seven (7) working days after the complete application is submitted and the business license fee is paid. (Ord. 2002-02-002, 2-7-2002)

3-2M-5: BOND REQUIRED:
Each business license applicant under the provision of this article shall file a bond in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) with two (2) or more sureties to be approved by the city attorney’s office. The bond shall be made payable to the city and shall be conditioned that the person applying for the license will comply with all laws and ordinances regulating employment agencies and shall pay all damages occasioned to any person by reason of any misstatement, misrepresentation, fraud or deceit of the business licensee or by any other violation of law or ordinances regulating employment agencies. If, at any time in the opinion of the city attorney’s office, the sureties or any of them shall become irresponsible, the business licensee shall, upon notice from the city treasurer, give a new bond. Failure to give a new bond within ten (10) days after such notice shall operate as a revocation of such license, and the certificate of license shall be immediately returned to the city. (Ord. 2002-02-002, 2-7-2002)

3-2M-6: REFERRALS ON BONA FIDE ORDERS ONLY:
A licensee under the provision of this article shall not send out any help without having previously obtained a bona fide order. (Ord. 2002-02-002, 2-7-2002)

3-2M-7: TAKING COMMISSION IN ADVANCE UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to receive, directly or indirectly, any money or other valuable consideration from any person seeking employment for any information or assistance furnished or to be furnished by the agent to such person, enabling or tending to enable such person to secure such employment, prior to the time such information or assistance is actually furnished. (Ord. 2002-02-002, 2-7-2002)

3-2M-8: COMMISSION RETURNED IF EMPLOYMENT NOT SECURED:
It shall be unlawful for a licensee to retain, directly or indirectly, any money or other valuable consideration received for any information or assistance described in section 3-2M-1 of this article. If the person for whom such information or assistance is furnished fails through no neglect or fault of his or her own to secure the employment regarding which such information or assistance is furnished, the money or consideration shall be returned by the agent to the payer upon demand. (Ord. 2002-02-002, 2-7-2002)

3-2M-9: SCHEDULE OF FEES; LIMITATIONS:
Each licensee shall file with the Utah industrial commission a schedule of fees to be charged and collected in the conduct of its business, which schedule shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the agency. Changes in the schedule may be made, but no change shall become effective until seven (7) days after the date of refiling the amended schedule with the Utah industrial commission. No fee charged or collected shall be in excess of the fee as scheduled and in force at the time of the issuing of the contract for employment services. In addition, no licensee shall charge any fee in excess of twenty five percent (25%) of the amount actually earned in the employment during the first thirty (30) days if such employment was ended during such thirty (30) day period. (Ord. 2002-02-002, 2-7-2002)

3-2M-10: REGISTER OF EMPLOYERS:
Each licensee shall enter upon a register, to be kept for that purpose and to be known as an “employers’ register,” every order received from any corporation, company or individual desiring the service of any persons seeking work or employment, the name and address of the corporation, company or individual from whom such order was received, the number of persons wanted, the nature of the work or employment, the town or city, including street and number if any, where such work or employment is to be furnished and the wages to be paid. (Ord. 2002-02-002, 2-7-2002)

3-2M-11: REGISTER OF APPLICANTS:
Each licensee shall keep a register, to be known as “labor applicants’ register,” which shall show the name of each person seeking work or employment to whom information or assistance is furnished and the amount of the commission received in each case; the name of each person who, having received and paid for any information or assistance, fails to secure the employment regarding which such information or assistance is furnished, together with the reason why such employment was not secured, and the name of each person to whom return is made in accordance with the provisions of section 3-2M-8 of this article of any money or other consideration, together with the amount or the value of consideration returned. The registers required by section 3-2M-10 of this article and this section shall be open at all reasonable hours to the inspection of the business license officer or any peace officer of this state. (Ord. 2002-02-002, 2-7-2002)

3-2M-12: STATEMENT FURNISHED TO APPLICANTS:
Every person securing information from a licensee relative to hiring or engagement to work for others shall be furnished a written copy, in duplicate, of the terms of such hiring or engagement by the licensee, showing the amount of commissions or fees paid to such licensee, the kind of service to be performed, the rate of wages or compensation, the length of time, if definite, and if indefinite, so stated, of such service, with full name and address of the person authorizing the hiring of such person. One of these copies shall be delivered to the person for whom the labor is to be performed and the other shall be retained by the person furnished with the information, and the licensee issuing the written copy of the conditions of service or employment shall make and keep in a book provided for the purpose a third copy. (Ord. 2002-02-002, 2-7-2002)

3-2M-13: DIVIDING OF FEES PROHIBITED:
Any employment agent sending out help to contractors or other employers of help shall not divide the fees allowed under this article with subcontractors and employers of help, or their foremen or anyone in their employ. (Ord. 2002-02-002, 2-7-2002)

3-2M-14: RELIGIOUS OR CHARITABLE ASSOCIATIONS EXCEPTED:
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed so as to require any religious or charitable association which may assist in procuring situations of employment for persons seeking the same to obtain a license. (Ord. 2002-02-002, 2-7-2002)

3-2M-15: COPIES OF LAW POSTED:
The licensee shall cause copies of sections 3-2M-7 through 3-2M-9 of this article, and of sections 3-2M-12 through 3-2M-14 of this article, printed in type of sufficient size to be easily read, to be conspicuously posted in each room used or occupied for the purpose of such employment agency. (Ord. 2002-02-002, 2-7-2002)

3-2M-16: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
If any licensee gives any false information or makes any misstatement or any false promises concerning any work or employment or occupation, or fails to keep the registers as prescribed in this article, or shall willfully make any false entries in such register or shall violate any other provisions of this article shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to the penalties as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or section 3-1-21 of this title. (Ord. 2002-02-002, 2-7-2002; amd. 2003 Code)

ARTICLE N. COLLECTION AGENCIES


3-2N-1:      Applicability
3-2N-2:      Attorneys, Banks And Trust Companies Excepted

3-2N-1: APPLICABILITY:
No business license shall be issued to conduct a collection agency, collection bureau or collection office in this city, or engage in this city in the business of soliciting the right to collect or receive payment for another of any account, bill or other indebtedness, or advertise for or solicit in print the right to collect or receive payment for another of any account, bill or other indebtedness, unless at the time of conducting the collection agency, collection bureau, collection office or collection business, or of advertising or soliciting, that person or the person for whom he or she may be acting as agent, is registered with the Utah division of corporations and commercial code, has a good and sufficient bond on file with the Utah division of corporations and commercial code, and is in compliance with Utah Code Annotated sections 12-1-1 through 12-1-10. (2003 Code)

3-2N-2: ATTORNEYS, BANKS AND TRUST COMPANIES EXCEPTED:
This article shall not apply to an attorney at law duly authorized to practice law in the state, to a national bank or to any bank or trust company duly incorporated under the laws of the state. (2003 Code)

ARTICLE O. FOR HIRE VEHICLE SERVICES


3-2O-1:      Defined
3-2O-2:      Application Information
3-2O-3:      Maintenance Of For Hire Vehicle
3-2O-4:      Distinctive Color Scheme
3-2O-5:      Insurance Required
3-2O-6:      For-Hire Driver’s Permit
3-2O-7:      Form And Terms Of Permit
3-2O-8:      Display Of Permit
3-2O-9:      Rates And Fares
3-2O-10:     Rules, Regulations And Requirements
3-2O-11:     Intoxicating Liquors
3-2O-12:     Revocation Or Suspension Of License
3-2O-13:     Penalty

3-2O-1: DEFINED:
“For hire vehicle” means any motor vehicle used for the purpose of transporting persons for a fee including, but not limited to, shuttles, taxicabs, limousines, or similar vehicles; provided, that “for hire vehicle,” as herein defined, shall not include vehicles used as part of a transportation network company to provide transportation network services as defined in Utah Code Annotated section 13-51-102. (Ord. 2016-07-002, 7-7-2016)

3-2O-2: APPLICATION INFORMATION:
All business license applications for hire vehicle services shall be made on the form provided by the city for general business licenses and shall include, the make, model, year of manufacture, seating capacity, Utah state license number with proof of current register with the division of motor vehicles, the color scheme or combination proposed to be used, and insurance as required in this article of all the for hire vehicles used in the business. The application shall also include the information on the for hire driver’s permit as listed in section 3-2O-6 of this article. (Ord. 2016-07-002, 7-7-2016)

3-2O-3: MAINTENANCE OF FOR HIRE VEHICLE:
A. Required: All for hire vehicles shall be maintained in a safe condition for the transportation of passengers. The for hire vehicles shall be kept clean, of respectable appearance, and shall maintain the distinctive color or color scheme, as listed on the business license application, so as to permit differentiation from privately owned passenger motor vehicles and other for hire vehicles.
B. Compliance: All for hire vehicles must comply with state law including:
    1. Safety and inspection requirements described in Utah Code Annotated section 53-8-205;
    2. Equipment standards described in Utah Code Annotated section 41-6a-1601;
    3. Emission requirements adopted by a county under Utah Code Annotated section 41-6a-1642;
    4. Procuring and maintaining insurance; and
    5. Carrying proof of insurance. (Ord. 2016-07-002, 7-7-2016)

3-2O-4: DISTINCTIVE COLOR SCHEME:
A business license for hire vehicle services shall not be issued to any person or entity until a standard and uniform color scheme for the applicant’s for hire vehicles has been approved by the city, which designated color scheme shall not conflict with or imitate any color scheme, monogram, name or insignia used by another for hire vehicle in such manner as to be misleading or to tend to deceive or defraud the public. Every for hire vehicle shall have painted upon each of the rear doors, the name of the owner, or the licensed business name under which the owner operates. All lettering mentioned in this section shall not be less than two and one-fourth inches (2 1/4") in height and five-sixteenths inch (5/16") stroke. This section shall not apply to limousines, except the limousine driver shall provide and display a city approved vehicle trade dress, consisting of recognizable company emblems, which will allow the city to identify the company vehicle at a distance of up to fifty feet (50') at all times when such vehicle is stopped or parked but in service for business. Such trade dress, which may be removable, shall be a visual indicator that indicates the vehicle is affiliated with a specific company and that the company is authorized to operate. (Ord. 2016-07-002, 7-7-2016)

3-2O-5: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
Prior to the issuance of a business license for for hire vehicle services, the applicant shall submit to the business license officer an insurance policy that covers, on a primary basis and for a commercial purpose, the vehicle and all drivers. The policy shall have a liability coverage for a minimum amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence; personal injury protection to the extent required under state law, uninsured motorist coverage where required by state law, and underinsured motorist coverage where required by Utah law, or other limits and requirements as required by state law.
No person shall operate or permit a for hire vehicle owned or controlled by such person to be operated as a vehicle for hire without first having obtained at its own cost and expense the required policies of insurance required by Utah law. (Ord. 2016-07-002, 7-7-2016)

3-2O-6: FOR-HIRE DRIVER’S PERMIT:
A. A for-hire vehicle driver’s permit is required for each driver of a for-hire vehicle. To obtain a permit, the for-hire vehicle driver must complete the application provided by the city, sign it before a notary public and submit it to the license officer. In addition, the application shall submit to the license officer the following:
    1. The applicant’s Utah driver’s license with a taxi endorsement per state law, title 53, chapter 3, section 202, Uniform Driver License Act, along with a clearly visible color copy of the license;
    2. The applicant’s name, telephone number, address, and age;
    3. The applicant’s Utah criminal background check report which was issued within the past forty-five (45) days;
    4. If the applicant has lived in Utah for less than five (5) continuous years immediately preceding the date of the application, the applicant’s Triple I criminal background report or a similar all-state criminal background report, as approved by the city, that was issued within the past one hundred eighty (180) days;
    5. The applicant’s driving history for the past seven (7) years from all states where the applicant held a driver’s license during that time; and
    6. A passport size photograph clearly showing the applicant’s face and information.
B. The driver shall be disqualified as a for-hire vehicle driver or denied a permit if:
    1. The driver/applicant has committed more than three (3) moving violations in the three (3) years before the day on which the individual applies for a permit;
    2. The driver/applicant has been convicted, which, for purposes of this permit, includes a plea in abeyance, in the seven (7) years before the day on which the individual applies for the permit, of any of the following: driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs; fraud; a sexual offense; a felony involving a motor vehicle; a crime involving property damage; a crime involving theft; a crime of violence; or an act of terror;
    3. The driver/applicant is required to register as a sex offender in accordance with title 77, chapter 41, Sex and Kidnap Offender Registry;
    4. The driver/applicant does not have a valid Utah driver’s license; or
    5. The driver/applicant is not at least nineteen (19) years of age.
C. Renewal Of For-Hire Driver’s Permit: The for-hire driver’s permit shall be renewed annually. The applicant for renewal shall submit an application on the form provided by the city if the applicant’s permit has not been suspended, revoked, or expired. Along with the renewal application, applicant shall submit to the licensing officer a Utah criminal background check which was issued within the past forty-five (45) days and the applicant’s driving history for the past year from all states where the applicant held a driver’s license during that time. The applicant shall also include payment of the permit fee, unless any of the conditions for the denial, suspension or revocation of the permit are present as set forth in this article or a disqualifying status is present. (Ord. 2018-03-005 § 2, 3-15-2018)

3-2O-7: FORM AND TERMS OF PERMIT:
The for-hire vehicle driver’s permit shall be in such form as to contain the photograph and signature of the driver. It shall be unlawful to deface, remove or obliterate any official entry made upon the for-hire vehicle driver’s permit. (Ord. 2016-07-002, 7-7-2016)

3-2O-8: DISPLAY OF PERMIT:
The for-hire vehicle driver’s permit must, under penalty of revocation of the permit, be constantly and conspicuously displayed on the outside front of the driver’s outer garment when he or she is engaged in his or her employment. The permit shall be nontransferable, and it shall be unlawful for any person to wear any such permit or one so similar as to deceive any person, unless the same has been regularly issued, as provided herein, to the person wearing the same. (Ord. 2016-07-002, 7-7-2016)

3-2O-9: RATES AND FARES:
A. Schedule Of Rates: The driver of each for-hire vehicle shall display in a conspicuous place on the inside of the vehicle which he or she is operating where the same may be easily read by every person riding therein, a schedule of the rates or, if the rates are based on zones, the zone map determining the charges to be assessed.
B. Taximeter: 
    1. If the rates to be charged are to be computed by taximeters, it shall be the duty of every person owning or operating such for-hire vehicle to keep the taximeter in good and workable condition and at the beginning of every hire to set the taximeter in the usual way so that it will register and compute on a mileage basis while the vehicle is running and on a time basis while waiting, and the taximeter shall be placed so that the face where the fare is registered will be plainly visible to passengers within the vehicle.
    2. No for-hire vehicle business license shall be issued to a for-hire vehicle service using a taximeter for computing the fare, until the taximeter attached thereto shall have been inspected by an independent company certifying it as accurate, and no person shall use or permit to be used upon any for-hire vehicle a taximeter which shall be in a condition to be over five percent (5%) incorrect to the prejudice of any passenger.
C. Filing Schedule Of Rates: It shall be the duty of every operator of a for-hire vehicle service to file with the business license officer a schedule of the rates to be charged in the operation of the for-hire vehicles and the method upon which the rates shall be computed.
D. Refusing To Pay Fare: It shall be unlawful for any person having hired any for-hire vehicle, and having ridden therein, to refuse to pay the fare, not exceeding the rates prescribed in the schedule or zone maps permitted under this article. It shall be unlawful for any for-hire vehicle driver to charge rates different from those so prescribed.
E. Demand Of Fare In Advance: A for-hire vehicle driver shall have the right to demand in advance the minimum fare of any person employing him, and may refuse to convey any person who shall not comply with such demand. (Ord. 2016-07-002, 7-7-2016)

3-2O-10: RULES, REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
A. Requirements For For-Hire Vehicle Operation: 
    1. Business License Required: No person shall operate or permit a for hire vehicle owned or controlled by such person to be operated as a vehicle for hire without first having obtained a for hire vehicle business license from the city in accordance with this article.
    2. Documents With Driver: All for hire vehicles shall have in the driver’s possession a copy of the current vehicle registration, copy of the business license, proof of insurance as required in this article and the driver shall have a “Z” or “P” endorsement on their Utah state driver’s license. Failure to produce any of this information may result in the issuance of a citation and suspension or revocation of the business license.
    3. Terms Defined: For the purpose of this section, the term “operate” or “operated” for hire shall not include the transporting, by a for hire vehicle properly licensed in a jurisdiction outside the corporate limits of the city, of a passenger or passengers for hire where a trip shall originate with the passenger or passengers being picked up outside the corporate limits of the city and where the destination is either within or beyond the city corporate limits. The term “operate” or “operated” means and shall include the soliciting or picking up of a passenger or passengers within the corporate limits of the city, whether the destination is within or outside of the corporate limits of the city.
    4. Office Space: All office space of a for hire company in the city of St. George must comply with this code.
    5. Additional Passengers: Whenever a for hire vehicle driver is transporting a passenger or passengers, such passenger or passengers shall have the exclusive right to full and free use of the passenger compartment, and it shall be unlawful for the for hire vehicle driver to solicit or carry an additional passenger or passengers therein, except with the consent of the passenger or passengers then being transported.
B. Conduct Of For Hire Vehicle Driver: It shall be unlawful for a for hire vehicle driver, while engaged in operating a for hire vehicle, to obstruct any street or sidewalk; or to interfere with, obstruct or impede the free passage of passengers or other persons; or to seize or grasp, or interfere with any person or package carried by or belonging to passengers or persons.
C. For Hire Vehicle Must Take Direct Route: Any driver employed to carry passengers to a definite point shall take the most direct route possible that will carry the passenger safely and expeditiously to his or her destination.
D. Fraud Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for the driver of any for hire vehicle to induce or attempt to induce any person to employ him or her by knowingly or wantonly misinforming or misleading such person as to the time or place of the arrival or departure of any airplane, bus or other conveyance, or the location of any airport, office, station or ticket office, or the location of any hotel, public place or private residence within the city, or to practice any deceit, fraud or misrepresentation in any manner whatever relative to matters pertaining to his or her business.
E. Duty To Transport Passengers: It shall be unlawful for any for hire vehicle driver while engaged in operating a for hire vehicle, except as permitted herein, to refuse to convey any person for any lawful purpose, with or without baggage, upon demand and tender of the lawful fare, or having undertaken to convey such person and thereafter willfully to refuse or neglect so to do; provided, that there shall be no duty hereunder for any for hire vehicle driver to transport any person who is acting in a loud, boisterous or unruly manner.
F. Disclosing Information Required: It shall be unlawful for the owner of any particular for hire vehicle service, upon being requested so to do by a passenger or law enforcement officer, to refuse to give the for hire vehicle services business license number, or for any for hire vehicle driver, upon being requested so to do by a passenger or law enforcement officer, to refuse to give the for hire vehicle driver’s permit information and the name of the for hire vehicle driver.
G. Record Of Business: Every person engaged in driving a for hire vehicle shall keep a true and exact record of every trip made. The record shall show the exact time of departure from the place of deployment, the place where every stop was made and the exact time when the employment terminated, and the place where the passenger, or if more than one, where each passenger was discharged, which record shall at all times be open to the inspection of any law enforcement officer upon demand. (Ord. 2016-07-002, 7-7-2016)

3-2O-11: INTOXICATING LIQUORS:
It shall be unlawful for any person while engaged in operating a for hire vehicle to be under the influence, or to drink intoxicating liquors or alcoholic beverages of any kind, including beer, regardless of the limit of its alcoholic content, or to be under the influence, or to ingest, any illegal drug, or to be under the influence, or to take or ingest, any drug or substance that renders the driver in an unsafe condition to operate a for hire vehicle. (Ord. 2016-07-002, 7-7-2016)

3-2O-12: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
A. Authority: Based upon a violation of any of the provisions of this article or of any other ordinance of the city, or the laws of the state, or for any other reason city deemed reasonable or proper, the above mentioned for hire vehicle business license and for hire vehicle driver’s permit may be either permanently revoked or suspended by the city, but only after the owner or driver has been given notice and has had a reasonable opportunity to present evidence in his or her behalf.
B. Appeal: In the event the city either permanently revokes or suspends the business license or the driver’s for hire vehicle driver’s permit, the licensee or permittee may file a written appeal to the city council which shall be filed with the city recorder within five (5) business days of the revocation or suspension. The licensee’s or permittees failure to file a written appeal within five (5) business days of the revocation or suspension shall be considered a waiver of a right of appeal. The city council shall hear the appeal within thirty (30) business days of receipt of the written appeal. At the hearing before the city council, the licensee or permittee may present evidence as to why his or her business license or the for hire vehicle driver’s permit should not be revoked or suspended. The decision of the city council shall be made within five (5) business days of the hearing, and the city council’s decision shall be final.
C. Suspension Or Revocation: Any suspension of the business license or the for hire vehicle driver’s permit shall be noted on such license or permit, together with a statement of the reasons therefor, and the licensee or permittee shall be deprived of the permit or license until the expiration of the period of the suspension in the event that only a suspension is imposed. A second suspension for the same reason or a third suspension for any reason shall be cause to permanently revoke the for hire vehicle business license and/or the for hire vehicle driver’s permit.
D. License After Revocation: No person whose license or permit has been revoked shall be permitted to obtain a for hire vehicle business license and/or a for hire vehicle driver’s permit, except upon the presentation of reasons satisfactory to the city council. (Ord. 2016-07-002, 7-7-2016)

3-2O-13: PENALTY:
Any violation of this article is a class B misdemeanor and punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), plus any mandatory fees and surcharges imposed by law or a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 2016-07-002, 7-7-2016)

ARTICLE P. MOTELS


3-2P-1:      Definitions
3-2P-2:      Applicability
3-2P-3:      Operational Requirements
3-2P-4:      Advertisement Of Rates
3-2P-5:      Penalty

3-2P-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this article shall have the following meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
MOTEL: Any facility, by whatever name designated, providing dwelling units designed for use by transient guests and maintained and held out to the public as accommodations by the day, week or twenty-nine (29) days or less, whether a charge is made or not. (Ord. 2016-01-007, 1-21-2016)

3-2P-2: APPLICABILITY:
Every motel within the city limits shall first obtain a license as required by subsection 3-1-4A of this title, and shall be subject to the conditions set out herein. (Ord. 2016-01-007, 1-21-2016)

3-2P-3: OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Management: Each motel must maintain an office on the motel premises in the charge and under the immediate supervision of a manager or attendant at all times. Such office shall remain continuously open and staffed whenever there are any guests registered or present at the motel and whenever the motel is open to receive guests.
B. Disclosure Of Available Rooms: Each motel shall disclose to the business license officer the current number of rooms available and/or held out for public accommodation:
    1. At the time of initial licensure or license renewal; and
    2. Within twenty-four (24) hours of any change in the number of such available rooms.
C. Display Of License; Register: 
    1. A current, valid business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in each motel.
    2. A register of the person to whom a motel unit is rented or leased shall be kept at all times. The register shall contain the following information about the person to whom a motel unit is rented or leased:
        a. Name and permanent address;
        b. Dates of arrival at the motel and departure; and
        c. Valid driver’s license or other government issued identification containing a photograph and the name and the address of the person to whom a motel unit is rented or leased, noting the type of identification and the issuing agency.
D. Occupancy: It shall be unlawful for any motel unit to be occupied by a greater number of persons than that which it is designed or furnished to accommodate.
E. Responsibility For Minors: No motel unit shall be rented, leased, or registered to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. Each person to whom a motel unit is rented, leased, or registered shall be responsible for any minors occupying such unit, and shall remain on the motel premises at all times while there are minors occupying such unit.
F. Length Of Stay; Exception: No person shall occupy any unit or combination of units at any one motel for longer than twenty nine (29) consecutive days, and no motel shall permit any person to occupy any unit or combination of units or allow persons to leave personal items or property in the unit or combination of units on the motel premises for longer than twenty nine (29) consecutive days. This subsection shall not apply to federal, state, or municipal law enforcement or emergency personnel, or to motels renting, leasing, or registering motel units to such personnel.
G. Sanitary Facilities: 
    1. Each motel unit held out for public accommodation must comply with the minimum rules established by the Utah Department of Health.
    2. It shall be unlawful to rent, lease, or otherwise hold out for public accommodation any motel unit which does not have:
        a. A complete operable bathroom, including flush toilet, sink and bath or shower in working order; and
        b. For each guest, an adequate daily supply of at least the following sanitary supplies:
            (1) Hot and cold running water,
            (2) Soap,
            (3) Towels,
            (4) Toilet paper, and
            (5) Clean linen.
    3. Each motel unit held out for public accommodation shall be cleaned after the departure of each guest and before the arrival of any subsequent guest. Each occupied motel unit shall be cleaned on a daily basis, and shall be provided with at least the required sanitary supplies listed above on a daily basis.
H. Inspections: Each motel may be subject to fire, building, health, or other inspection conducted by municipal officials. Any such inspection shall:
    1. Occur during reasonable business hours; and
    2. Not be made on any occupied unit in the absence of the owner, manager or attendant on duty or without the written permission of the owner, manager or attendant on duty; and
    3. Comply with Utah law and the fourth amendment of the United States constitution.
I. Duty To Report: Any owner, manager or attendant of any facility covered by this section shall report promptly to the proper authorities any violations of a municipal ordinance or any other violation of law which he or she has reason to believe was or is being committed on the premises. (Ord. 2016-01-007, 1-21-2016)

3-2P-4: ADVERTISEMENT OF RATES:
A. Posting And Advertising Of Rates: No person owning or operating motels or other establishments intended to accommodate overnight guests for a fee, including their managers, employees and agents, shall advertise or post rates within the city unless the rate for the class or category of unit advertised is available. (Ord. 2016-01-007, 1-21-2016)

3-2P-5: PENALTY:
Violation of any provision of this article shall be a class B misdemeanor in accordance with section 3-1-21 of this title or section 1-4-1 of this code, and each day that a violation continues shall be considered to be a separate offense. Owners and proprietors may be guilty of violating this article, as well as on duty employees or agents, if they employ, manage and supervise employees or agents who permit a violation of this article to occur. (Ord. 2016-01-007, 1-21-2016)

ARTICLE Q. LOCKSMITH SERVICES


3-2Q-1:      Definitions
3-2Q-2:      Rights Of License
3-2Q-3:      Application Information
3-2Q-4:      Police Investigation
3-2Q-5:      Bond Required
3-2Q-6:      License Records
3-2Q-7:      Exceptions

3-2Q-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this article shall have the following meaning unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
KEY DUPLICATING: Solely the duplication of any keys by mechanical or other means.
LOCKSMITHING: The installation, change, removal, construction, reconstruction, repair, adjustment, manufacture or duplication of locks, combination for safes, tool boxes, vaults and the duplication of keys. (Ord. 2002-1-002, 1-3-2002)

3-2Q-2: RIGHTS OF LICENSE:
Each locksmith services business license shall include the right to engage in the business of locksmithing and key duplicating. (Ord. 2002-1-002, 1-3-2002)

3-2Q-3: APPLICATION INFORMATION:
In addition to the information required by section 3-2Q-5 of this article, the business license application for locksmithing shall include:
A. A concise history of the applicant’s employment;
B. The applicant’s name and length of residency in the state;
C. The names and addresses of three (3) character references; and
D. A statement disclosing whether applicant has ever been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor and, if so, the nature of the offense and where and when it was committed. (Ord. 2002-1-002, 1-3-2002)

3-2Q-4: POLICE INVESTIGATION:
A. Applications shall be referred to the chief of police, or his or her designee, for approval or denial.
B. The chief of police, or his or her designee, only shall deny an application if the applicant has been convicted of any misdemeanor involving theft or any felony. (Ord. 2002-1-002, 1-3-2002)

3-2Q-5: BOND REQUIRED:
All licensees shall be required, before issuance of a license hereunder, to deposit with the business license officer a surety bond in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) conditioned that the licensee shall faithfully observe and comply with all ordinances and laws pertaining to locksmithing and key duplicating and that the bond shall indemnify the city and any person injured or damaged by reason of the failure of the licensee to so comply. (Ord. 2002-1-002, 1-3-2002)

3-2Q-6: LICENSE RECORDS:
Each licensee shall keep for a minimum of two (2) years orderly and adequate records containing the following, which shall be open to inspection by a police officer at any reasonable time:
A. The name and address of every person for whom a key is made from a key bearing the imprint “M” or “master” or other recognizable mark indicating it is a master key, together with the name and address of every person for whom a locked automobile, building, structure, house, store, safe or vault is opened and the date of transaction.
B. The name and address of every person for whom a lock or combination of a lock is changed and the date of the transaction. (Ord. 2002-1-002, 1-3-2002)

3-2Q-7: EXCEPTIONS:
The requirements of this article shall not apply to the following:
A. Persons otherwise licensed by the city or the state as a contractor or carpenter who installs a lock as part of a door or remodeled door when the lock and key come from a manufacturer’s stock and the installation does not involve adjustment or reconstruction of the lock.
B. A person or an employee of a firm or corporation who is duly licensed to conduct such business in an area outside the jurisdiction of the city and who is not otherwise subject to the provisions of this law, when their work in the city does not involve, in a six (6) month period, more than one contract and one day to perform. (Ord. 2002-1-002, 1-3-2002)

ARTICLE R. MOBILE CATERING UNITS


3-2R-1:      Applicability
3-2R-2:      Exceptions
3-2R-3:      Portable Facility Defined
3-2R-4:      Operational Requirements
3-2R-5:      Revocation; Penalty

3-2R-1: APPLICABILITY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of retailing and selling any beverage or food product for human consumption from a temporary, portable or mobile unit without first obtaining, in addition to a city business license, a food service sanitation certificate from the state and complying with the conditions of this article. (Ord. 1-17-1985, 1-17-1985)

3-2R-2: EXCEPTIONS:
This article shall have no application to the sale of candy and refreshments in a public building or facility where such items are normally vended in connection with sporting or recreational activities carried on in such facilities, unless the vending is from a mobile or portable base not a permanent part of the facility where such sales take place. (Ord. 1-17-1985, 1-17-1985)

3-2R-3: PORTABLE FACILITY DEFINED:
For purposes of this article, a facility shall be considered to be portable if it is equipped or constructed so as to be easily transportable, and its use is not limited to a single location or premises. This article shall have no application to a one time usage that does not reoccur on a continuing basis. (Ord. 1-17-1985, 1-17-1985)

3-2R-4: OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Inspections: 
    1. Inspection shall be made initially and at least once a year thereafter by the chief of police, or officer delegated by him, of the vehicle or portable facility to be used for the sale of food and beverage.
    2. Both the vehicle or portable facility from which food or beverage is sold shall be available for inspection at any reasonable time upon request by the chief of police, fire chief, or their delegated agent, for the purpose of ascertaining the sanitation of the premises and purity of food. In addition, if the food is prepared elsewhere than in the vehicle or portable unit, inspection shall be permitted by the same parties of the kitchen or premises where any portion of the preparation actually occurs. The standards of quality, purity and strength of food and drinks that have been or shall hereafter be adopted by the United States Department of Agriculture are hereby declared to be the standards of quality, purity and strength of foods and beverages in the city and are hereby adopted as a part of this article, together with amendments as made.
B. Location Of Sales; Routes: The sale locations or routes, together with intended points of sale, shall be provided the city, either in a list form or clearly designated on a map, together with additions or deletions on a current basis from time to time. The city shall have the right at all times to remove from such designation and forbid sale at any location where considerations of safety or general public welfare indicate that it would be in the best interests of the city to prohibit such sales.
C. Litter Minimized: A licensee shall at all times do whatever is reasonable and necessary to minimize the littering of streets, sidewalks and private property as the result of the catering activities for which a license is issued, including providing convenient trash receptacles, advising customers verbally and in writing of proper methods of trash disposal, and personally policing the sales area before moving to another location in order to clean up any trash or debris resulting from the activities of licensee.
D. Equipment: The licensee shall employ such mirrors, warning devices, lights and other equipment as may be reasonable and necessary on a mobile unit to warn traffic and pedestrians of the intended movements of said vehicle, including the incorporation of any suggested changes or equipment that may be requested by the chief of police after inspection as herein above provided. (Ord. 1-17-1985, 1-17-1985)

3-2R-5: REVOCATION; PENALTY:
Failure of a licensee at any time to meet any of the above conditions, or any other ordinance of the city, shall result in a revocation of the license to do business, subject to the hearing provided in section 3-1-19 of this title. Violation may also result in the application of that penalty prescribed in section 3-1-21 of this title. Each day of operation while in violation of this article may constitute a separate offense thereunder. Nothing herein shall be construed to permit door to door peddling or solicitation in a residential neighborhood, or the sale of commodities other than ready to eat food, beverage and related items from a mobile or portable facility. (Ord. 1-17-1985, 1-17-1985)

ARTICLE S. SEPTIC TANK PUMPERS


3-2S-1:      Applicability
3-2S-2:      Fee For License
3-2S-3:      License Requirements

3-2S-1: APPLICABILITY:
Anyone engaged in the pumping or cleaning of septic tanks, cesspools, holding tanks, car wash sumps, or related activities, shall obtain a license only upon the conditions prescribed in this article. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

3-2S-2: FEE FOR LICENSE:
An applicant under this article shall pay a license fee each year in such amount as required by resolution of the city council due to the heavy impact of such activities upon the city storm water treatment system. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

3-2S-3: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
A licensee shall dump all products at the single dump point located near the St. George regional water reclamation facility and designated by the city. Discharge of any fluid or substance into the sewer system at any other point or any violation of local, state or federal storm water regulations shall be the basis for revocation of any license granted hereunder. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

ARTICLE T. MAIL DELIVERY AGENCIES


3-2T-1:      Applicability
3-2T-2:      Operational Requirements

3-2T-1: APPLICABILITY:
Any person engaging in the business of causing mail to be forwarded, or receiving delivery of mail on behalf of or as agent for another person or entity, or any person engaging in the business of providing telephone or other communication services for a fee to another person or entity, must first obtain a license as required by subsection 3-1-4A of this title and comply with the requirements of this article. (Ord. 2-3-1990, 2-15-1990)

3-2T-2: OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Record Keeping: Whenever the licensee’s address, telephone or other communication terminus is made available for use by another on a fee basis in such a manner that the identity and permanent address of the customer is not disclosed or made readily available, the licensee shall maintain a record of the true name of the customer, a permanent street address of the customer, and the number of a driver’s license or other equivalent form of identification.
B. Records Open To Authorities: Whenever the police department has probable cause to believe that the licensee or its facilities are being utilized as part of an unlawful activity or in connection with an act that may violate a city ordinance, the police department shall be entitled to obtain from licensee the information kept by it pursuant to this section.
C. Disclosure Agreement: Any contract between licensee and a customer regarding such agency or service may agree to retain all information as confidential except for disclosure when required by law, including this article. (Ord. 2-3-1990, 2-15-1990)

ARTICLE U. TOWING SERVICES


3-2U-1:      Definitions
3-2U-2:      License Requirements
3-2U-3:      Display Of Licenses And Certificate
3-2U-4:      Rotation
3-2U-5:      City Impounds

3-2U-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this article shall have the following meaning unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
ROTATION LIST: A list of tow trucks or tow truck services maintained by the city of St. George that have valid licenses, and who request in writing from the city of St. George the privilege of being called in sequence down the list to provide tow truck services to motorists when a motorist requests the city’s assistance in obtaining a tow truck or tow truck service.
TOW LOT: An area reserved for storage of vehicles that have been removed by a tow truck.
TOW TRUCK: A motor vehicle which has been altered or designed, equipped and used for the purpose of towing vehicles by means of a crane, hoist, tow bar, tow line, chain or dolly.
TOW TRUCK SERVICE: Transportation upon the public streets, public places and highways of the city of damaged, disabled or abandoned vehicles, together with personal effects and/or cargo, by towing only. Wrecker service, tow car service and garage tow truck service are synonymous and shall be termed “tow truck service”. (Ord. 2002-1-003, 1-3-2002)

3-2U-2: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
A business license shall be issued to tow trucks or tow truck services with a principal place of business within the corporate limits of the city upon proof being presented to the city by the applicant that each of the following requirements have been and will continue to be met by the applicant:
A. State Rules And Regulations: Complete compliance with the current Utah department of transportation rules and regulations for tow truck operators;
B. State Certificate: Issuance of a department of transportation certificate for each tow during the policy term of the license;
C. Liability Insurance: Competent evidence of valid towing property damage liability insurance, not less than twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), issued with applicant named as insured, including the policy number and insurance company name for the business and the tow truck;
D. Signage: Permanent readable signs on the doors of the tow truck listing the name of the applicant, address and telephone number.
E. Bond Required: Competent evidence of a surety bond of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) from good and sufficient sureties to ensure continued compliance with these provisions;
F. Secure Area: Competent evidence that the tow truck service, or tow truck, tows and stores motor vehicles within a secured, fenced or enclosed yard or building for the storage of motor vehicles within the city limits, unless otherwise required by the state;
G. Competent Personnel: All tow trucks must be operated by competent personnel carrying a certification card issued by the Utah department of transportation and a proper and valid Utah driver’s license which allows for operation of a tow truck;
H. Conduct Of Business: Competent evidence that all business operations are conducted in a fair, equitable and lawful manner.
I. Fees: Competent evidence that suggested tow and storage fees are those established by the Utah towing association. (Ord. 2002-1-003, 1-3-2002)

3-2U-3: DISPLAY OF LICENSES AND CERTIFICATE:
Every tow truck operator shall carry upon his or her person:
A. A proper and valid Utah driver’s license which allows for operation of a tow truck;
B. Evidence of a proper and valid business license issued by the city;
C. Evidence of a personal certification card issued by the Utah department of transportation; and
D. All other identification required by law. (Ord. 2002-1-003, 1-3-2002)

3-2U-4: ROTATION:
A. To qualify for rotation, a tow truck service shall comply with all requirements of this article and other ordinances of the city.
B. The police department has the authority to promulgate all rules and regulations operating a rotation system.
C. The rotation system shall be followed, unless a valid contract has been issued by the city. (Ord. 2002-1-003, 1-3-2002)

3-2U-5: CITY IMPOUNDS:
The city may enter into contracts with tow trucks, tow services and tow lot companies to ensure safe and economical storage and transportation of motor vehicles impounded by the city. (Ord. 2002-1-003, 1-3-2002)

ARTICLE V. SHORT TERM RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTIES


3-2V-1:      License And Operational Requirements

3-2V-1: LICENSE AND OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. License Required: It is unlawful for any person to keep, conduct, operate or maintain a “short term residential rental property” as defined in section 10-2-1 of this code within the city without a business license for such dwelling unit. A person who owns multiple short term residential rental properties is not required to obtain more than one business license for the operation and maintenance of those short term residential rental properties.
B. License Not Transferable: A short term residential rental property business license is not transferable between persons or structures. Any person holding such license shall give written notice within thirty (30) days to the business license official after having transferred or otherwise disposed of legal or equitable control of any rental dwelling unit licensed under this article. Such notice of transferred interest shall be deemed a request to cancel an existing business license for such rental dwelling unit and shall include the name, address, and information regarding the person(s) succeeding to the ownership or control thereof.
C. Transient Room Tax: All short term residential rental properties shall be subject to the collection of the municipality transient room tax as allowed under Utah Code.
D. Maintenance And Repair; Owner’s Duties: The property shall be subject to the rental fit premises requirements specifying the property owner’s duties for maintenance of the dwelling unit and repair of specified failures as outlined in this code.
E. Garbage Removal: Garbage shall be removed from the property by the owner or property manager and properly disposed of within twenty-four (24) hours of tenants leaving the property.
F. Cleaning Service: Each property shall be cleaned at least weekly while occupied and in between tenant occupancy. Each property shall also comply with the sanitary facilities requirements outlined for motels in this code.
G. Local Property Manager Required: All short term residential rental properties shall designate a local property manager. The local property manager shall be available twenty-four (24) hours per day to respond to tenant and neighborhood questions or concerns. Each short term residential rental property shall have a clearly visible sign within the unit containing the following information: the name and phone number of the local property manager, and the maximum occupancy of the unit, and the day of garbage pick up.
H. Owner And Property Manager Responsible: The owner and property manager shall be jointly and severally liable for any violations of this article. Any rental dwelling unit which is found in violation of this article or any other requirement of this code may be subject to revocation of the short term residential rental properties business license. (Ord. 2010-07-001, 7-1-2010)

CHAPTER 3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES


3-3-1:       Reserved
3-3-2:       Definitions
3-3-3:       Number Permitted
3-3-4:       License Required
3-3-5:       Application For License
3-3-6:       Qualifications Of Licensee
3-3-7:       Fees For License
3-3-8:       Current Status Of Other Charges
3-3-9:       Local Consent
3-3-10:      Proximity Limitations
3-3-11:      Prohibited Acts And Activities – State Statute Provisions Adopted
3-3-12:      Revocation, Suspension Or Refusal To Renew
3-3-13:      Penalty

3-3-1: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2016-10-008, 10-27-2016; amd. Ord. 2019-01-005 § 2, 1-3-2019)

3-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the city council hereby adopts, by reference, and incorporates the definition sections in the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. In addition, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning herein prescribed:
ACT: The Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, Utah Code Annotated title 32B, or successor provisions as amended.
BAR ESTABLISHMENT: A license entitling the licensee to sell an alcoholic product for consumption on the licensed premises and in connection with a license issued by the state of Utah to operate as a bar establishment as provided in Utah Code Annotated 32B-6, part 4, or successor provisions as amended.
BAR ESTABLISHMENT IN A HOTEL: A license intended to serve the clientele, patrons and guests of significant hotel/convention facilities, which bar establishment shall be located in a hotel containing not less than one hundred thirty (130) guestrooms and with not less than four thousand (4,000) square feet of function space, consisting of meeting and/or dining rooms that can be reserved for private use under a banquet contract and be able to accommodate a minimum of three hundred (300) people and which bar establishment shall not have any separate entrances from outside the hotel facility. This type of bar establishment license entitles the licensee to sell alcohol products for consumption on the licensed premises and in connection with a license issued by the state of Utah to operate as a bar establishment. This type of bar establishment license may only be issued to the owner or operator of a qualifying hotel, or a wholly owned affiliate or subsidiary thereof.
BAR ESTABLISHMENT IN A RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT: A license intended to serve the clientele, patrons and guests of a significant retail facility, which bar establishment shall be located in a retail facility containing not less than one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet. This type of bar establishment license entitles the licensee to sell alcohol products for consumption on the licensed premises and in connection with a license issued by the state of Utah to operate as a bar establishment. This type of bar establishment license may only be issued to the owner or operator of the qualifying retail facility, or a wholly owned affiliate or subsidiary thereof.
BAR ESTABLISHMENT IN THE HISTORIC DISTRICT OVERLAY ZONE: A license intended to serve the downtown area, which bar establishment shall be located in the C-4 commercial zone in the historic district overlay zone. This type of bar establishment license entitles the licensee to sell alcohol products for consumption on the licensed premises and in connection with a license issued by the state of Utah to operate as a bar establishment.
CITY: The city of St. George, Utah.
LICENSE OFFICER: The business license officer of the city.
LICENSED PREMISES: Any property, building, enclosure, room or equipment used in connection with the sale, storage, service, manufacture, distribution or consumption of alcoholic beverages or products and licensed to carry out the activity approved under this chapter and under the Act.
LICENSEE: Any person issued a license by the city to sell, manufacture, store or allow consumption of alcoholic beverages on premises owned or controlled by the person.
OFF-PREMISES BEER RETAILER: A license entitling the licensee to sell beer on the licensed premises for consumption off the premises as provided in Utah Code Annotated, chapter 32B-7, or successor provisions as amended or as provided in Utah Code Annotated, chapter 32B-2, Part 6, except, in addition to the Act requirements, the following is also required:
    1. The off-premises retail space shall be at least one thousand (1,000) square feet; and
    2. The off-premises beer retailer shall not have more than thirty percent (30%) of its total annual gross retail receipts for the off-premises retailer from the sale of beer.
ON-PREMISES BANQUET LICENSE: A license entitling the licensee to sell beer on the licensed premises for consumption on the premises as provided in Utah Code Annotated, title 32B, chapter 6, part 6, or successor provisions as amended or as provided in Utah Code Annotated, except as this section applies to hotels, in addition to the Act requirements, the following is also required:
    1. A license intended to serve the clientele, patrons and guests of significant hotel/convention facilities, which bar establishment shall be located in a hotel containing not less than sixty (60) guestrooms and at least one thousand (1,000) square feet of function space, consisting of meeting and/or dining rooms that can be reserved for private use under a banquet contract and be able to accommodate a minimum of seventy-five (75) people. This type of banquet license entitles the licensee to sell alcohol products for consumption on the licensed premises and in connection with a license issued by the state of Utah to provide banquet services in a hotel. This type of license may only be issued to the owner or operator of a qualifying hotel, or a wholly owned affiliate or subsidiary thereof.
ON-PREMISES BEER RETAILER/NON-TAVERN RECREATIONAL AMENITY RETAILER: A license entitling the licensee to sell beer on the licensed premises for consumption on the premises as provided in Utah Code Annotated, title 32B, chapter 6, part 7, or successor provisions as amended or as provided in Utah Code Annotated, except, in addition to the Act requirements, the following is also required:
    1. To be wholly located on the licensed premises of a recreational amenity and shall not be allowed on the premises of a facility adjoining the licensed premises of a recreational amenity;
    2. Any room where alcohol is served or consumed shall be clearly visible to the recreation area and shall be open for use by the patrons including minors; and
    3. All beer shall be served in containers that are readily identifiable as beer containers such as a clear glass or pitcher or the beer’s original container.
PACKAGE AGENCY: Any person permitted under a contractual agreement with the Utah Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control to sell alcoholic products for consumption off the licensed premises of the agency as provided in Utah Code Annotated, chapter 32B-2, part 6, or successor provisions as amended or as provided in Utah Code Annotated, except, in addition to the Act requirements, the following is also required:
    1. For an off-premises retail facility with the following conditions:
        a. Shall be in a hotel with not less than sixty (60) guestrooms and at least one thousand (1,000) square feet of function space, consisting of meeting and/or dining rooms that can be reserved for private use under a banquet contract and be able to accommodate a minimum of seventy-five (75) people;
        b. The retail space for the package agency shall be at least one thousand (1,000) square feet; and
        c. The total annual gross retail receipts for the package agency off-premises retailer shall not be more than thirty percent (30%) of the total gross receipts for the hotel; or
    2. Room service with the following conditions:
        a. Shall be in a hotel with not less than sixty (60) guestrooms and at least one thousand (1,000) square feet of function space, consisting of meeting and/or dining rooms that can be reserved for private use under a banquet contract and be able to accommodate a minimum of seventy-five (75) people; and
        b. The total annual gross room service alcohol receipts for the package agency retailer shall not be more than thirty percent (30%) of the total gross receipts for the hotel; or
    3. An off-premises retail facility at a manufacturing facility licensed under Utah Code Annotated chapter 32B-11:
        a. Shall be in the manufacturing facility and the retail space shall not be more than one thousand (1,000) square feet; and
        b. The total annual gross retail receipts for the package agency off-premises retailer shall not be more than thirty percent (30%) of the total gross receipts of the manufacturing facility.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, firm, corporation, association, business trust, or other form of business enterprise, including a receiver or trustee, and the plural as well as the singular number, unless the intent to give a more limited meaning is disclosed by the context.
RECREATIONAL AMENITY: For purposes of issuing an on-premises beer retailer license that is not a tavern, “recreational amenity” is one (1) or more of the following or an activity substantially similar to one (1) of the following:
    1. A pool parlor;
    2. A bowling facility;
    3. A golf course;
    4. Miniature golf;
    5. A golf driving range;
    6. A tennis club;
    7. A sports facility that hosts professional sporting events and has a seating capacity equal to or greater than six thousand five hundred (6,500); or
    8. A concert venue that has a seating capacity equal to or greater than six thousand five hundred (6,500). (Ord. 2016-10-008, 10-27-2016; amd. Ord. 2019-01-005 § 2, 1-3-2019)

3-3-3: NUMBER PERMITTED:
A. The quotas for alcohol license shall be as set forth herein. Where a quota is not set forth in this chapter, the quotas established under the Act shall apply. Specified:
    1. Off-Premises Beer Retailer: The total number of off-premises beer retailer licenses issued within the city shall not exceed that number determined by dividing the population of the city by one thousand (1,000). However, the city council shall have discretion to issue an off-premises beer retailer license without regard to the quota set forth above, if the licensee falls within the category of establishment where the total square footage devoted to the sale of grocery or related items exceeds ten thousand (10,000) square feet, total employees will exceed thirty-five (35), and the impact of the applicant upon the economy of the city is determined to be beneficial.
    2. On-Premises Beer Retailer Tavern: On and after July 1, 1994, the city shall not issue any new on-premises beer retailer tavern licenses. The city may only renew existing on-premises beer retailer tavern licenses, permit a change of licensee at licensed premises existing as of July 1, 1994, and allow existing on-premises beer retailer tavern licensees to move to new locations if the license fees are paid and the new location meets the requirements of this chapter and other provisions of this code and the requirements of the Act. Any on-premises beer retailer tavern licensee or renewal whose license is revoked for whatever reason shall not be entitled to obtain a new on-premises beer retailer tavern license.
    3. Bar Establishment: The total number of licenses issued within the city shall not exceed that number determined by dividing the population of the city by twenty thousand (20,000). This license may only be issued in a planned development zone that has been amended by the city council allowing a bar establishment in that zone and the approval was given after September 30, 2018.
    4. Bar Establishment In A Hotel: The total number of licenses issued within the city shall not exceed that number determined by dividing the population of the city by twenty thousand (20,000).
    5. Bar Establishment In A Retail Establishment: The total number of licenses issued within the city shall not exceed that number determined by dividing the population of the city by twenty thousand (20,000).
    6. Bar Establishment In The Historic District Overlay Zone: The total number of licenses issued within the city shall not exceed that number determined by dividing the population of the city by twenty thousand (20,000).
    7. On-Premises Beer Retailer/Non-Tavern Recreational Amenity Retailer: The total number of licenses issued within the city shall not exceed that number determined by dividing the population of the city by fifteen thousand (15,000).
B. State License No Effect: A license issued by the state for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall not affect the need for a separate license from the city. Holding one (1) type of license under this chapter shall have no effect on the applicability of regulations or quotas governing other types.
C. Population Determination: Population for determining the number of licenses shall be by the most recent U.S. decennial or special census or by any other population determination made by the United States government or the state. If the city council wishes to make more frequent determinations of population than what may be available from the above sources, it may do so based on such formula as it may reasonably consider to be accurate, and in such event, it may abandon that determination upon issuance of a new census figure by the United States or state if it believes the latter to be more accurate. (Ord. 2016-10-008, 10-27-2016; amd. Ord. 2019-01-005 § 2, 1-3-2019)

3-3-4: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. An alcohol license is required by any person who is required to have a state alcohol license under the Act. The alcohol license is in addition to a business license under chapter 1 of this title, “General License Provisions.”
B. Separate License Each Location And Type: Any license issued under this chapter shall be to sell alcoholic product or otherwise conduct permitted activities only at the specific place and in the specific manner provided by such license. A separate license shall be obtained for each type of alcohol activity and for each different location for which the applicant desires to carry on activities regulated by this chapter. (Ord. 2016-10-008, 10-27-2016; amd. Ord. 2019-01-005 § 2, 1-3-2019)

3-3-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
A. Required: An application for a license under this chapter shall be made in writing, under oath, and on a form provided by the city for a new license, due to a change of ownership, a change of lessee of an existing licensed premises, or a change of location of an existing licensed premises. Renewal applications must be signed by an authorized signer for the business and returned to the city with a copy of the current state alcohol license and all applicable fees.
B. Accompanying Materials: Any application submitted under this chapter shall be accompanied by:
    1. A nonrefundable application fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city council;
    2. An issuance fee for an original license or renewal in such amount as established by resolution of the city council, which is refundable if a license is not issued. If a license is issued on or after July 1 in any year, one-half (1/2) of the license fee shall be charged;
    3. A copy of the applicant’s current business license or application therefor;
    4. A copy of the completed application being submitted to the state for the state alcohol license;
    5. For all off-premises beer retailer alcohol licenses, the applicant shall provide a criminal history for the owner and the local manager of the retail location along with a list of all community locations within two hundred feet (200') of the off-premises beer retail location as provided in section 3-3-10;
    6. A signed consent form stating that the licensee will permit any authorized representative of the city or any law enforcement officer an unrestricted right to enter the licensed premises; and
    7. Any other information the license officer may require.
C. Renewal Applications: Renewal applications must be signed by an authorized signer for the business and returned to the city with a copy of the current state alcohol license and all applicable fees.
D. Submission To License Officer: All applications and accompanying information shall be returned to the license officer.
E. Reserved.
F. Assignment Or Transfer: No license issued under this chapter shall be assigned, transferred, leased, subleased or sold, or otherwise transferred, except that in the sole discretion of the city, a transfer of a license may be permitted upon a change of location where the owner remains the same, or upon a change of owners where the location remains the same. In either case, the same requirements as to the location of premises and the qualifications of the licensee shall apply, and the same fees will be required as in the case of the issuance of an original license.
G. Nonuse – Validity: A license issued under this chapter which is not used by the licensee within or for a period in excess of ninety (90) consecutive days shall automatically revert to the city and shall no longer have any validity. (Ord. 2016-10-008, 10-27-2016; amd. Ord. 2019-01-005 § 2, 1-3-2019; Ord. 2020-07-005 § 2, 7-16-2020)

3-3-6: QUALIFICATIONS OF LICENSEE:
A. Every licensee hereunder shall be of good moral character, over the age of twenty-one (21) years, and lawfully present in the United States. If the applicant is a corporation, partnership, limited liability company or other entity, it shall be qualified to do business in the state and each shareholder, joint venturer, partner or member holding any interest greater than twenty percent (20%) in the applicant business, and each director, officer, manager and trustee, shall meet the qualifications to be a licensee. Any partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other entity who shall hold its license through an agent shall also meet all the qualifications of a licensee. Such agent shall be personally responsible for assuring compliance with this chapter and the Act and shall be subject to the penalties for any violation of this chapter or of the Act. Upon the death, resignation or discharge of its agent, a partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other entity shall, within fifteen (15) days, appoint another agent to qualify for and hold the license. Failure to designate a substitute agent within the time required shall be grounds for suspension, revocation or refusal to renew the license.
B. No license shall be issued to any person who has violated any provision of this title or the Act or who has violated any provision of a license to sell alcoholic products issued by any governmental agency within the state, or who has had such a license revoked. No license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of a felony or of any violation of any law or ordinance relating to alcoholic beverages or drugs, keeping a gambling or disorderly house, or any law or ordinance involving moral turpitude, or who has pleaded guilty to, including a plea in abeyance, or forfeited bail on a charge of having committed a felony or of having violated any such law or ordinance. (Ord. 2016-10-008, 10-27-2016; amd. Ord. 2019-01-005 § 2, 1-3-2019)

3-3-7: FEES FOR LICENSE:
A. Application Fee: A nonrefundable application fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city council shall be submitted with any application for an original license.
B. License Fee: At the time of application for an original license or renewal, the applicant shall pay an issuance fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city council.
C. Issuance After July 1: If a license is issued on or after July 1 in any year, one-half (1/2) of the annual license fee shall be charged. (Ord. 2016-10-008, 10-27-2016; amd. Ord. 2019-01-005 § 2, 1-3-2019)

3-3-8: CURRENT STATUS OF OTHER CHARGES:
No license shall be issued to any applicant who is in arrears in the payment to the city for any business license fees, or who is otherwise indebted to the city. Failure to pay business license fees or other charges assessed by the city when due shall be a basis for suspension or revocation of any license issued hereunder. (Ord. 2016-10-008, 10-27-2016; amd. Ord. 2019-01-005 § 2, 1-3-2019)

3-3-9: LOCAL CONSENT:
Where a party seeks local consent of the city for an application for an alcohol license with the state of Utah, the party shall submit an application as required for an alcohol license. The city manager or designee shall consider the location, the nature and class of the proposed license, and whether the license will comply with the city ordinances. Local consent shall expire in one hundred eighty (180) days if a license is not issued by the state. (Ord. 2016-10-008, 10-27-2016; amd. Ord. 2019-01-005 § 2, 1-3-2019)

3-3-10: PROXIMITY LIMITATIONS:
A. Specified: No off-premises beer retailer licensee’s premises may be established within two hundred feet (200') of any community location, as measured from the nearest entrance of the licensee’s premises or establishment by following the shortest route of either ordinary pedestrian traffic or, where applicable, vehicular travel along public thoroughfares, whichever is the closer, to the property boundary of the community location.
B. Variance: Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the city council finds after full investigation that compliance with the proximity limitations set forth in subsection A of this section would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties or exceptional and undue hardships, and after giving full consideration to the attending circumstances, following a public hearing, the city council may authorize a variance from the proximity limitation so as to relieve the peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties, or the exceptional or undue hardships, provided the variance may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this chapter. (Ord. 2016-10-008, 10-27-2016; amd. Ord. 2019-01-005 § 2, 1-3-2019)

3-3-11: PROHIBITED ACTS AND ACTIVITIES – STATE STATUTE PROVISIONS ADOPTED:
A. The city council hereby adopts by reference and incorporates into this code all sections of Utah Code Annotated title 32B, Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, or successor provisions as amended, that relate to Class B misdemeanors, Class C misdemeanors or infractions. In the event the city code is inconsistent with the requirements of the Act, the city code shall control, except if the state law preempts the city code then the state law shall control.
B. It is unlawful:
    1. For a person to buy for resale, sell or deal in alcoholic product without complying with the provisions of this chapter, the Act and any other applicable law;
    2. For an off-premises beer retailer licensee or its employee to sell, dispose of, deliver or give beer to any person between the hours of one o’clock (1:00) A.M. and seven o’clock (7:00) A.M.;
    3. For an on-premises beer retailer/non-tavern recreational amenity retailer to serve beer in containers other than a clear glass, a clear pitcher or the beer’s original container; or
    4. For an on-premises beer retailer/non-tavern recreational amenity retailer to serve alcohol or allow anyone to consume alcohol in any room that is not clearly visible to the recreation area and is not open for use by patrons including minors. (Ord. 2016-10-008, 10-27-2016; amd. Ord. 2019-01-005 § 2, 1-3-2019)

3-3-12: REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OR REFUSAL TO RENEW:
A. Reasons Specified: In addition to the provisions provided in section 3-1-19, the license officer may suspend, revoke or refuse to renew any license issued pursuant to this chapter for any of the following reasons:
    1. There occurs on the licensed premises repeated acts of violence.
    2. The licensee is on the premises habitually drunk or under the influence of alcohol or illegal drugs.
    3. The licensee fails to keep for a period of two (2) years, or make available to the city upon reasonable request, all invoices, records, bills or other papers and documents relating to the purchase, sale and delivery of alcoholic beverages.
    4. The licensee commits a violation which is a felony or any violation of any law or ordinance relating to alcoholic beverages, driving under the influence of alcohol, or alcohol related reckless driving, keeping a gambling or disorderly house, or any law or ordinance involving moral turpitude. (Ord. 2016-10-008, 10-27-2016; amd. Ord. 2019-01-005 § 2, 1-3-2019)

3-3-13: PENALTY:
In addition to the denial, suspension, revocation or refusal to renew a license, the licensee and any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1. Each day or incident of violation shall constitute a separate offense hereunder. (Ord. 2016-10-008, 10-27-2016; amd. Ord. 2019-01-005 § 2, 1-3-2019)

CHAPTER 4 TAXES


4A           Municipal Energy Sales And Use Tax
    3-4A-1:      Definitions
    3-4A-2:      Tax Imposed
    3-4A-3:      Exemptions From Tax
    3-4A-4:      Existing Franchises
    3-4A-5:      Collection Contract With State
    3-4A-6:      State Statute Provisions Incorporated
    3-4A-7:      Additional License Or Reporting Not Required
    3-4A-8:      Effective Date
4B           Telecommunications License Tax
    3-4B-1:      Definitions
    3-4B-2:      Levy Of Tax
    3-4B-3:      Rate
    3-4B-4:      Rate Limitation And Exemption Therefrom
    3-4B-5:      Effective Date Of Tax Levy
    3-4B-6:      Changes In Rate Or Repeal Of The Tax
    3-4B-7:      Interlocal Agreement For Collection Of The Tax
    3-4B-8:      Procedures For Taxes Erroneously Recovered From Customers
    3-4B-9:      Repeal Of Inconsistent Taxes And Fees
4C           Transient Room Tax
    3-4C-1:      Tax Imposed
4D           Sales And Use Tax
    3-4D-1:      Short Title
    3-4D-2:      Purpose And Intent
    3-4D-3:      Sales And Use Tax Levied
    3-4D-4:      State Statutes Incorporated
    3-4D-5:      Contract With State Tax Commission
    3-4D-6:      Exemption From Tax
    3-4D-7:      Tax Paid Not Part Of Purchase Price
    3-4D-8:      Mayor Authorized
    3-4D-9:      Report Of Tax Collections; Point Of Sale; Public Utilities
    3-4D-10:     Effective Date Of Tax And Continuation Of Previous Ordinances

ARTICLE A. MUNICIPAL ENERGY SALES AND USE TAX


3-4A-1:      Definitions
3-4A-2:      Tax Imposed
3-4A-3:      Exemptions From Tax
3-4A-4:      Existing Franchises
3-4A-5:      Collection Contract With State
3-4A-6:      State Statute Provisions Incorporated
3-4A-7:      Additional License Or Reporting Not Required
3-4A-8:      Effective Date

3-4A-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
CONSUMER: A person who acquires taxable energy for any use that is subject to the St. George energy sales and use tax.
CONTRACTUAL FRANCHISE FEE:
    A. A fee;
        1. Provided for in a franchise agreement; and
        2. That is consideration for the franchise agreement; or
    B. 
        1. A fee similar to subsection A of this definition; or
        2. Any combination of subsection A or B of this definition.
DELIVERED VALUE:
    A. The fair market value of the taxable energy delivered for sale or use in the municipality and includes:
        1. The value of the energy itself; and
        2. Any transportation, freight, customer demand charges, service charges or other costs typically incurred in providing taxable energy in usable form to each class of customer in the municipality.
    B. “Delivered value” does not include the amount of a tax paid under Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, part 1 or part 2, or this article.
ENERGY SUPPLIER: A person supplying taxable energy, except for persons supplying a de minimus amount of taxable energy, if such persons are excluded by rule promulgated by the state tax commission.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT: A franchise or an ordinance, contract or agreement granting a franchise.
FRANCHISE TAX:
    A. A franchise tax;
    B. A tax similar to a franchise tax; or
    C. Any combination of subsection A or B of this definition.
PERSON: Includes any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, the state of Utah, any county, city, municipality, district or other local governmental entity of the state of Utah, or any group or combination acting as a unit.
SALE: Any transfer of title, exchange or barter, conditional or otherwise, in any manner, of taxable energy for a consideration. “Sale” includes:
    A. Installment and credit sales;
    B. Any closed transaction constituting a sale;
    C. Any transaction under which right to acquire, use or consume taxable energy is granted under a lease or contract and the transfer would be taxable if an outright sale were made.
STORAGE: Any keeping or retention of taxable energy in this city for any purpose except sale in the regular course of business.
TAXABLE ENERGY: Gas and electricity.
USE:
    A. The exercise of any right or power over taxable energy incident to the ownership or the leasing of the taxable energy.
    B. “Use” does not include the sale, display, demonstration or trial of the taxable energy in the regular course of business and held for resale. (Ord. 6-1-1997, 6-19-1997; amd. 2003 Code)

3-4A-2: TAX IMPOSED:
There is hereby levied, subject to the provisions of this article, a tax on every sale or use of taxable energy made within the city equaling six percent (6%) of the delivered value of the taxable energy to the consumer. This tax shall be known as the St. George energy sales and use tax.
A. Calculation On Delivered Value: The tax shall be calculated on the delivered value of the taxable energy to the consumer.
B. Tax Additional To Local Sales And Use Tax: The tax shall be in addition to any sales or use tax on taxable energy imposed by the city authorized by Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, part 2, the local sales and use tax act. (Ord. 6-1-1997, 6-19-1997)

3-4A-3: EXEMPTIONS FROM TAX:
A. No exemptions are granted from the energy sales and use tax, except as expressly provided in Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-305(2)(b); notwithstanding an exemption granted by Utah Code Annotated section 59-1-104.
B. The following are exempt from the energy sales and use tax, pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-305(2)(b):
    1. Sales and use of aviation fuel, motor fuel and special fuels subject to taxation under Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 13;
    2. Sales and use of taxable energy that is exempt from taxation under federal law, the United States constitution, or the Utah constitution;
    3. Sales and use of taxable energy purchased or stored for resale;
    4. Sales or use of taxable energy to a person, if the primary use of the taxable energy is for use in compounding or producing taxable energy or a fuel subject to taxation under Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 13;
    5. Taxable energy brought into the state by a nonresident for the nonresident’s own personal use or enjoyment while within the state, except taxable energy purchased for use in the state by a nonresident living or working in the state at the time of purchase;
    6. The sale or use of taxable energy for any purpose other than as a fuel or energy; and
    7. The sale of taxable energy for use outside the boundaries of the city.
C. The sale, storage, use or other consumption of taxable energy is exempt from the energy sales and use tax levied by this article, provided:
    1. The delivered value of the taxable energy has been subject to a municipal energy sales or use tax levied by another municipality within the state authorized by Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, part 3; and
    2. The city is paid the difference between the tax paid to the other municipality and the tax that would otherwise be due under this article, if the tax due under this article exceeds the tax paid to the other municipality. (Ord. 6-1-1997, 6-19-1997)

3-4A-4: EXISTING FRANCHISES:
A. This article shall not alter any existing franchise agreements between the city and energy suppliers.
B. There is a credit against the tax due from any consumer in the amount of a contractual franchise fee paid if:
    1. The energy supplier pays the contractual franchise fee to the city pursuant to a franchise agreement in effect on July 1, 1997;
    2. The contractual franchise fee is passed through by the energy supplier to a consumer as a separately itemized charge; and
    3. The energy supplier has accepted the franchise. (Ord. 6-1-1997, 6-19-1997)

3-4A-5: COLLECTION CONTRACT WITH STATE:
A. On or before the effective date hereof, the city shall contract with the state tax commission to perform all functions incident to the administration and collection of the energy sales and use tax, in accordance with this article. The mayor is hereby authorized to enter into agreements with the state tax commission that may be necessary to the continued administration and operation of the energy sales and use tax ordinance enacted herein.
B. An energy supplier shall pay the energy sales and use tax revenues collected from consumers directly to the city monthly if:
    1. The city is the energy supplier; or
    2. 
        a. The energy supplier estimates that the energy sales and use tax collected annually from its Utah consumers equals one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) or more; and
        b. The energy supplier collects the energy sales and use tax.
C. An energy supplier paying the energy sales and use tax directly to the city may deduct any contractual franchise fees collected by the energy supplier qualifying as a credit and remit the net tax less any amount the energy supplier retains as authorized by Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-307(4). (Ord. 6-1-1997, 6-19-1997)

3-4A-6: STATE STATUTE PROVISIONS INCORPORATED:
A. Except as herein provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Utah Code Annotated title 10, chapter 1, part 3, municipal energy sales and use tax act, as well as this article, all of the provisions of Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, part 1, as amended, and in force and effect on the effective date hereof, insofar as they relate to sales and use taxes, excepting Utah Code Annotated sections 59-12-101 and 59-12-119 thereof, and excepting for the amount of the sales and use taxes therein, are hereby adopted and made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein.
B. Wherever, and to the extent that in Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, part 1, as amended, the state of Utah is named or referred to as the “taxing agency,” the name of the city shall be substituted, insofar as is necessary for the purposes of that part, as well as Utah Code Annotated title 10, chapter 1, part 3, as amended. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to require substitution of the name of the city for the word “state” when that word is used as part of the title of the state tax commission, or of the constitution of Utah, nor shall the name of the city be substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of such a substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the state tax commission in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this article.
C. Any amendments made to Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 1, part 1, as amended, which would be applicable to the city for the purposes of carrying out this article are hereby incorporated herein by reference and shall be effective upon the date that they are effective as a Utah statute. (Ord. 6-1-1997, 6-19-1997)

3-4A-7: ADDITIONAL LICENSE OR REPORTING NOT REQUIRED:
No additional license to collect or report the energy sales and use tax levied by this article is required, provided the energy supplier collecting the tax has a license issued under Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-106. (Ord. 6-1-1997, 6-19-1997)

3-4A-8: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This article is effective June 30, 1997. The energy sales and use tax shall be levied beginning one minute after twelve o’clock (12:01) A.M., July 1, 1997. (Ord. 6-1-1997, 6-19-1997)

ARTICLE B. TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE TAX


3-4B-1:      Definitions
3-4B-2:      Levy Of Tax
3-4B-3:      Rate
3-4B-4:      Rate Limitation And Exemption Therefrom
3-4B-5:      Effective Date Of Tax Levy
3-4B-6:      Changes In Rate Or Repeal Of The Tax
3-4B-7:      Interlocal Agreement For Collection Of The Tax
3-4B-8:      Procedures For Taxes Erroneously Recovered From Customers
3-4B-9:      Repeal Of Inconsistent Taxes And Fees

3-4B-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article:
COMMISSION: The state tax commission.
CUSTOMER:
    A. Subject to subsections B and C of this definition means the person who is obligated under a contract with a telecommunications provider to pay for telecommunications service received under the contract.
    B. For purposes of this article, “customer” means:
        1. The person who is obligated under a contract with a telecommunications provider to pay for telecommunications service received under the contract; or
        2. If the end user is not the person described in subsection B1 of this definition, the end user of telecommunications service.
    C. “Customer” does not include a reseller:
        1. Of telecommunications service; or
        2. For mobile telecommunications service, of a serving carrier under an agreement to serve the customer outside the telecommunications provider’s licensed service area.
END USER:
    A. The person who uses a telecommunications service.
    B. For purposes of telecommunications service provided to a person who is not an individual, “end user” means the individual who uses the telecommunications service on behalf of the person who is provided the telecommunications service.
GROSS RECEIPTS ATTRIBUTED TO THE MUNICIPALITY: Those gross receipts from a transaction for telecommunications services that is located within the municipality for the purposes of sales and use taxes under Utah Code title 59, chapter 12, sales and use tax act and determined in accordance with Utah Code section 59-12-207.
GROSS RECEIPTS FROM TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: The revenue that a telecommunications provider receives for telecommunications service rendered except for amounts collected or paid as:
    A. A tax, fee, or charge:
        1. Imposed by a governmental entity;
        2. Separately identified as a tax, fee, or charge in the transaction with the customer for the telecommunications service; and
        3. Imposed only on a telecommunications provider;
    B. Sales and use taxes collected by the telecommunications provider from a customer under title 59, chapter 12, sales and use tax act; or
    C. Interest, a fee, or a charge that is charged by a telecommunications provider on a customer for failure to pay for telecommunications service when payment is due.
MOBILE TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: As defined in the mobile telecommunications sourcing act, 4 USC section 124.
MUNICIPALITY: The city of St. George, Utah.
PLACE OF PRIMARY USE:
    A. For telecommunications service other than mobile telecommunications service, means the street address representative of where the customer’s use of the telecommunications service primarily occurs, which shall be:
        1. The residential street address of the customer; or
        2. The primary business street address of the customer; or
    B. For mobile telecommunications service, is as defined in the mobile telecommunications sourcing act, 4 USC section 124.
SERVICE ADDRESS: Notwithstanding where a call is billed or paid, means:
    A. If the location described in this subsection A is known, the location of the telecommunications equipment:
        1. To which a call is charged; and
        2. From which the call originates or terminates;
    B. If the location described in subsection A of this definition is not known but the location described in this subsection B is known, the location of the origination point of the signal of the telecommunications service first identified by:
        1. The telecommunications system of the telecommunications provider; or
        2. If the system used to transport the signal is not a system of the telecommunications provider, information received by the telecommunications provider from its service provider; or
    C. If the locations described in subsection A or B of this definition are not known, the location of a customer’s place of primary use.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER:
    A. Subject to subsections B and C of this definition, means a person that:
        1. Owns, controls, operates, or manages a telecommunications service; or
        2. Engages in an activity described in subsection A1 of this definition for the shared use with or resale to any person of the telecommunications service.
    B. A person described in subsection A of this definition is a telecommunications provider whether or not the public service commission of Utah regulates:
        1. That person; or
        2. The telecommunications service that the person owns, controls, operates, or manages.
    C. “Telecommunications provider” does not include an aggregator as defined in Utah Code section 54-8b-2.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE:
    A. Telephone service, as defined in Utah Code section 59-12-102, other than mobile telecommunications service, that originates and terminates within the boundaries of this state; and
    B. Mobile telecommunications service, as defined in Utah Code section 59-12-102:
        1. That originates and terminates within the boundaries of one state; and
        2. Only to the extent permitted by the mobile telecommunications sourcing act, 4 USC section 116 et seq. (Ord. 2004-06-005, 6-3-2004)

3-4B-2: LEVY OF TAX:
There is hereby levied a municipal telecommunications license tax on the gross receipts from telecommunications service attributed to this municipality. (Ord. 2004-06-005, 6-3-2004)

3-4B-3: RATE:
The rate of the tax levy shall be four percent (4%) of the telecommunication provider’s gross receipts from telecommunications service that are attributed to the municipality. If the location of a transaction is determined to be other than this municipality then the rate imposed on the gross receipts for telecommunications services shall be determined pursuant to the provisions of Utah Code section 10-1-407. (Ord. 2004-06-005, 6-3-2004)

3-4B-4: RATE LIMITATION AND EXEMPTION THEREFROM:
This rate of this levy shall not exceed four percent (4%) of the telecommunication provider’s gross receipts from telecommunication service attributed to the municipality unless a higher rate is approved by a majority vote of the voters in this municipality that vote in:
A. A municipal general election;
B. A regular general election; or
C. A local special election. (Ord. 2004-06-005, 6-3-2004)

3-4B-5: EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAX LEVY:
This tax shall be levied beginning July 1, 2004. (Ord. 2004-06-005, 6-3-2004)

3-4B-6: CHANGES IN RATE OR REPEAL OF THE TAX:
This section is subject to the requirements of Utah Code section 10-1-403. If the tax rate is changed or the tax is repealed, then the appropriate notice shall be given as provided in Utah Code section 10-1-403. (Ord. 2004-06-005, 6-3-2004)

3-4B-7: INTERLOCAL AGREEMENT FOR COLLECTION OF THE TAX:
On or before the effective date hereof, the municipality shall enter into the uniform interlocal agreement with the commission as described in Utah Code section 10-1-405 for the collection, enforcement, and administration of this municipal telecommunications license tax. (Ord. 2004-06-005, 6-3-2004)

3-4B-8: PROCEDURES FOR TAXES ERRONEOUSLY RECOVERED FROM CUSTOMERS:
Pursuant to the provisions of Utah Code section 10-1-408, a customer may not bring a cause of action against a telecommunications provider on the basis that the telecommunications provider erroneously recovered from the customer the municipal telecommunications license tax except as provided in Utah Code section 10-1-408. (Ord. 2004-06-005, 6-3-2004)

3-4B-9: REPEAL OF INCONSISTENT TAXES AND FEES:
Any tax or fee previously enacted by this municipality under authority of Utah Code section 10-1-203 or Utah Code title 11, chapter 26, local taxation of utilities limitation is hereby repealed.
Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to repeal any municipal ordinance or fee which provides that the municipality may recover from a telecommunications provider the management costs of the municipality caused by the activities of the telecommunications provider in the rights-of-way of the municipality, if the fee is imposed in accordance with Utah Code section 72-7-102 and is not related to the municipality’s loss of use of a highway as a result of the activities of the telecommunications provider in a right-of-way, or increased deterioration of a highway as a result of the activities of the telecommunications provider in a right-of-way nor does this article limit the municipality’s right to charge fees or taxes on persons that are not subject to the municipal telecommunications license tax under this article and locate telecommunications facilities, as defined in Utah Code section 72-7-108, in this municipality. (Ord. 2004-06-005, 6-3-2004)

ARTICLE C. TRANSIENT ROOM TAX


3-4C-1:      Tax Imposed

3-4C-1: TAX IMPOSED:
A. Room Tax: There is levied upon the business of every person, company, corporation, or other like and similar persons, groups or organizations, doing business in the city as a tourist home, hotel, motel, or trailer court a transient room tax equal to one percent (1%) of the gross revenue derived from charges for the amount paid or charged for accommodations and services that are rented for less than thirty (30) consecutive days.
B. Revenue From Tax: The revenue collected from this tax shall be used by the city for general fund purposes.
C. Credit For Tax: Any person or business entity subject to the payment of taxes under this section shall be given a credit against the business licensing fees due the city under subsection 3-1-7B and chapter 2, article P of this title, or their successors if the transient room taxes collected exceed the amount of the business licensing fees owed. (Ord. 2008-12-004, 12-4-2008)

ARTICLE D. SALES AND USE TAX


3-4D-1:      Short Title
3-4D-2:      Purpose And Intent
3-4D-3:      Sales And Use Tax Levied
3-4D-4:      State Statutes Incorporated
3-4D-5:      Contract With State Tax Commission
3-4D-6:      Exemption From Tax
3-4D-7:      Tax Paid Not Part Of Purchase Price
3-4D-8:      Mayor Authorized
3-4D-9:      Report Of Tax Collections; Point Of Sale; Public Utilities
3-4D-10:     Effective Date Of Tax And Continuation Of Previous Ordinances

3-4D-1: SHORT TITLE:
This article shall be known as the St. George CITY LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX. This article shall also be known as title 3, chapter 4, article D of this code. It may be cited and pleaded under either designation. (2003 Code)

3-4D-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The revenue generated by the tax imposed by this article shall be used as determined solely by the city council. (2003 Code)

3-4D-3: SALES AND USE TAX LEVIED:
A. There is levied and there shall be collected and paid a tax on every retail sale of items listed in Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-103, as amended, made within the city at the rate of one percent (1%), commencing retroactive to one minute after twelve o’clock (12:01) A.M., January 1, 1990.
B. There is levied and there shall be collected and paid an excise tax on the storage, use or other consumption within the city, of tangible personal property or any items listed in Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-103, as amended, at the rate of one percent (1%), commencing retroactive to one minute after twelve o’clock (12:01) A.M., January 1, 1990. (2003 Code)

3-4D-4: STATE STATUTES INCORPORATED:
A. Except as herein provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of the local sales and use tax act, all of the provisions of Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, part 1, as amended, and in force and effect on the effective date hereof, insofar as they relate to sales taxes, excepting sections 59-12-101 and 59-12-119 thereof, and excepting for the amount of the sales tax levied therein, are hereby adopted and made a part of this article as though fully set forth herein.
B. Wherever, and to the extent that in Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, part 1, as amended, the state of Utah is named or referred to as the “taxing agency,” the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to require substitution of the name of the city for the word “state” when that word is used as part of the title of the state tax commission, or of the constitution of Utah, nor shall the name of the city be substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the state tax commission in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this article.
C. Any amendments made by the Utah legislature to Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, part 1, as amended, which would be applicable to the city, are hereby incorporated herein by reference and shall be effective upon the date they are effective as a Utah statute. (2003 Code)

3-4D-5: CONTRACT WITH STATE TAX COMMISSION:
Heretofore, the city has entered into an agreement with the state tax commission to perform all functions incident to the administration or operation of the sales and use tax ordinance of the city. That contract is hereby confirmed and the mayor is hereby authorized to enter into such supplementary agreement with the state tax commission as may be necessary to the continued administration and operation of the sales and use tax ordinance of the city as enacted by this article. (2003 Code)

3-4D-6: EXEMPTION FROM TAX:
The sale, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of or the cost of which has been subject to sales or use tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, part 2, as amended, by a county other than Washington County or by any other Utah city or town shall be exempt from the tax. (2003 Code)

3-4D-7: TAX PAID NOT PART OF PURCHASE PRICE:
The amount of any tax paid under Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, part 1, shall not be included as a part of the purchase price paid or charged for a taxable item hereunder. (2003 Code)

3-4D-8: MAYOR AUTHORIZED:
The mayor is authorized to execute whatever documents are necessary to distribute sales and use tax revenues on the combination of point of sale and population factors set forth in Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-205, as amended. (2003 Code)

3-4D-9: REPORT OF TAX COLLECTIONS; POINT OF SALE; PUBLIC UTILITIES:
All sales and use taxes collected under this article shall be reported to the state tax commission on forms which accurately identify the location where the sale or use transaction was consummated. If a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated for the purposes of this article shall be determined under rules of the state tax commission. “Public utilities,” as defined by Utah Code Annotated title 54, as amended, are not obligated to determine the place or places within the county where public utility services are rendered, and the state tax commission shall apportion the revenues arising from such services on an equitable basis pursuant to an appropriate formula and under rules to be prescribed and adopted by it. (2003 Code)

3-4D-10: EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAX AND CONTINUATION OF PREVIOUS ORDINANCES:
The sales and use tax imposed under this article shall be retroactive to one minute after twelve o’clock (12:01) A.M., January 1, 2000. The provisions of the predecessor sales and use tax ordinance of the city, which is repealed hereby, shall be deemed to have continued effective until twelve o’clock (12:00) midnight, December 31, 1999. The provisions of this ordinance which are not in conflict with the former ordinance shall be deemed to be a continuation thereof, and any rights, duties and obligations arising thereunder shall not in any way be deemed abrogated or terminated. (2003 Code)

CHAPTER 5 ALARM SYSTEM BUSINESSES


3-5-1:       Definitions
3-5-2:       Permit Requirements; Fee
3-5-3:       Audible Alarm Standards
3-5-4:       Automatic Dialing Systems Prohibited
3-5-5:       Alarm Users
3-5-6:       Monitoring Companies
3-5-7:       Verification Process
3-5-8:       Unlawful Activation Or Reporting Of Alarm
3-5-9:       Determination Of False Alarm; Rebuttable Presumption
3-5-10:      Penalty For False Alarm
3-5-11:      No Response To Frequent False Alarms; Appeal Of No Response Determination
3-5-12:      Fines Collected Directed To Crime Prevention Programs
3-5-13:      Appeal
3-5-14:      Penalty

3-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
ALARM BUSINESS: An individual, partnership, corporation or other entity that engages in the business of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing a security alarm system in an alarm site.
ALARM SITE: A single premises or location served by a security alarm system or systems. Each tenancy, if served by a separate security alarm system in a multi-tenant building or complex shall be considered a separate alarm site.
ALARM SYSTEM MONITORING COMPANY: Any individual, partnership corporation or other form of association that engages in the business of monitoring security alarm systems and reporting any activation of alarm systems to the police.
ALARM USER: Any individual, partnership, corporation or other form of association that owns or leases a security alarm system or on whose premises a security alarm system is maintained for the protection of the premises.
AUTOMATIC DIALING TELEPHONE ALARM: A security alarm system with a device that automatically dials the police department without human activation of the device by the alarm user.
CHIEF: The chief of police of the city of St. George and the chief’s designee.
DEPARTMENT: The city of St. George police department.
DISPATCH OR RESPONSE: A discretionary decision whether to direct police units to a location where there has been a request, made by whatever means, for police assistance or investigation. There is no duty to dispatch under any circumstances, including to answer an alarm signal, and all dispatch decisions are made subject to competing priorities and available police resources.
FALSE ALARM: An alarm signal eliciting notification to and a response by the police when there is no evidence of crime or other activity that warrants a call for immediate police assistance, and no person who was on or near the property or has viewed a video communication from the property call for the police dispatch or confirmed the need for police assistance. “False alarm” does not include an alarm signal caused by violent conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances beyond the control of the alarm user.
SECURITY ALARM SYSTEM: Any system, device or mechanism for the detection and reporting of any unauthorized entry or attempted entry or property damage upon premises protected by the system that may be activated by sensors or other techniques and, when activated, automatically transmits a telephone message or emits an audible or visible, or electronic signal that can be heard, seen or received by persons outside of the protected premises and is intended to summon police assistance. (Ord. 5-4-1999, 5-6-1999)

3-5-2: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS; FEE:
A. Permit Required: No alarm user shall operate, or cause to be operated, or maintain a security alarm system without a valid alarm permit issued by the department. A separate permit is required for each security alarm system. (Ord. 5-4-1999, 5-6-1999)
B. Fee For Permit: There is a one time fee for permit issuance for security alarm systems in all city zoning districts, including, but not limited to, residential estate, residential, multiple-family residential, mobile home, commercial, manufacturing, administrative and professional office, planned development, open space, mining and grazing, and agricultural zones. The fee is in such amount as established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 5-4-1999, 5-6-1999; amd. 2003 Code)
C. Information Required On Application: Each security alarm system permit application must include the following information:
    1. The name, address, and telephone numbers of the alarm user or alarm user’s designee who will be the permit holder and be responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the security alarm system and payment of fees under this chapter;
    2. The classification of the alarm site as either residential, commercial or multi-unit;
    3. For each alarm security system located at the alarm site, the purpose of the security alarm system, i.e., burglary, holdup, duress, or other;
    4. Signed certification from the alarm user, the alarm business and/or the security alarm system monitoring company stating:
        a. The date of installation of the security alarm system;
        b. The name, address and phone number of the alarm business performing the security alarm system installation, and the alarm business responsible for providing repair service to the security alarm system;
        c. The name, address and phone number of the security alarm system monitoring company monitoring the security alarm system if different from the installing alarm business;
        d. That a set of written operating instructions for the security alarm system, including written guidelines on how to avoid false alarms, has been left with the applicant alarm user; and
        e. That the alarm business or security alarm system monitoring company trained the applicant alarm user in proper use of the security alarm system, including instructions on how to avoid false alarms.
D. Issuance; Conditions For Denial: Upon receipt of a completed application form and the permit fee, the department shall issue an alarm permit to an applicant unless the applicant has:
    1. Failed to pay any fine assessed under sections 3-5-10 and 3-5-14 of this chapter; or
    2. Had a security alarm system permit suspended or revoked, and the violation causing the suspension or revocation has not been corrected.
E. False Statements: Any false statement of a material fact made by an applicant alarm user, alarm business or security alarm monitoring business, for the purpose of obtaining an alarm permit, shall be sufficient cause for the department to refuse to issue a permit or to revoke an issued permit.
F. Transferability: An alarm permit cannot be transferred to another alarm user. The alarm user shall inform the department, within five (5) business days, of any event that changes, alters or modifies any material fact contained in the alarm permit application.
G. Fees Paid Prior To Permit Issuance: All fees owed by an alarm user applicant, an alarm business or a security alarm monitoring business listed on the alarm user permit application, must be paid before a permit may be issued.
H. Confidentiality: Information contained in permit applications shall be held in confidence by all employees or representatives of the city with access to such information to the extent that information contained in the permit applications is private, controlled or protected under the city government records access and management ordinance set forth in title 1, chapter 9 of this code. (Ord. 5-4-1999, 5-6-1999)

3-5-3: AUDIBLE ALARM STANDARDS:
A. Requirements Specified; Time Limit: A security alarm system that emits an audible signal that may be heard outside of the protected premises shall conform to the following requirements:
    1. Audible alarms shall automatically discontinue emitting the audible sound within ten (10) minutes after activation of the alarm; and
    2. With respect to security alarm systems in existence prior to the enactment of the ordinance codified herein that do not comply with subsection A1 of this section, the alarm user shall have ninety (90) days from the enactment of the ordinance codified herein which to make the necessary modifications to the security alarm system in order to comply the requirements of subsection A1 of this section.
B. Penalty: The sounding of an audible signal from a security alarm system that can be heard continuously off the premises for more than ten (10) minutes is a civil infraction and the alarm user, in addition to any other penalties specified herein, shall be penalized by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense.
C. Defenses: It is a defense to a violation of this section that the continuous sounding of the alarm:
    1. Assisted in saving a life or avoided injury; or
    2. Was caused by a malfunction of the alarm system equipment without the alarm user’s prior knowledge of the cause of the malfunction; or
    3. Was activated by an unauthorized entry or criminal activity. (Ord. 5-4-1999, 5-6-1999)

3-5-4: AUTOMATIC DIALING SYSTEMS PROHIBITED:
Beginning ninety (90) days after the effective date hereof, it shall be unlawful for any individual, partnership, corporation or other form of association to sell, offer for sale, install, maintain, operate or assist in the operation of any alarm system with an automatic dialing or digital alarm communicator features that automatically call the police in the event of an alarm. (Ord. 5-4-1999, 5-6-1999)

3-5-5: ALARM USERS:
An alarm user shall:
A. Elimination Of False Alarms: Maintain the premises and security alarm system in a manner that will eliminate false alarms;
B. Review Operating Instructions: Review all alarm system operating instructions, including those instruction for the verification of an alarm;
C. Notification Of False Alarm: Notify the alarm system monitoring company of a false alarm activation as soon as the alarm user is aware of the false alarm; and
D. Manual Activations: Not manually activate an alarm except when needing an immediate police response to an emergency. (Ord. 5-4-1999, 5-6-1999)

3-5-6: MONITORING COMPANIES:
A. Requirements: An alarm system monitoring company engaging in business activities in the city shall:
    1. Licensing: Obtain all necessary business licenses as required by the city and the state;
    2. Records Maintenance: Maintain a current record, accessible to the chief at all times, that includes: the names of the alarm users serviced by the alarm system monitoring company; the addresses of the protected properties; the type of alarm system, original installation date and subsequent modifications, if any, for each protected property; and a record of the false alarms at each property;
    3. Provide Requested Information: Provide the chief such information as the chief requests regarding: the nature of the company’s security alarms; the company’s method of monitoring the alarms; the company’s program for preventing false alarms, including educational programs for alarm users; and the company’s method for disconnecting audible alarms;
    4. Provide Necessities To Users: Provide each of its alarm system users with: operating instructions for the alarm system, including an explanation of the alarm company’s alarm verification process; a telephone number to call for assistance in operating the system; and a summary of the provisions of this chapter relating to penalties for false alarms and the possibility of no police response to alarm systems experiencing excessive false alarms;
    5. Verification Process: Maintain a verification process, as specified in section 3-5-7 of this chapter, for all monitored security alarm systems in order to prevent unnecessary police dispatches resulting from false alarms;
    6. Requests For Response: Communicate requests for police response to the department in a manner specified by the chief;
    7. Cancellations Of Responses: Communicate requests for cancellations of police response in a manner specified by the chief;
    8. Records Of Responses: Maintain a record of all requests for police response to an alarm, including: the date and time of the alarm and request for police response; the alarm system user’s name and address; evidence of the company’s attempt to verify the alarm; and, to the best of its knowledge, an explanation of the cause of any false alarm; and
    9. Cooperation: Work cooperatively with the alarm system user and the chief in order to determine the cause of any false alarm and to prevent recurrences.
B. Penalty: An alarm system monitoring company’s failure to comply with any of the requirements of this section shall be a civil infraction, punishable by a fine of up to two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Each day of noncompliance shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 5-4-1999, 5-6-1999; amd. 2003 Code)

3-5-7: VERIFICATION PROCESS:
A. Means Of Verification: Verification process is an independent method of an alarm system monitoring company for determining that a signal from a security alarm system requires immediate police response. The verification process shall not take more than five (5) minutes, calculated from the time that the alarm company receives the alarm signal until the alarm company determines whether to request a police dispatch. The means of verification shall include at least one (1) of the following:
    1. Voice Communications: The establishment of voice communications with the alarm user or a person authorized by the user at or near the premises with the alarm who may indicate whether there is an immediate need for police response.
    2. Special Signal: A feature that permits the alarm user or a person authorized by the user to send a special signal to the alarm system monitoring company that will cancel the alarm immediately after the signal has been sent and prevent the alarm system monitoring company from calling the police or requesting a police response.
    3. Video System: The installation of a video system that provides the alarm system monitoring company, when the alarm signal is received, the ability to ascertain whether activity is occurring that warrants immediate police response.
    4. Confirmation: A confirmation that an alarm signal reflects a need for immediate police response from either the alarm user or a person authorized by the user of an alternate response agency made before dispatching the police.
    5. Alternate System: An alternate system that the chief determines has or is likely to have a high degree of reliability.
B. Penalty: An alarm system monitoring company’s failure to comply with any of the requirements of this section shall be a civil infraction, punishable by a fine of up to two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Each day of noncompliance shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 5-4-1999, 5-6-1999)

3-5-8: UNLAWFUL ACTIVATION OR REPORTING OF ALARM:
A. Prohibited: No person shall activate a security alarm system for the purpose of summoning the police except in the event of an unauthorized entry, robbery or other crime being committed or attempted on the premises, or if the person needs immediate assistance in order to avoid injury or serious bodily harm.
B. Malfunctions: Any person who shall notify the police of an activated alarm and have knowledge that such activation was apparently caused by an electrical or other malfunction shall at the same time notify the police of the apparent malfunction. (Ord. 5-4-1999, 5-6-1999)

3-5-9: DETERMINATION OF FALSE ALARM; REBUTTABLE PRESUMPTION:
For the purposes of this chapter, there is a rebuttable presumption that the following determinations made by the chief or by a police officer dispatched to the premises reporting an alarm signal are correct:
A. There is no evidence of a crime or other activity that would warrant a call for immediate police assistance at the premises;
B. No individual who was on or near the premises or who had viewed a video communication from the premises called for a police dispatch or verified a need for an immediate police response; and
C. There is no evidence that violent conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances beyond the control of the alarm user caused the activation of the alarm. (Ord. 5-4-1999, 5-6-1999)

3-5-10: PENALTY FOR FALSE ALARM:
A false alarm is a civil infraction. Following one false alarm offense in a twelve (12) month period, the alarm system user shall be penalized by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each subsequent offense. (Ord. 5-4-1999, 5-6-1999)

3-5-11: NO RESPONSE TO FREQUENT FALSE ALARMS; APPEAL OF NO RESPONSE DETERMINATION:
A. Conditions Warranting Disregard Of Call: When the chief of police determines whether to make an immediate dispatch in response to notification of a signal from a security alarm system, the chief may disregard a call for police assistance when:
    1. The call for assistance comes from an alarm system for a premises that has a record of sending four (4) false alarms in a six (6) month period; and
    2. The call is the only basis for making the dispatch.
    The chief may consider such a call for assistance as an additional factor in the chief’s decision to order an immediate police response when an in person call, verification from a person at or near the premises or other independent evidence shows need for immediate police assistance at the premises.
B. Written Notice: To discourage false alarms, the chief shall adopt a process of sending a letter or delivering other written notice informing the alarm user who has had a false alarm of the consequences of excessive false alarms, the need to take corrective action, and the prospect that four (4) false alarms in a six (6) month period shall result in the police disregarding alarms from the premises and not responding to requests for immediate police assistance unless there is an in person call for assistance from someone at or near the premises or other independent information that verifies the need for an immediate police response.
C. Content Of Notice Of No Response: Before determining not to respond to alarms from a premises as specified above, the chief shall send or deliver notice to the alarm user that:
    1. Four (4) false alarms have been received from the property within a six (6) month period;
    2. The remedy authorized in subsection A of this section may be taken;
    3. The alarm system user may request a hearing before the chief or the chief’s designee and explain why the chief should not take the proposed action;
    4. If no hearing is requested, the department will, after ten (10) days from the delivery of the notice, disregard alarms from the premises unless there is an in person call for assistance from someone at or near the premises or other independent information that verifies the need for an immediate police response; and
    5. A requirement of an in person communication or other verification shall remain in effect for a period of one year.
D. Hearing: If a hearing is requested, the chief shall schedule the hearing within ten (10) days of the receipt of the request. At the hearing, the chief may consider such factors as: the steps that the alarm user or alarm system monitoring company has taken, or is taking, to correct the problem; the incidence of crime in the area of the premises; the facts and circumstances of the false alarms; and other relevant information presented by the alarm user or the alarm system monitoring company.
E. Suspension Of No Response: The chief may suspend or cancel the remedy under subsection A of this section if the chief determines that the alarm user or alarm system monitoring company has taken appropriate actions to prevent the recurrence of false alarms. (Ord. 5-4-1999, 5-6-1999)

3-5-12: FINES COLLECTED DIRECTED TO CRIME PREVENTION PROGRAMS:
All fines collected pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be directed to the department for expenditure on crime prevention programs as established by the chief. (Ord. 5-4-1999, 5-6-1999)

3-5-13: APPEAL:
Any fines imposed under this chapter are appealable to the fifth judicial district court in and for Washington County. The appeal is barred unless it is filed within thirty (30) days after imposition of the fine. (Ord. 5-4-1999, 5-6-1999)

3-5-14: PENALTY:
A. Infraction: The violations of the sections of this chapter shall be a civil infraction and punishable by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00), unless otherwise specified.
B. Conduct Constituting Infraction: The following conduct shall constitute a civil infraction and is punishable by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00):
    1. Failure to respond to a false alarm notice within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the notice;
    2. Failure to appear for a hearing requested pursuant to this chapter; and
    3. Failure to pay any fine imposed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 5-4-1999, 5-6-1999)

CHAPTER 6 TELEPHONE SOLICITATION AND MARKETING


3-6-1:       Definitions
3-6-2:       License Required
3-6-3:       Application For License
3-6-4:       Operational Requirements
3-6-5:       Inspection Authority
3-6-6:       Revocation Or Suspension
3-6-7:       Penalty

3-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
TELEMARKETING BUSINESS: Any sales operation whereby telephone solicitation or attempted telephone solicitation is initiated with the prospective purchaser, either directly or by mailed request that the prospective purchaser call the solicitor, in an effort to encourage the individual to purchase or rent any goods, wares, services or merchandise and to pay any consideration whatsoever for the same, where the solicitor, as an inducement to purchase will receive a premium, gift, certificate or other paper giving the purchaser the right, chance or privilege to purchase or receive goods, wares, services or merchandise, whether for a fee or without cost, for purchases made. It shall also include any operation in which the telephone solicitor attempts to encourage an individual to accept premiums, merchandise or service (“free” or otherwise) that requires a shipping or handling fee or any other attendant fee to be paid before shipment.
TELEMARKETING FACTOR: Any person or organization that buys or takes consignment of sales orders or premiums as described in the definition of “telemarketing business”, as defined in this section, from a seller, solicitor or his agent for the purpose of completing performance of those orders.
TELEPHONE SOLICITOR: Any person who, by telephone, performs any of the tasks listed in the definition of “telemarketing business”, as defined in this section. (Ord. 7-1-1988, 7-7-1988; amd. Ord. 4-1-1989, 4-6-1989; 2003 Code)

3-6-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to engage in a telemarketing business or function as a telemarketing factor without first obtaining a license as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 7-1-1988, 7-7-1988)

3-6-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
The following are required to be submitted in order for a business license to be issued:
A. Application Form: A completed general business license application form.
B. Bond: A surety bond in the amount of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) and subject to the conditions as described in section 3-1-14 of this title.
C. Supplier Information: The business name and address of each factor supplying premiums, merchandise or service with which it will do business; or, if applying as a factor, the same information for each telemarketing business with which it will do business.
D. Copies Of Materials: A copy of all sales presentations, scripts, advertising bulletins, and all other promotional materials used by the applicant and/or solicitors in the process of doing business.
E. Description Of Items: A complete and accurate description of each item offered as merchandise or premiums. Include a photograph or accurate sample of each item. The description must be the same as that given to the prospective purchaser or recipient.
F. Certifications: 
    1. Certification from the chief of police that applicant, its principals and managing employees have not been convicted of theft, fraud, obtaining money under false pretenses, embezzlement or other crime involving moral turpitude.
    2. Certificate from the applicant that there are no adverse judgments against its principals or managing employees in civil actions involving allegations of fraudulent advertising, sales or trade practices or breach of contract other than as set forth in the certificate, together with a detailed explanation of circumstances, and certifying further that there has been no permanent injunction against any of said parties arising out of an adjudicated civil action that would prohibit them from engaging in fraudulent advertising, sales or trade practices in any jurisdiction. (Ord. 7-1-1988, 7-7-1988; amd. 2003 Code)

3-6-4: OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Presentation: At the outset of every sales presentation the solicitor must state:
    1. The full and true name of the caller.
    2. The name of the business on whose behalf the call is being made.
    3. The nature of the call.
B. Identification On Product: Every telemarketing business or factor must provide each customer the ability to contact the respective business factor by prominently displaying its name, address and telephone number on every shipping carton or envelope sent to a customer.
C. Right Of Return: Each purchaser or recipient has a right to return the merchandise or premiums within thirty (30) days after receipt if they do not conform to the representations of the solicitor, they are defective, or are not received in the time promised. The purchaser may request a full cash refund, credit, exchange or replacement, by stating in writing the reason for returning said items.
D. Credits And Refunds: If a purchaser meets the requirements of subsection C of this section, the seller must give the purchaser a full replacement or a refund within thirty (30) days, at the purchaser’s option, whether the payments were made to the seller, factor or any other person involved in the supplying of the disputed goods. In the event the factor deals with a seller which has failed to obtain a business license pursuant to this chapter, the factor shall be responsible for any refund, credit, exchange or replacement. Credits or refunds may be prorated if the purchaser returns only a portion of the advertising specialties.
E. Effective Date Of Return: The return of goods by a purchaser and delivery of a written explanation for the return shall be deemed effective as of its postmark if it has been deposited, properly addressed and postage prepaid, in the United States mail, or, if it was sent by other means, upon its receipt. Proof of return must be furnished by the purchaser upon request.
F. Promises Or Guaranties: If any promise or guaranty is made regarding the advertising specialties or premiums offered in the solicitation, the seller or solicitor must, within one (1) week after their delivery, provide the purchaser with a written guaranty containing the specific details of the guaranty.
G. Refund Policy Written: Every licensee must ensure that a written copy of the refund policy contained in this section is shipped with the advertising specialties. The refund policy shall also contain the name, business address and telephone number of the party responsible for refunds or other adjustments.
H. Prizes And Gifts: It is unlawful for any licensee or agent or employee thereof to notify any person by any means, as a part of an advertising plan or program, that a prize has been won, or that a gift will be received as an inducement to buy, with a requirement that the winner must pay a redemption fee or any consideration whatsoever in order to acquire the prize or gift. (Ord. 7-1-1988, 7-7-1988)

3-6-5: INSPECTION AUTHORITY:
The license officer or designee may, but is not required to, enter each place of business during normal business hours in order to determine the conformity with provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 7-1-1988, 7-7-1988)

3-6-6: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION:
The city may suspend, revoke or condition any license for any of the following reasons:
A. Material misrepresentations, withholding or nondisclosure of material facts required by the license application.
B. Violation by the licensee, employee, representative or solicitor of any provisions of this chapter or any other law in furtherance of a business licensed hereunder. (Ord. 7-1-1988, 7-7-1988)

3-6-7: PENALTY:
Failure to comply with any of the relevant provisions of this chapter is a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 7-1-1988, 7-7-1988; amd. 2003 Code)

CHAPTER 7 HOME OCCUPATIONS


3-7-1:       Reserved
3-7-2:       Applicability
3-7-3:       Business License Required
3-7-4:       Reserved
3-7-5:       Garage Type Sales
3-7-6:       Issuance Of License
3-7-7:       Federal, State, County And Local Requirements
3-7-8:       Inspection Authority
3-7-9:       Revocation
3-7-10:      Appeal

3-7-1: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2018-02-008, 2-1-2018)

3-7-2: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all home occupations. The provisions of chapter 1 of this title shall also apply to this chapter unless different procedures are specifically provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2018-02-008, 2-1-2018)

3-7-3: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, either directly or indirectly, to commence, conduct or carry on any business, including a nonprofit enterprise, in a residential zone except as specifically allowed in this chapter.
B. Two (2) categories of home occupations are permitted in a residential zone:
    1. Class A Home Occupation: Class A home occupations are permitted to operate in a residential zone without a business license as provided in this chapter. If the owner of a Class A home occupation requests a business license from the city, the application shall be treated as a Class B home occupation license and Class B fees shall apply. The owner of a Class A home occupation that chooses to obtain a business license is not required to renew the license.
    2. Class B Home Occupation: It shall be unlawful for any person, either directly or indirectly, to commence, conduct or carry on any Class B home occupation without first procuring a home occupation business license from the city.
C. Each license shall authorize the person obtaining it to carry on, pursue or conduct only that type of general business described in the license and only at the location which is indicated thereon. The carrying on of a different type of general business activity shall require issuance of a separate license, and carrying on of the business at a location different from that indicated on the license shall be considered a branch establishment and require a separate license.
D. A person engaged in two (2) or more businesses at the same location shall be required to obtain separate licenses for each business, but, in the discretion of the license officer, when such businesses are complementary, a single license may be issued which shall specify on its face all such businesses operated at that location.
E. A violation of this section is a Class B misdemeanor and shall be prosecuted under section 3-1-21 of this title. (Ord. 2018-02-008, 2-1-2018)

3-7-4: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2018-02-008, 2-1-2018)

3-7-5: GARAGE TYPE SALES:
Garage, basement, yard or other similar sales shall not be allowed more than a total of five (5) days in any calendar year and do not require a business license. (Ord. 2018-02-008, 2-1-2018)

3-7-6: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
A. Procedure: All home occupation business licenses shall comply with the requirements in chapter 1 of this title. In addition, the business license officer may, upon application, issue a business license which shall state the home occupation permitted, any special conditions which are not listed in this chapter, and any time limitations imposed thereon.
B. Conditions Of Issuing And Maintaining A Home Occupation License: In order to prevent offsite impacts, all of the following conditions shall be complied with by the holder of a home occupation business license:
    1. All related business activities shall be conducted in a manner that is indiscernible from, and clearly incidental and secondary to, the residential use, without altering the dwelling, site or structures, the character of the neighborhood, the demand for public facilities or services, or creating an unsafe condition.
    2. All related business activities shall take place entirely within a building on the residential property. No portion of the business shall be visible from the exterior of the residence and shall occupy no more than the greater of:
        a. Four hundred (400) square feet, or
        b. Twenty percent (20%) of the combined square footage of the dwelling unit and any accessory structure that is not required for the parking of vehicles, or
        c. That area of the home kitchen as permitted by the health department as part of a cottage food operation as defined in Utah Code Annotated section 4-5-501.
    3. Only materials, equipment, or tools recognized as part of a normal household may be used. No motor power other than electrically operated motors, acceptable for connection to a 240/120-volt service, shall be used.
    4. None of the related business activities shall use or require the use of an electrical service that exceeds an 800-amp single phase, 240/120-volt service.
    5. None of the related business activities shall cause, directly or indirectly, any noise, dust, odor, fumes, vibrations, or unreasonable disturbance in excess of that which is normal to a residential use. In addition, it shall not cause or generate any other condition that interferes with the peace, health, safety or general welfare of people or property in the surrounding area.
    6. Only one vehicle and one trailer per residence may be used for the business. The vehicle shall not be longer than twenty-one feet (21'), the trailer shall not be longer than fifteen feet (15'), and neither shall be greater than eight-and-one-half feet (8.5') in height including any attached apparatus, measured from the ground.
    7. No merchandise or goods may be received or delivered to the residential property for the business except by parcel post or letter carrier mail service using vehicles typically employed in residential deliveries. Use of a semi-tractor/trailer truck or forklift is not permitted.
    8. The residential property and all buildings used for the business must comply with all applicable federal, state, county and city laws and ordinances.
    9. No business or commercial sign or advertising is displayed on the premises.
C. Class A Home Occupation: In addition to the requirements of subsection B of this section, Class A home occupation(s) shall comply with the following conditions:
    1. Only legal permanent occupants of the residence may work in or on the residential property; and
    2. Persons who are not legal permanent occupants of the residence shall not come to the residential property for any business purpose.
D. Class B Home Occupation: In addition to the requirements of subsection B of this section, Class B home occupation(s) shall comply with the following conditions:
    1. In addition to the legal permanent occupants of the residence, one nonresident may work in or on the residential property. The nonresident may only come to the residential property for business purposes between the hours of seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. and eight o’clock (8:00) P.M.
    2. No more than ten (10) people shall come to the residential property at any one time for a business purpose and only between the hours of seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. and eight o’clock (8:00) P.M.
    3. Daycares, preschools and classes are allowed outdoor activities between the hours of seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. and eight o’clock (8:00) P.M.
    4. No merchandise or goods shall be sold at the residential property except as allowed by state law.
E. Violation: Any business operated in violation of any of these conditions shall be prosecuted as a Class B misdemeanor under section 3-1-21 of this title. (Ord. 2018-02-008, 2-1-2018)

3-7-7: FEDERAL, STATE, COUNTY AND LOCAL REQUIREMENTS:
A home occupation business must comply with all federal, state, county, local and other public agency license requirements to conduct a home occupation. (Ord. 2018-02-008, 2-1-2018)

3-7-8: INSPECTION AUTHORITY:
The zoning enforcement officer, business license officer, or their designee, may at all reasonable times enter the residence for which a home occupation business license has been issued to ascertain compliance with this chapter. They may also inspect such residence prior to the issuance of a home occupation business license. Refusal by the owner or occupant of the residence to allow such inspection, when requested, shall be grounds for denial or revocation of a home occupation business license. (Ord. 11-4-1999, 11-18-1999)

3-7-9: REVOCATION:
Any home occupation business license shall be revoked by the business license officer upon violation of any requirements of this chapter, or upon failure to comply with any of the conditions or limitations of the license, unless such violation is corrected within three (3) days of receipt of written notice thereof. A home occupation business license may be revoked by the business license officer for repeated violations of the requirements of this chapter, notwithstanding compliance to the violation notice. (Ord. 11-4-1999, 11-18-1999)

3-7-10: APPEAL:
In the event of denial of any home occupation business license or of the revocation thereof or of objection to the limitations placed thereon, based on noncompliance with city zoning ordinances, appeal may be made to the board of adjustment in accordance with the provisions of section 10-3-1 of this code. All other appeals may be made to the city council. (Ord. 11-4-1999, 11-18-1999)

CHAPTER 8 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES


3-8-1:       Purpose And Intent
3-8-2:       Definitions
3-8-3:       Zone Permitted; Distance Restrictions; Classification
3-8-4:       Location Of Sexually Oriented Businesses
3-8-5:       Existing Businesses
3-8-6:       Permit Requirements; Application
3-8-7:       Employee License Requirements
3-8-8:       Investigation
3-8-9:       Inspection Of Premises
3-8-10:      Issuance Or Denial Of Permit
3-8-11:      Fee For Permit
3-8-12:      Expiration Of Permit; Renewal
3-8-13:      Suspension Of Permit
3-8-14:      Revocation Of Permit
3-8-15:      Review Of Denial, Suspension Or Revocation
3-8-16:      Transferability
3-8-17:      Exhibition Of Sexually Explicit Films Or Videos In Booths
3-8-18:      Minors
3-8-19:      Advertising And Lighting
3-8-20:      Hours Of Operation
3-8-21:      Nudity Prohibited; Exemptions
3-8-22:      Live Entertainment
3-8-23:      Operation Without Valid Permit
3-8-24:      Distribution Of Sexual Devices
3-8-25:      Immunity From Prosecution
3-8-26:      Injunctions
3-8-27:      Penalty

3-8-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
A. It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the city and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent any deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city, thereby reducing or eliminating the adverse secondary effects from such sexually oriented businesses. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the first amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.
B. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent deleterious effects of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials.
C. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the first amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent or effect of this chapter to in any way condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material or material harmful to minors. (Ord. 11-5-1999, 11-18-1999)

3-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms and words are defined as follows:
EMPLOYEE: A person who works or performs in and/or for a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of said business.
ESTABLISHMENT: Means and includes any of the following:
    A. The opening or commencement of any business as a new business;
    B. The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any of the “sexually oriented businesses” defined in this section;
    C. The addition of any of the “sexually oriented businesses” defined in this chapter to any other existing sexually oriented business; or
    D. The relocation of any such sexually oriented business.
NUDITY, NUDE OR STATE OF NUDITY:
    A. The appearance of human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or the areola or nipple of the female breast; or
    B. A state of dress which fails to opaquely and fully cover a human buttocks, anus, male or female genitals, pubic region, or areola or nipple of the female breast.
OPERATOR: The owner, permit holder, custodian, manager, operator or person in charge of any permitted or licensed premises.
PERMITTED PREMISES OR LICENSED PREMISES: Any premises that requires a license and/or permit and that is classified as a sexually oriented business.
PERMITTEE OR LICENSEE: A person in whose name a permit and/or license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/or license.
PERSON: An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity.
PUBLIC BUILDING: Any building owned, leased or held by the United States, the state, the county, the city, any special district, school district, or any other agency or political subdivision of the state or the United States, which building is used for governmental purposes.
PUBLIC PARK: Public land which has been designated for park or recreational activities, including, but not limited to, a park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian or bicycle paths, open space, wilderness areas, or similar public land within the city which is under the control, operation or management of the city. Public park does not include a public square.
PUBLIC SQUARE: Property owned and maintained by the city that has been designated as a public square and is open for public use as provided in this chapter.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION: Any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT OR RESIDENTIAL USE: Except with regard to caretaker residences in a commercial or manufacturing zone, a single-family, duplex, townhouse, multifamily or mobile home park, development or subdivision and campgrounds, and single-family, duplex, townhouse, multifamily, or mobile home uses, all as defined under city ordinances.
SCHOOL: Any public or private educational facility, including, but not limited to, child daycare facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, primary schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges and universities. School includes the school grounds, but does not include the facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a school.
SEMINUDE: A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region and areolae of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, massage parlor, sexual encounter establishment, escort, escort agency or seminude model studio.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES: Those businesses defined as follows:
    ADULT ARCADE: An establishment where, for any form of consideration, one (1) or more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors or similar machines, or other image producing machines, for viewing by five (5) or fewer persons each, are regularly used to show films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
    ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE: A commercial establishment which has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock in trade or derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues or devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or advertising to the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of any one (1) or more of the following:
        A. Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other visual representations which are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”;
        B. An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale, rental or viewing of materials depicting or describing “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”, and still be categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store so long as one (1) of its principal business purposes is offering for sale, rental or viewing, for some form of consideration, the specified materials which depict or describe “specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities”.
    ADULT CABARET: A nightclub, bar, restaurant, “bottle club,” or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which regularly features:
        A. Persons who appear nude or in a state of nudity or seminude;
        B. Live performances which are characterized by “specified sexual activities;” or
        C. Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
    ADULT MOTEL: A motel, hotel or similar commercial establishment which:
        A. Offers public accommodations, for any form of consideration, which provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” and which advertises the availability of this sexually oriented type of material by means of a sign visible from the public right-of-way, or by means of any off premises advertising, including but not limited to newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or television; or
        B. Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time less than ten (10) hours; or
        C. Allows a tenant or occupant to subrent the sleeping room for a time period of less than ten (10) hours.
    ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A commercial establishment where films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” are regularly shown for any form of consideration.
    ADULT THEATER: A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly features persons who appear seminude or live performances which are characterized by “specified sexual activities”.
    ESCORT: A person who, for any form of consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
    ESCORT AGENCY: A person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one (1) of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
    MASSAGE PARLOR: Any place where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electronic or magnetic treatments, or any other treatment whereby manipulation of the human body occurs as a part of or in connection with “specified sexual activities,” or where any person providing such treatment, manipulation or service related thereto, exposes his or her “specified anatomical areas.” The definition of “sexually oriented businesses” shall not include the practice of massage in any licensed hospital, nor by a licensed hospital, nor by a licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, physical therapist or massage therapist not engaged in the above, nor by any nurse or technician working under the supervision of a licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath or physical therapist, nor by trainers for any amateur, semiprofessional or professional athlete or athletic team or school athletic program.
    SEMINUDE MODEL STUDIO: Any place where a person, who regularly appears seminude, is provided for money or any form of consideration, to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons.
    SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT: A business or commercial establishment, that as one (1) of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration, a place where two (2) or more persons may congregate, associate or consort for the purpose of “specified sexual activities” or activities when one (1) or more of the persons is seminude. The definition of “sexually oriented businesses” shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Any of the following:
    A. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areolae; or
    B. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Any of the following:
    A. The fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts;
    B. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy;
    C. Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
    D. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence;
    E. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections A through D of this definition.
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Increase in the floor area or wall area occupied by the business by more than fifteen percent (15%), as the floor area and wall area exist on the effective date hereof.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Any of the following:
    A. The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
    B. The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means;
    C. The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal devise which transfers ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of a person possessing the ownership or control. (Ord. 11-5-1999, 11-18-1999; amd. Ord. 2017-04-002, 4-6-2017)

3-8-3: ZONE PERMITTED; DISTANCE RESTRICTIONS; CLASSIFICATION:
A. Zone Permitted; Distance Restrictions; Measurement: The establishment of a sexually oriented business shall be permitted only in M-1 manufacturing zone and shall be subject to the following restrictions:
    1. No person shall cause or permit the establishment of any of the following “sexually oriented businesses” as defined in section 3-8-2 of this chapter: a) within one thousand feet (1,000') of another such business; or b) within one thousand feet (1,000') of any religious institution, school, boys club, girls club, or similar existing youth organization, or public park, public square or public building; or c) within one thousand feet (1,000') of any property zoned as a residential district, where zoning allows (except with regard to caretaker residences in a commercial or manufacturing zone), any residential use or any properties actually used for residential purposes.
    2. As regarding subsection A1 of this section, distance between two (2) sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest property line of each business. The distance between any sexually oriented business and any religious institution, school, boys club, girls club, or similar existing youth organization, public park, public square, public building, or any properties zoned as a residential district, zoned to allow residential use or used for residential purposes, shall also be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects from the nearest property line of the premises where the sexually oriented business is conducted to the nearest property line of the premises of a religious institution, school, boys club, girls club, or similar existing youth organization, public park, public square, public building, or any properties zoned as a residential district, zoned to allow any residential use, or used for residential purpose. (Ord. 2017-04-002, 4-6-2017)
B. Classification: The classification of businesses regulated are:
    1. Adult arcade;
    2. Adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store;
    3. Adult cabaret;
    4. Adult motel;
    5. Adult motion picture theater;
    6. Adult theater;
    7. Massage parlor;
    8. Sexual encounter establishment;
    9. Escort agency; or
    10. Seminude model studio. (Ord. 11-5-1999, 11-18-1999; amd. 2003 Code)

3-8-4: LOCATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES:
The city’s zoning ordinance hereby requires that sexually oriented businesses shall be permitted only as provided in subsection 3-8-3A of this chapter, in which such use is listed as permissible. Permits for sexually oriented businesses shall be required and governed by the procedures and policies specified in this chapter. In addition, any sexually oriented business shall be subject to the following restrictions:
A. It is unlawful for a person to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business except as provided in subsection 3-8-3A of this chapter. (Ord. 11-5-1999, 11-18-1999; amd. 2003 Code)
B. It is unlawful for a person to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business within one thousand feet (1,000') of: 1) any religious institution; 2) any school; 3) a boys club, girls club, or similar existing youth organization; 4) a public park; 5) a public square; 6) a public building; 7) the boundary of any residential district or property zoned for residential use; and 8) a property line of a lot devoted to residential use. (Ord. 2017-04-002, 4-6-2017)
C. It is unlawful for a person to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business within one thousand feet (1,000') of another such business, which will include, any adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, massage parlor, sexual encounter establishment, escort agency or seminude model studio.
D. It is unlawful for a person to cause or permit the operation, establishment or maintenance of more than one (1) sexually oriented business within the same building, structure or portion thereof, or to cause the “substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business”1 in any building, structure or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business.
1See definition at section 3-8-2 of this chapter.
(Ord. 11-5-1999, 11-18-1999; amd. 2003 Code)

3-8-5: EXISTING BUSINESSES:
A. Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on November 18, 1999, that is in violation of sections 3-8-3 and 3-8-4 of this chapter, shall be deemed a nonconforming use. A nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period of one (1) year, with a possible extension of one (1) year to be granted by the planning commission only upon a convincing showing of “extreme financial hardship,” which is defined as the recovery of the initial financial investment in the nonconforming use, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered, except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two (2) or more sexually oriented businesses are within one thousand feet (1,000') of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first established and has been in continuous operation at the particular location is the conforming use, and the later established business is nonconforming. (Ord. 11-5-1999, 11-18-1999)
B. A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of a sexually oriented business permit and/or license, of a religious institution, school, boys club, girls club or similar youth organization, public park, public square, public building, residential district, property zoned for residential use or residential lot within one thousand feet (1,000') of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid permit and/or license and does not apply when an application for a permit and/or license is submitted after a permit and/or license has expired or has been revoked. (Ord. 2017-04-002, 4-6-2017)
C. Any establishment subject to the provisions of this section shall apply for a permit as provided by section 3-8-6 of this chapter within thirty (30) days of the effective date hereof. Any establishment existing prior to the effective date hereof, shall comply with the regulations pertaining to sections 3-8-17, 3-8-19, 3-8-22 and 3-8-24 of this chapter, within sixty (60) days of the effective date hereof, and all other applicable permit regulations within thirty (30) days of the effective date hereof. (Ord. 11-5-1999, 11-18-1999)

3-8-6: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS; APPLICATION:
A. Permit Required: No sexually oriented business shall be permitted to operate without a valid sexually oriented business permit issued by the city for the particular type of business. It shall be unlawful for a person to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business without said permit.
B. City Manager Responsibility: The city manager or his/her designee is responsible for granting, denying, revoking, renewing, suspending and/or canceling sexually oriented business permits for proposed or existing sexually oriented businesses. The city manager or his/her designee is also responsible for ascertaining whether a proposed sexually oriented business for which an application for a permit has been received complies with all requirements of sections 3-8-3 through 3-8-5 of this chapter, all applicable zoning laws and/or regulations now in effect or as amended or enacted subsequent to the effective date hereof by the city and in the city’s general plan.
C. Police Department Responsibility: The police department is responsible for providing information on whether an applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act during the time period set forth.
D. Planning Department Responsibility: The planning department is responsible for inspecting a proposed, permitted or nonpermitted sexually oriented business in order to ascertain whether it is in compliance with applicable statutes and ordinances.
E. Application For Permit: Any person desiring to operate a sexually oriented business shall file with the city an original and two (2) copies of a sworn permit application on the application form supplied by the city.
F. Information, Documents Required: The completed application shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents:
    1. If the applicant is:
        a. An individual, the individual shall state his/her legal name and any aliases and submit satisfactory proof that he/she is eighteen (18) years of age.
        b. A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if any.
        c. A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of the state, the names and capacity of all officers, directors and principal stockholders, and the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process.
    2. If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, the applicant must state the sexually oriented business’ fictitious name and submit the required state fictitious business name registration documents.
    3. Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to this section have, within the two (2) or five (5) year periods, as specified in section 3-8-10 of this chapter, immediately preceding the date of the application, been convicted of a specified criminal act, and, if so, the specified criminal act involved, the date of conviction and the place of conviction.
    4. Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to this section have had a previous permit under this chapter or any other similar sexually oriented business ordinances from another city or county denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant or any other individuals listed pursuant to this section have been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is permitted under this chapter whose permit has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked and the date of denial, suspension or revocation.
    5. Whether the applicant or any other individual listed pursuant to this section holds any other permits and/or licenses under this chapter or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another city or county and, if so, the names and locations of such other permitted businesses.
    6. The single classification of permit for which the applicant is filing.
    7. The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone numbers, if any.
    8. The applicant’s mailing address and residential address.
    9. A recent photograph of the applicant.
    10. The applicant’s driver’s license number, social security number, and state or federally issued tax identification number.
    11. A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches (±6"). (Ord. 11-5-1999, 11-18-1999)
    12. A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared by a Utah registered land surveyor within thirty (30) days prior to the date the application is submitted to the city depicting the property lines and the structures containing any established existing uses regulated by this chapter within one thousand feet (1,000') of the property to be certified; the property lines of any established religious institution, school, boys club, girls club or similar youth organization, public park, public square or public building within one thousand feet (1,000') of the property to be certified; and the property lines of any residentially zoned area or residential property within one thousand feet (1,000') of the property to be certified. For purposes of this section, a use shall be considered existing or established if it is in existence at the time an application is submitted. (Ord. 2017-04-002, 4-6-2017)
    13. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, (s)he must sign the application for a permit as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a ten percent (10%) or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a permit as applicant. If a corporation is listed as owner of a sexually oriented business or as the entity which wishes to operate such a business, each individual having a ten percent (10%) or greater interest in the corporation must sign the application for a permit as applicant.
    14. If a person wishes to operate a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which shall exhibit on the premises films, video cassettes or other video reproductions which depict specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, then said person shall, at the time of application for a permit, also comply with the requirements of section 3-8-17 of this chapter.
G. Changes In Information: Applicants for a permit under this section shall have a continuing duty to promptly supplement all application information required by this section in the event that said information changes in any way from what is stated on the application. The failure to comply with said continuing duty within thirty (30) days from the date of such change shall be grounds for suspension of a permit.
H. Improperly Completed Application: In the event that the city manager or his/her designee determines or learns at any time that the applicant has improperly completed the application for a proposed sexually oriented business, he/she shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and allow the applicant ten (10) days to properly complete the application. The time period for granting or denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is allowed an opportunity to properly complete the application.
I. Qualification Of Applicant And Premises Required: The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with health, fire and building codes and other applicable laws. (Ord. 11-5-1999, 11-18-1999)
J. Nonrefundable Application Fee: The applicant shall be required to pay a nonrefundable application fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city council at the time of filing an application under this section. (Ord. 11-5-1999, 11-18-1999; amd. 2003 Code)
K. Certification Of Location: Prior to obtaining any permit or license to operate any “sexually oriented business,” as defined in section 3-8-2 of this chapter, and as part of any application for a permit under this section, the applicant shall obtain from the city or its designee a certification that the proposed location of such business complies with the locational requirements of sections 3-8-3 through 3-8-5 of this chapter.
L. Other Permits, Licenses Not Applicable: The fact that a person possesses other types of state or city permits or licenses does not exempt him/her from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business permit.
M. Permit Deemed Consent: By applying for a permit under this chapter, the applicant shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this chapter and to the exercise by the city manager or his/her designee, the police department and all other city agencies charged with enforcing the laws, ordinances and codes applicable in the city of their respective responsibilities under this chapter.
N. Names Of Licensed Employees Submitted: The applicant shall be required to provide the city with the names of any and all employees who are required to be licensed pursuant to section 3-8-7 of this chapter. This shall be a continuing requirement even after a permit is granted or renewed. (Ord. 11-5-1999, 11-18-1999)

3-8-7: EMPLOYEE LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
A. License Required: Each individual to be employed in a sexually oriented business who engages in the services rendered by a seminude model studio, escort or escort agency, sexual encounter establishment, massage parlor, or a live performer or entertainer, shall be required to obtain a sexually oriented business employee license. Each applicant shall pay a permit fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city council. Said fee is to cover reasonable administrative costs of the licensing application process. (Ord. 11-5-1999, 11-18-1999; amd. 2003 Code)
B. Information And Documents Required: Before any applicant may be issued a sexually oriented business employee license, the applicant shall submit to the city business license officer, on a form to be provided by the city, the following information:
    1. The applicant’s name and any other names (including “stage” names) or aliases used by the individual;
    2. Age, date and place of birth;
    3. Height, weight, hair and eye color;
    4. Current residence address and telephone number;
    5. Current business address and telephone number;
    6. State driver’s license or identification number;
    7. Social Security number;
    8. Acceptable written proof that the individual is at least eighteen (18) years of age;
    9. Attached to the application form, a color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant’s face, and the applicant’s fingerprints on a form provided by the city. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant;
    10. A statement detailing the license or permit history of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such applicant previously operated or sought to operate, in this or any other county, city, state or country, any sexually oriented business, and if so, whether the applicant has ever had a license, permit or authorization to operate such business denied, revoked or suspended, or had any professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked or suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation or suspension, the applicant shall state the date, the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction, and shall describe in full the reasons for the denial, revocation or suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation or suspension shall be attached to the application; and
    11. Whether the applicant has been convicted of a “specified criminal act,” as defined in section 3-8-10 of this chapter. This information shall include the date, place, nature of each conviction or plea of bolo contendere and identify the convicting jurisdiction.
C. Investigation; Issuance Conditions: The business license officer shall refer the sexually oriented business employee license application to the police department for an investigation to be made of such information as is contained on the application. The investigation shall be completed and the application and report of the investigation shall be forwarded to the city manager within ten (10) days from the date the completed application is filed. After the investigation, the city manager or his/her designee shall issue a license unless one (1) or more of the following findings is true:
    1. That the applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a license, or in any report or record required to be filed with the police department or other department of the city;
    2. That the applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age;
    3. That the applicant has been convicted of a “specified criminal act,” as defined in section 3-8-10 of this chapter;
    4. That the sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule or regulation, or prohibited by particular provisions of this chapter;
    5. That the applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee license revoked by the city within two (2) years of the date of the current application.
D. Renewal Of License: 
    1. A license granted pursuant to this section shall expire on December 31 of each year and may be renewed only by making application as provided in this section. Application for renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date, and when made less than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit will not be affected. Renewal shall be subject to review by the city manager or his/her designee and a finding by the city manager or his/her designee and the police department that the applicant has not been convicted of any “specified criminal act,” as defined in section 3-8-10 of this chapter, and has not committed any act during the existence of the previous license period which would be grounds to deny the initial permit application.
    2. The renewal of the license shall be subject to payment of a fee as set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 11-5-1999, 11-18-1999)

3-8-8: INVESTIGATION:
A. Upon receipt of an application properly filed with the city and upon payment of the nonrefundable application fee, the city license officer shall immediately stamp the application as received and shall immediately thereafter send photocopies of the application to the police department and any other city agencies responsible for enforcement of health, fire and building codes and other applicable laws. Each department or agency shall promptly conduct an investigation of the applicant, the application and the proposed sexually oriented business in accordance with its responsibilities under law and as set forth in this chapter. Such investigations shall be completed within twenty (20) days of receipt of the application by the city. At the conclusion of its investigation, each department or agency shall indicate on the photocopy of the application its approval or disapproval of the application, date it, sign it, and, in the event it disapproves, state the reasons therefor. The police department shall only be required to certify the NCIC records request check mentioned in section 3-8-10 of this chapter. The police department shall not be required to approve or disapprove applications.
B. A department or agency shall disapprove an application if it finds that the proposed sexually oriented business will be in violation of any provision of any statute, code, ordinance, regulation or other law in effect in the city. After its indication of approval or disapproval, each department or agency shall immediately return the photocopy of the application to the city license officer, who shall immediately forward the application and all comments by each department to the city manager or his/her designee. (Ord. 11-5-1999, 11-18-1999)

3-8-9: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
A. Authority: An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the city, the health department and the fire department to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business.
B. Refusal Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for a person who operates a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under this chapter, or his/her agent or employee, to refuse to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time that it is occupied or open for business. (Ord. 11-5-1999, 11-18-1999)

3-8-10: ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
A. Time Limit: The city manager or his/her designee, shall grant or deny an application for a permit within thirty (30) days from the date of its proper filing. Upon the expiration of the thirtieth day, unless the city requests and is granted a reasonable extension of time, the applicant shall be permitted to begin operating the business for which the permit is sought, unless and until the city or its designee notifies the applicant of a denial of the application and states the reason for that denial.
B. Contents Of Permit: The city manager or his/her designee, shall grant the application unless one (1) or more of the criteria set forth in subsection C of this section is present. The permit, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The permit shall also indicate that the sexually oriented business is subject to prohibitions against public nudity and indecency pursuant to the United States Supreme Court decision in Barnes v. Glen Theater, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991). The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it can be read easily at any time.
C. Reasons For Denial: The city manager or his/her designee, shall deny the application for any of the following reasons:
    1. An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.
    2. An applicant or an applicant’s spouse is overdue on his/her payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against him/her or imposed upon him/her in relation to a sexually oriented business.
    3. An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a permit by the city to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding twelve (12) months, or residing with a person whose permit to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding twelve (12) months.
    4. An applicant has failed to provide information required by this section or the permit application for the issuance of the permit or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form.
    5. The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business has not been approved as being in compliance with health, fire and building codes, and other applicable laws by the department or agency responsible under law for investigating said compliance.
    6. The application or permit fees required by this chapter have not been paid.
    7. An applicant of the proposed business is in violation of, or is not in compliance with, any of the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the zoning locational requirements for a sexually oriented business under sections 3-8-3 through 3-8-5 of this chapter.
    8. The granting of the application would violate a statute, ordinance or court order.
    9. The applicant has a permit under this chapter which has been suspended or revoked.
    10. An applicant has been convicted of a “specified criminal act”, for which:
        a. Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense for “specified criminal acts” which are sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape or crimes connected with another sexually oriented business, including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity or material harmful to minors, prostitution, pandering or tax violations;
        b. Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense for “specified criminal acts,” which are sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape or crimes connected with another sexually oriented business, including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity or material harmful to minors, prostitution, pandering or tax violations;
        c. Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses occurring within any twenty-four (24) month period for “specified criminal acts,” which are sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape or crimes connected with another sexually oriented business, including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity or materials harmful to minors, prostitution, pandering or tax violations; offenses occurring within any twenty-four (24) month period.
        The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on disqualification of the applicant.
        An applicant who has been convicted of the above described “specified criminal acts” may qualify for a sexually oriented business permit only when the time period required above has elapsed.
    11. An applicant knowingly has in his or her employ, an employee who does not have a valid license as required in section 3-8-7 of this chapter.
D. Notification Of Denial: If the city manager or his/her designee, denies the application, he/she shall notify the applicant of the denial and state the reason for the denial.
E. Previous Denial: If a person applies for a permit for a particular location within a period of twelve (12) months from the date of denial of a previous application for a permit at that location, and there has not been an intervening change in the circumstances which could reasonably be expected to lead to a different decision regarding the former reasons for denial, the application shall be denied. (Ord. 11-5-1999, 11-18-1999)

3-8-11: FEE FOR PERMIT:
The annual fee for a sexually oriented business permit is in such amount as established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 11-5-1999, 11-18-1999; amd. 2003 Code)

3-8-12: EXPIRATION OF PERMIT; RENEWAL:
A. Each permit shall expire on December 31 of each year and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 3-8-6 of this chapter. For renewals, the filing of the original survey along with the renewal application shall be sufficient. Application for renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date, and when made less than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit will not be affected.
B. When the city manager or his/her designee denies renewal of the permit, the applicant shall not be issued a permit under this chapter for one (1) year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the city or its designee, finds that the basis for denial of the renewal of the permit has been corrected, the applicant shall be granted a permit if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date denial became final. (Ord. 11-5-1999, 11-18-1999)

3-8-13: SUSPENSION OF PERMIT:
A. Conditions Constituting Suspension: The city manager or his/her designee, shall suspend a permit for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if he/she determines that a permittee, or an employee of a permittee, has:
    1. Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter; or
    2. Been under the influence of alcoholic beverages while working on the premises of a sexually oriented business; or
    3. Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this chapter; or
    4. Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexual oriented business premises; or
    5. Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of a building, fire, health, zoning or other applicable statute, code, ordinance or regulation, whether federal, state or local, said determination being based on investigation by the division, department or agency charged with enforcing said rules or laws. In the event of such statute, code, ordinance or regulation violation, the city shall promptly notify the permittee of the violation and shall allow the permittee a seven (7) day period in which to correct the violation. If the permittee fails to correct the violation before the expiration of the seven (7) day period, the city shall forthwith suspend the permit and shall notify the permittee of the suspension; or
    6. Engaged in permit transfer contrary to section 3-8-16 of this chapter. In the event that the city suspends a permit on the ground that a permittee engaged in a permit transfer contrary to section 3-8-16 of this chapter, the city manager or his/her designee shall forthwith notify the permittee of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect until the applicable section of this chapter has been satisfied; or
    7. Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of the hours of operation as set forth in section 3-8-20 of this chapter; or
    8. Knowingly employs a person who does not have a valid license as required in section 3-8-7 of this chapter.
B. Term Of Suspension: The suspension shall remain in effect until the violation of the statute, code, ordinance or regulation in question has been corrected. (Ord. 11-5-1999, 11-18-1999)

3-8-14: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
A. Revocation Within Specified Time: The city manager or his/her designee shall revoke a permit if a cause for suspension as provided in section 3-8-13 of this chapter occurs and the permit has been suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months.
B. Conditions Constituting Revocation: The city manager or his/her designee, shall revoke a permit upon determining that:
    1. A permittee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process that tended to enhance the applicant’s opportunity for obtaining a permit; or
    2. A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances in or on the premises; or
    3. A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; or
    4. A permittee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the permittee’s permit was suspended; or
    5. A permittee has been convicted of a “specified criminal act,” for which the time period required in section 3-8-10 of this chapter has not elapsed; or
    6. On two (2) or more occasions within a twelve (12) month period, a person or persons committed an offense, occurring in or on the permitted premises, constituting a “specified criminal act” for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were committed. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the permit; or
    7. A permittee is convicted of tax violations for any taxes or fees related to a sexually oriented business; or
    8. A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or any other specified sexual activities to occur in or on the permitted premises; or
    9. A permittee has been operating more than one (1) sexually oriented business under a single roof.
C. Term Of Revocation: When the city manager or his/her designee revokes a permit, the revocation shall continue for one (1) year and the permittee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business permit for one (1) year from the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the city manager finds that the basis for revocation under this section has been corrected, the applicant shall be granted a permit if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date revocation became effective. If the permit was revoked under this section, an applicant may not be granted another permit until the expiration of one (1) year from the date the revocation became effective. (Ord. 11-5-1999, 11-18-1999)

3-8-15: REVIEW OF DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an application, or suspension or revocation of a permit, the applicant or permittee may seek prompt review of such administrative action through the city council, or special city review board if one is established by the city. If the denial, suspension or revocation is affirmed upon review, the administrative action may be reviewed by the court having jurisdiction. (Ord. 11-5-1999, 11-18-1999)

3-8-16: TRANSFERABILITY:
A. Operation At Other Location Prohibited: A permittee shall not operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a permit at any place other than the address designated in the application for a permit and the permit issued in response thereto.
B. Transfer Requirements: A permittee shall not transfer his/her permit to another person unless and until such other person satisfies the following requirements:
    1. Obtains an amendment to the permit from the city manager or his/her designee, which provides that he/she is now the permittee, which amendment may be obtained only if he/she has completed and properly filed an application with the city manager or his/her designee, setting forth the information called for under section 3-8-6 of this chapter; and
    2. Pays a transfer fee of twenty percent (20%) of the annual permit fee set by this chapter.
C. Suspension Or Revocation Proceedings: No permit may be transferred when the city manager or his/her designee has notified the permittee that suspension or revocation proceedings have been or will be brought against the permittee.
D. Transfer To Another Location: A permittee shall not transfer his permit to another location.
E. Violation; Revocation: Any attempt to transfer a permit either directly or indirectly in violation of this section is hereby declared void and the permit shall be deemed revoked. (Ord. 11-5-1999, 11-18-1999)

3-8-17: EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS OR VIDEOS IN BOOTHS:
A. Requirements: A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, and, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued to said business under this chapter, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements:
    1. Upon application for a sexually oriented business permit, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one (1) or more manager’s stations, the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager’s station may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area with no dimension greater than eight feet (8'). The diagram shall also designate the place at which this permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer’s or architect’s blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram shall be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches (±6"). The city manager or his/her designee may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
    2. The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
    3. No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager’s station may be made without the prior approval of the city or its designee.
    4. It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one (1) employee is on duty and situated at each manager’s station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
    5. The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two (2) or more manager’s stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one (1) of the manager’s stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager’s station.
    6. It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in subsection A5 of this section remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials or persons at all times and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to this chapter.
    7. No viewing room may be occupied by more than one (1) person at any one time.
    8. The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than two (2) foot-candles as measured at the floor level.
    9. It shall be the duty of the owners and operators and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present on the premises.
B. Violation: It is unlawful for a person to knowingly fail to fulfill any duty set forth under subsection A of this chapter. (Ord. 11-5-1999, 11-18-1999)

3-8-18: MINORS:
It is unlawful for a person to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for such business under this chapter, and knowingly or with reasonable cause to know, permit, suffer or allow:
A. Admittance of a person under eighteen (18) years of age to the business premises unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian;
B. A person under eighteen (18) years of age to remain at the business premises unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian;
C. A person under eighteen (18) years of age to purchase goods or services at the business premises without the specific consent of a parent or legal guardian; or
D. A person under eighteen (18) years of age to work at the business premises as an employee or independent contractor. (Ord. 11-5-1999, 11-18-1999)

3-8-19: ADVERTISING AND LIGHTING:
A. Advertising Prohibited Activities: It shall be unlawful for a person to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for such business under this chapter, and advertise the presentation of any activity prohibited by any applicable state statute or local ordinance.
B. Outside Advertising: It shall be unlawful for a person to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for such business under this chapter, and display or otherwise exhibit the materials and/or performances at such sexually oriented business in any advertising which is visible outside the premises. This prohibition shall not extend to advertising of the existence or location of such sexually oriented business.
C. Interior View Of Premises From Outside: The permittee shall not allow any portion of the interior premises to be visible from outside the premises.
D. Outside Lighting: All off street parking areas and premises entries of the sexually oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation with a lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of one (1) foot-candle of light on the parking surface and walkways. This required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the sexually oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct. The lighting shall be shown on the required sketch or diagram of the premises.
E. Compliance With Subsequently Enacted Regulations: Nothing contained in this section shall relieve the operators of a sexually oriented business from complying with the requirements of any subsequently enacted city ordinances or regulations. (Ord. 11-5-1999, 11-18-1999)

3-8-20: HOURS OF OPERATION:
A. Operator: It shall be unlawful for a person to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under this chapter, and allow such business to remain open for business, or to permit any employee to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service, between the hours of one o’clock (1:00) A.M. and nine o’clock (9:00) A.M. of any particular day.
B. Employee: It shall be unlawful for a person to work as an employee of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under this chapter, and engages in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service between the hours of one o’clock (1:00) A.M. and nine o’clock (9:00) A.M. of any particular day. (Ord. 11-5-1999, 11-18-1999)

3-8-21: NUDITY PROHIBITED; EXEMPTIONS:
A. Prohibition: The United States Supreme Court decision in Barnes v. Glen Theater, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991) which upheld the rights of cities to prohibit live public exposure of a person’s private parts, specifically applies to sexually oriented businesses, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued to said businesses under this chapter, including such businesses where no alcoholic beverages are sold, served or consumed at the premises. Public nudity is prohibited within the city, including any sexually oriented business. Any sexually oriented business which is found in violation of this section shall have its permit suspended pursuant to the provisions of section 3-8-13 of this chapter.
B. Exemptions; Defenses: 
    1. It is a defense to prosecution for any violation of this chapter that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
        a. By a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
        b. By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
        c. In a structure:
            (1) Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and
            (2) Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class; and
            (3) Where no more than one (1) nude model is on the premises at any one time.
    2. It is a defense to prosecution for a violation of this chapter that an employee of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not it is permitted under this chapter, exposed any specified anatomical area during the employee’s bona fide use of a restroom, or during the employee’s bona fide use of a dressing room which is accessible only to employees. (Ord. 11-5-1999, 11-18-1999)

3-8-22: LIVE ENTERTAINMENT:
A. Defined: For purposes of this section, “live entertainment” is defined as a person who appears seminude, or a performance which is characterized by “specified sexual activities”.
B. Stage Requirements: No person shall perform live entertainment for patrons of a sexually oriented business establishment except upon a stage at least eighteen inches (18") above the level of the floor which is separated by a distance of at least ten feet (10') from the nearest area occupied by patrons. No patron shall be permitted within ten feet (10') of the stage while the stage is occupied by a performer.
C. Dressing Rooms: The sexually oriented business establishment shall provide separate dressing room facilities for female and male performers which shall not be occupied or used in any way by anyone other than performers.
D. Access Between Stage And Dressing Rooms: The sexually oriented business establishment shall provide access for performers between the stage and the dressing rooms which is completely separated from the patrons. If such separate access is not physically feasible, the establishment shall provide a minimum four foot (4') wide walk aisle for performers between the dressing room area and the stage, with a railing, fence or other barrier separating the patrons and the performers which prevents any physical contact between patrons and performers.
E. Physical Contact Prohibited: No entertainer, either before, during or after a performance, shall have physical contact with any patron and no patron shall have physical contact with any entertainer either before, during or after a performance. This subsection shall only apply to physical contact while in or on the premises of the establishment.
F. Fixed Rails: Fixed rails at least thirty inches (30") in height shall be maintained establishing the separation between performers and patrons required by this section.
G. Gratuities: No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any entertainer. A patron who wishes to pay or give a gratuity to a performer shall place the gratuity in a container that is at all times located separate from the performers for the purpose of preventing any physical contact between a patron and a performer. No performer shall solicit any gratuity from any patron.
H. Prohibited Conduct: No operator of a sexually oriented business establishment shall cause or allow a performer to contract or engage in any entertainment such as a “couch” or a “straddle” dance with a patron while in or on the establishment premises. No performer shall contract to or engage in a “couch” or “straddle” dance with a patron while in or on the establishment premises. For purposes of this subsection, “couch” or “straddle” dance is defined as an employee of the establishment intentionally touching or coming within ten feet (10') of any patron while engaged in the display or exposure of any “specified anatomical area,” or any “specified sexual activity.” For purposes of this subsection, “employee” is defined as set forth in section 3-8-2 of this chapter.
I. Exceptions: This section shall not apply to an employee of an establishment who, while acting as a waiter, waitress, host, hostess or bartender, comes within ten feet (10') of a patron. No employee shall engage in any “specified sexual activity” or display or expose any “specified anatomical area” while acting as a waiter, waitress, host, hostess or bartender.
J. Compliance Requirements: Operators of a sexually oriented business desiring to provide live entertainment or existing businesses providing live entertainment shall comply with the following provisions:
    1. For purposes of this section, “establishment” is defined as set forth in section 3-8-2 of this chapter. No establishment shall be in compliance with this section until the city’s designated agents have inspected and approved of the establishment’s compliance. The city shall have ten (10) days from the date it receives written notice from the operator that the establishment is ready for inspection to approve or disapprove of compliance required by this section. Failure to approve or disapprove of compliance within ten (10) days shall constitute a finding of compliance under this section.
    2. The operator of an establishment that has been providing live entertainment under a valid sexually oriented business permit at the time the ordinance codified herein is adopted, shall have sixty (60) days from the effective date hereof to bring the establishment into compliance with this section. Failure to do so while continuing to provide live entertainment shall cause the establishment’s permit to be suspended under section 3-8-13 of this chapter. The permit shall remain suspended until the establishment is approved by the city’s designated agents as being in full compliance with this section.
    3. The operator of an establishment that has been operating under a valid permit for another classification of sexually oriented business and who wishes to provide live entertainment at that establishment, shall apply for and receive a sexually oriented business permit for the operation of an establishment providing live entertainment before any live entertainment is provided at that establishment. No live entertainment permit shall be issued until the establishment is approved as being in full compliance with this section and all other applicable requirements of this chapter.
    4. The applicant for a permit to operate a new establishment, who wishes to provide live entertainment, shall apply for and receive a sexually oriented business permit for the operation of an establishment providing live entertainment before any live entertainment is provided. No live entertainment permit shall be issued until the establishment is approved as being in full compliance with this section and all other applicable requirements of this ordinance. (Ord. 11-5-1999, 11-18-1999; amd. 2003 Code)

3-8-23: OPERATION WITHOUT VALID PERMIT:
In addition to the criminal provisions found in other sections of this chapter, the following additional criminal provisions shall also apply to sexually oriented businesses. It shall be unlawful for a person to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under this chapter, and such person knows or should know that:
A. The business does not have a sexually oriented business permit under this chapter for any applicable classification;
B. The business has a permit which is under suspension;
C. The business has a permit which has been revoked; or
D. The business has a permit which has expired. (Ord. 11-5-1999, 11-18-1999)

3-8-24: DISTRIBUTION OF SEXUAL DEVICES:
A. Prohibited: It is unlawful for anyone to distribute, for commercial purposes, sell or offer for sale any device, instrument or paraphernalia designed or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others.
B. Devices Included: Such devices, instruments or paraphernalia include, but are not limited to, phallic shaped vibrators, dildos, muzzles, whips, chains, bather restraints, racks, nonmedical enema kits, body piercing implements (excluding earrings or other decorative jewelry) or other tools of sadomasochistic abuse. (Ord. 11-5-1999, 11-18-1999)

3-8-25: IMMUNITY FROM PROSECUTION:
The city and its designees, the police department and all other departments and agencies, and all other city officers, agents and employees, charged with enforcement of state and local laws and codes shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable, good faith trespass upon a sexually oriented business while acting within the scope of authority conferred by this chapter. (Ord. 11-5-1999, 11-18-1999)

3-8-26: INJUNCTIONS:
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without having a valid permit is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for the criminal violation. Such violation shall be punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or thirty (30) days imprisonment, and if an injunction must be sought, attorney fees and costs will be assessed at the discretion of the court against the sexually oriented business. (Ord. 11-5-1999, 11-18-1999)

3-8-27: PENALTY:
A. Misdemeanor: In addition to whatever penalties are applicable under this code or the Utah Criminal Code, if any person fails or refuses to obey or comply with or violates any of the criminal provisions of this chapter, such person upon conviction of such offense, shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1. Each violation or noncompliance shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. Further, each day of continued violation or noncompliance shall be considered as a separate offense.
B. Court Action: Nothing herein contained shall prevent or restrict the city from taking such other lawful action in any court of competent jurisdiction as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation or noncompliance. Such other lawful actions shall include, but shall not be limited to, an equitable action for injunctive relief or an action at law for damages.
C. Civil Violations Hearing Officer: Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the city from prosecuting any violation of this chapter by means of a civil violations hearing officer established pursuant to authority as provided by the laws of the state or this code.
D. Remedies Cumulative: All remedies and penalties provided for in this section shall be cumulative and independently available to the city, and the city shall be authorized to pursue any and all remedies set forth in this section to the full extent allowed by law. (Ord. 11-5-1999, 11-18-1999)

CHAPTER 9 TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND TOBACCO PARAPHERNALIA


3-9-1:       Applicability; Sale Of Tobacco Products And Tobacco Paraphernalia Restricted
3-9-2:       Definitions
3-9-3:       Tobacco Sales Business License Required
3-9-4:       Retail Tobacco Specialty Business Not Permitted
3-9-5:       Revocation Of A Tobacco Sales Business License
3-9-6:       Penalty

3-9-1: APPLICABILITY; SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND TOBACCO PARAPHERNALIA RESTRICTED:
No individual, entity or organization shall:
A. Conduct or operate a retail tobacco specialty business; or
B. Sell, furnish, or otherwise distribute tobacco products or “tobacco paraphernalia,” as defined in this chapter, unless it satisfies the requirements set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2012-11-001, 11-1-2012)

3-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
RETAIL TOBACCO SPECIALTY BUSINESS: A commercial establishment in which:
    A. The sale of tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia accounts for more than thirty-five percent (35%) of the total annual gross receipts for the establishment;
    B. Food and beverage products, excluding gasoline sales, is less than forty-five percent (45%) of the total annual gross receipts for the establishment; and
    C. The establishment is not licensed as a pharmacy under Utah Code title 58, chapter 17b, Pharmacy Practice Act.
TOBACCO PARAPHERNALIA: Does not include matches or lighters, and means any equipment, product, or material of any kind which is used, intended for use, or designed for use to package, repackage, store, contain, conceal, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce a cigar, cigarette, or tobacco in any form into the human body, including, but not limited to:
    A. Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls;
    B. Water pipes;
    C. Carburetion tubes and devices;
    D. Smoking and carburetion masks;
    E. Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand;
    F. Chamber pipes;
    G. Carburetor pipes;
    H. Electric pipes;
    I. Air driven pipes;
    J. Chillums;
    K. Bongs; and
    L. Ice pipes or chillers.
TOBACCO PRODUCT: Any cigar, cigarette, or electronic cigarette as defined in Utah Code; a tobacco product as defined in Utah Code, including chewing tobacco; any substitute for a tobacco product, including flavoring or additives to tobacco.
TOBACCO SALES BUSINESS LICENSE: A business license issued by the city which permits the licensee to sell tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia from its validly licensed business. (Ord. 2012-11-001, 11-1-2012)

3-9-3: TOBACCO SALES BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. Tobacco Products And Tobacco Paraphernalia: No individual, entity, organization, or business shall sell tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia unless it has obtained a tobacco sales business license. A tobacco sales business license shall only be issued as a secondary license to a business license for one of the following:
    1. A business that is primarily engaged in the sale of food and beverage products and is located in a building which is ten thousand (10,000) square feet or larger;
    2. A business that is primarily engaged in the sale of gasoline or diesel fuel and is located in a building which is two thousand (2,000) square feet or larger;
    3. An on-premises alcoholic beverage sales license;
    4. A business license for a pharmacy under Utah Code and is located in a building which is ten thousand (10,000) square feet or larger; or
    5. A business license for any business that was lawfully selling tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia under that license prior to May 3, 2012.
B. Application For License: 
    1. An application for a license shall be made in writing on the form provided by the licensing officer. The form must be completed in its entirety. The application must be accompanied by:
        a. The business license required in this chapter;
        b. Documentation showing the square footage of the building;
        c. Proof of the operation of a business specified in subsection A1 or A2 of this section, if the application is to qualify as such a business; and
        d. If seeking to qualify under subsection A5 of this section, proof of:
            (1) The lawful sales of tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia prior to May 3, 2012; and
            (2) The percentage of tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia sold as compared to the total annual gross receipts for the business. (Ord. 2012-11-001, 11-1-2012)

3-9-4: RETAIL TOBACCO SPECIALTY BUSINESS NOT PERMITTED:
The operation of a retail tobacco specialty business is prohibited. (Ord. 2012-11-001, 11-1-2012)

3-9-5: REVOCATION OF A TOBACCO SALES BUSINESS LICENSE:
A. The city may suspend, revoke, or terminate the business license of a business which is operating as a tobacco sales business if:
    1. The licensee, owner, or operator:
        a. Engages in a pattern of unlawful activity as outlined in Utah Code 76-10-1601 et seq., or its amendment; or
        b. Violates any alcohol or drug related offenses, regulations restricting the sale and distribution of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia, or any felony offenses under any provision of federal, state, or local law.
    2. While on the business premises, an employee violates:
        a. Any laws or regulations related to alcohol or controlled substances;
        b. Any laws or regulations restricting the sale and distribution of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia; or
        c. Any provision of federal, state, or local law which would be a felony level offense.
    3. The tobacco sales business does not maintain the right to operate under the terms of other applicable laws, including zoning ordinances, building codes, and the business license.
B. In addition to the provisions outlined in subsection A of this section, a business licensed under subsection 3-9-3A5 of this chapter may have their tobacco sales business license permanently revoked if:
    1. The tobacco sales business license is not renewed continuously without relapse or revocation;
    2. The tobacco sales business is closed for business or otherwise suspends the sale of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia for more than sixty (60) consecutive days; or
    3. The tobacco sales business substantially changes the business premises or its business operation. (Ord. 2012-11-001, 11-1-2012)

3-9-6: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter is a class B misdemeanor and punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), not including any mandatory fees and surcharges imposed by law or a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 2012-11-001, 11-1-2012)

CHAPTER 10 SPECIAL EVENTS


3-10-1:      Purpose
3-10-2:      Definitions
3-10-3:      Permit Required
3-10-4:      Application Requirements And Procedures
3-10-5:      Insurance Requirement
3-10-6:      Fees
3-10-7:      Application Review, Approval And Issuance
3-10-8:      Grounds For Denial
3-10-9:      Appeal Procedures
3-10-10:     Violation

3-10-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for and encourage temporary events to occur in the city in order to create a sense of community and enhance the quality of life for city residents. It is also the city’s intent to promote, protect and assure the safety and convenience of residents and visitors by mitigating potential issues which may occur as a result of the special event. This chapter is adopted to ensure that the special events do not create disturbances, become a nuisance, threaten life, health, and property, disrupt traffic, or threaten or damage private or public property. It is not the intent of this chapter to regulate in any manner the content of speech or infringe upon the right to assemble, except for time, place and manner regulations. (Ord. 2015-10-003, 10-1-2015)

3-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be defined as set forth in this section:
APPLICANT: The individual event organizer and the organization responsible for the event and the payment of fees.
ATHLETIC EVENT: An organized competitive or recreational event in which a group of people collectively engage in a sport or form of physical exercise, including, but not limited to, running, jogging, walking, bicycling or skating, held on any public or private property.
CITY EVENT: A special event that is organized and operated by the city, whether directly or by contract with a third party operator.
FILMING EVENT: Filming of a media broadcast (other than for news purposes), filming of a motion picture, television broadcast and digital media production.
OUTDOOR SALES EVENT: An organized event in which a group of people or an organization engages in the sale of product including, but not limited to, displays and exhibitions, farmers’ markets, craft fairs, outdoor sales, tent sales and other similar activities.
SPECIAL EVENT: A temporary event of any of the following or a combination of the following acts:
    A. Any athletic event, entertainment event, parade, carnival, circus, dance, musical event, rodeo event, fighting event, racing event, live shows, fairs, concerts, block parties, filming event, or outdoor sales event, whether held for profit, nonprofit or charitable purposes held on private or public property within the city.
    B. Any organized assemblage at any public park, public square or other city property which gathers for a common purpose or event under the direction and control of a person or entity and which uses more services, amusement devices such as stages, inflatable devices or temporary structures, or equipment, whether provided by the city or a third party, than normally provided to groups which reserve park facilities or other city-owned facilities.
    C. Events held at the following are not special events under this chapter:
        1. A building that has a business located in it that has a current annual business license as an event business;
        2. A building with an assembly group classification under the International Building Code, as adopted by the city, so long as the event does not exceed the posted occupant load as approved by the city and has a current annual business license, if required; and
        3. A government owned facility.
    D. For purposes of this chapter, city events are not special events, however events sponsored by the city are special events.
TEMPORARY EVENT: Any event which occurs on a temporary basis of less than one (1) year at a location where the applicant does not have an annual business license for the specific activities being held. (Ord. 2015-10-003, 10-1-2015; amd. Ord. 2017-04-002, 4-6-2017)

3-10-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership, association or other entity, public or private, to promote, advertise or hold a special event without first obtaining a special event permit. (Ord. 2015-10-003, 10-1-2015)

3-10-4: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES:
A. Submission: A completed application on city forms shall be submitted to the city at least forty-five (45) calendar days before the event is scheduled to take place, in order to allow sufficient time to process the application and to allow timely appeal to the city council in the event the application is denied. Applications for new events or reoccurring events with changes that submit the application less than forty-five (45) calendar days prior to the scheduled event shall not be accepted. Applications are not considered complete until all required information has been submitted to the city.
B. Advertising: No advertising of a special event shall be permitted until city approval of the special event is granted and a special event permit is issued.
C. Inspections: Authorized law enforcement officers, fire control officers, and other government personnel shall be permitted free access to the event to make inspections to ensure compliance with all city, state, and federal laws. All government personnel shall comply with the Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution at all times during an inspection. (Ord. 2015-10-003, 10-1-2015)

3-10-5: INSURANCE REQUIREMENT:
A. Insurance: The applicant, vendors, exhibitors, and concessionaires of a special event held on city property shall procure and maintain commercial general liability insurance in the amount required by the city to protect the city against loss from liability imposed by law for damages on account of bodily injury or property damage arising from the event. Such insurance shall provide the following and shall be submitted to the city on an insurance certificate which shall include the following:
    1. The name and address of the insured.
    2. City shall be named as an additional primary insured and noncontributory on the general liability certificate.
    3. The location of the operations to which the insurance applies.
    4. The number of the policy and the type or types of insurance in force thereunder on the date of the certificate.
    5. The expiration date of the policy and the limit or limits of liability thereunder on the date of the certificate.
    6. A statement that all coverage is on an occurrence basis rather than a claims basis.
    7. A provision that the policy or policies will not be canceled, denied renewal, or reduced in coverage until at least thirty (30) days after written notice has been received by city.
    8. Name, address, and telephone number of the insurance company’s agent.
B. Workers’ Compensation Insurance: Applicant shall procure and maintain workers’ compensation insurance as required by Utah law.
C. Certificate Of Insurance: No special event permit shall be issued until the applicant and all vendors, exhibitors, or concessionaires participating in the event submit to the city a certificate of insurance as required in this chapter. (Ord. 2015-10-003, 10-1-2015)

3-10-6: FEES:
A. Application And Cost Recovery Fees: Along with the application for a special event permit, the applicant shall pay any applicable special event application fees and city cost recovery fees.
B. City Cost Recovery Fees: Extra city services will be provided for special events as determined by the city to be needed to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public and shall be paid by the applicant.
    1. City costs include, but are not limited to, police, fire, park maintenance, power, water, road closures, and cleanup of city facilities before, during, or after the event, and other costs to city directly attributable to the special event.
    2. Before city approval is granted to hold the event, the applicant shall pay the deposit and estimated city fees as determined by the city based on the application, the applicant’s past event history with the city, and experience with similar events.
C. Invoice: The city may mail or deliver to the permit holder an invoice for the cost of city services provided and any costs incurred by the city in restoring the site. If the amount exceeds the city cost recovery fees paid in advance, the applicant shall pay the unpaid portion of the invoice within thirty (30) days of the date that the invoice was mailed or delivered. If the amount is less than the city cost recovery fees paid prior to issuance of the permit, then the remaining amount shall be returned to the applicant. (Ord. 2015-10-003, 10-1-2015)

3-10-7: APPLICATION REVIEW, APPROVAL AND ISSUANCE:
The city manager, or a designee, shall review and either approve, approve with conditions, or deny the request for a special event permit. The city manager may refer the request for a special event permit to city council for approval. (Ord. 2015-10-003, 10-1-2015)

3-10-8: GROUNDS FOR DENIAL:
A. Grounds For Denial: The special event application may be denied by the city if:
    1. The proposed special event violates a law, ordinance, policy, procedure, or regulation or poses a danger or threat to the public health, safety or welfare, or causes unreasonable inconvenience or cost to the public;
    2. The proposed special event is not consistent with the intended nature and use of the requested city property;
    3. The proposed special event is scheduled at a place and time that could disrupt or interfere with an already approved special event;
    4. The proposed location or building is not adequate to accommodate the proposed special event such as parking, sanitation facilities, and health or safety codes, or the nature of the proposed special event is such that the city, or the applicant does not have sufficient resources available to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of special event participants or the general public;
    5. The permit application contains a material falsehood or misrepresentation;
    6. The applicant has failed to pay a debt to the city including costs incurred during a prior special event;
    7. Incomplete permit applications; and
    8. The applicant or any person on whose behalf the application for a permit was made has on prior occasions:
        a. Damaged city property, if the applicant is for an event on city property; or
        b. Made material misrepresentations regarding the nature or scope of an event or activity previously permitted; or
        c. Has violated the terms of prior permits issued to or on behalf of the applicant.
B. Notice: If a special event permit application is denied, the city shall notify the applicant in writing of the reason or reasons for the denial. (Ord. 2015-10-003, 10-1-2015)

3-10-9: APPEAL PROCEDURES:
Any applicant for a special event permit desiring to appeal an administrative decision concerning the denial or modification of a special event permit may petition the city council if the decision was made by the city manager. Any decision made by the city council is final. All appeals shall be in writing, shall state the specific grounds for the appeal, and shall be delivered to the city recorder within five (5) calendar days after the date the applicant received notice of the denial. An applicant may appeal the city council’s decision by seeking judicial review with the district court, which review shall be limited to a review of the record. The district court shall presume the city council’s decision is valid and shall review the record to determine whether or not the decision was arbitrary, capricious or illegal. (Ord. 2015-10-003, 10-1-2015)

3-10-10: VIOLATION:
A violation of this chapter shall be a class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 2015-10-003, 10-1-2015)

TITLE 4 HEALTH AND SAFETY

Chapter
1            Fire Department
2            Nuisances
3            Repealed
4            Solid Waste; Recyclables; Collection And Disposal
5            Construction Site Sanitation And Debris Control
6            Hazardous Materials
7            Rental Fit Premises
8            Oleander Plants
9            Air Quality Regulations
10           Property Maintenance

CHAPTER 1 FIRE DEPARTMENT


4-1-1:       Fire Department
4-1-2:       Fire Chief
4-1-3:       Fire Marshal
4-1-4:       Reorganization
4-1-5:       Assignments
4-1-6:       Functions
4-1-7:       Rules And Regulations

4-1-1: FIRE DEPARTMENT:
There shall be a fire department consisting of a fire chief, fire marshal and subordinate firefighters and subordinate volunteer firefighters and other employees. (Ord. 2002-02-003, 2-7-2002)

4-1-2: FIRE CHIEF:
The mayor shall, subject to the advice and consent of the city council, appoint a person to act as fire chief. The fire chief shall serve as the department head, be the appointing power, and be responsible for the administrative direction of the department. The fire chief may be removed from office by the mayor as otherwise provided by law. (Ord. 2002-02-003, 2-7-2002)

4-1-3: FIRE MARSHAL:
The fire chief shall, subject to the advice and consent of the city manager, assign a person to act in the office of fire marshal. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the fire marshal to enforce all laws, ordinances and regulations pertaining to fire prevention and fire protection within the limits of the city. The fire chief may assign such other personnel as he or she deems necessary to aid the fire marshal in the furtherance of his or her duties. (Ord. 2002-02-003, 2-7-2002)

4-1-4: REORGANIZATION:
The fire chief may, with the advice and consent of the city manager, from time to time reorganize the fire department. (Ord. 2002-02-003, 2-7-2002)

4-1-5: ASSIGNMENTS:
The fire chief may assign the fire marshal, any subordinate firefighter or employee in the department to any duty which in the judgment of the chief the good of the service may require, and may change such assignment from time to time whenever in the judgment of the chief the good of the service requires. (Ord. 2002-02-003, 2-7-2002)

4-1-6: FUNCTIONS:
The fire department and its chief, acting through its officers and firefighters, shall be responsible throughout the city for the protection of life and property from damage or loss due to fire or other hazardous conditions and to provide emergency medical care to the injured, through measures including, but not limited to:
A. The development and administration of public education, fire prevention and injury prevention programs:
B. Fire and safety inspections of buildings and proposed building plans;
C. The development, administration and enforcement of all applicable state and city laws, statutes, ordinances, codes and regulations;
D. Fire suppression;
E. Fire rescue;
F. Post investigation of fires to determine cause and origin and assist in the prosecution of arson cases; (Ord. 2002-02-003, 2-7-2002)
G. Emergency medical services; and (Ord. 2002-02-003, 2-7-2002; amd. 2003 Code)
H. Emergency management. (Ord. 2002-02-003, 2-7-2002)

4-1-7: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The fire chief shall make and adopt rules and regulations for the administration of the fire department. The city manager may disapprove any rule or regulation made and adopted by the fire chief. (Ord. 2002-02-003, 2-7-2002; amd. 2003 Code)

CHAPTER 2 NUISANCES


4-2-1:       Defined
4-2-2:       Maintenance Of Nuisance Prohibited
4-2-3:       Enumeration Of Nuisances
4-2-4:       Duty To Locate; Right Of Entry
4-2-5:       Abatement Procedures
4-2-6:       Penalty

4-2-1: DEFINED:
A. A nuisance is an offense against the order and economy of the city and consists in unlawfully doing an act or omitting to perform any duty, which act or omission either:
    1. Annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of three (3) or more persons; or
    2. Offends public decency; or
    3. Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous for passage any stream, public street, park, square or highway; or
    4. In any way renders three (3) or more persons insecure in life or the use of property.
B. An act which affects three (3) or more persons in any of the ways specified in this section is still a nuisance regardless of the extent of annoyance or whether damage inflicted on individuals is unequal. (Ord. 3-19-1981)
C. If any condition designated herein as an offense against the order and economy of the city is determined by the fire chief to constitute a fire or hazard, or is determined by the chief of police to constitute a safety hazard, or is determined by the state division of health to be a health hazard, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that such act or omission is within the designations of subsection A of this section. (Ord. 3-19-1981; amd. 2003 Code)

4-2-2: MAINTENANCE OF NUISANCE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit to remain or be maintained upon his premises any nuisance as in this chapter designated. (Ord. 3-19-1981)

4-2-3: ENUMERATION OF NUISANCES:
A. Dead Animals1: It is the responsibility of the owner or other person responsible for any domestic animal which dies to bury or otherwise dispose of it within two (2) days after death. If the person shall fail to do so within the time herein provided, such omission shall be deemed a nuisance. If the owner or other person responsible for such an animal cannot be found, it is the duty of the animal control officer to bury the dead animal. In such event, the city shall be entitled to reimbursement from the owner of the dead animal.
B. Refuse In Public Streets: It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally or carelessly to throw, cast, put into, drop or leave in any street, gutter, sidewalk or public place any stones, gravel, sand, dirt, debris, garbage, leaves, lawn or tree clippings, paper material, handbills, ashes, rubbish of any kind, or any other item, material or substance which shall either constitute a nuisance, as designated herein, shall interfere with the free and unobstructed use and movement of either traffic or water on a public street or right-of-way, in the opinion of the chief of police, or shall constitute a fire hazard in the opinion of the fire chief.
C. Offensive Condition Or Refuse On Private Property: Whenever there shall be found on or about any lot or parcel of property, whether vacant or occupied, any garbage, refuse, junk, used materials and merchandise, effluvia, kitchen waste, trash, inoperable motor vehicles, broken machinery, rank and noxious weeds, or other unsightly or deleterious objects or conditions that are offensive to the order and economy of the city, as designated in section 4-2-1 of this chapter, they shall be deemed a nuisance.
D. Slaughterhouses: If the owner of any slaughterhouse or other place wherein any swine, cattle, sheep or other animals are slaughtered, shall permit the same to remain unclean to the unnecessary annoyance of the citizens of the city, or in any state or condition detrimental to the public health, the same shall be deemed a nuisance.
E. Water Pollution: Any pollution of the waters of this city, as defined in Utah Code Annotated section 19-5-102, shall constitute a nuisance within the meaning of this chapter.
F. Breeding Places For Flies: It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain a condition within the city which unreasonably promotes or encourages the breeding of flies, mosquitoes, rats or other form of animal life which may be disease carriers or which otherwise constitutes a nuisance, as designated in section 4-2-1 of this chapter.
G. Barking Dogs: It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any dog which by barking, howling or yelping, or by any other action, constitutes a nuisance within the designation of section 4-2-1 of this chapter.
H. Noises: It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise, or any noise which annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others, within the limits of the city. The following acts when prolonged, unusual and unnatural in their time, place and use, may be a detriment to the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity: horns, radios, stereos, loudspeakers, yelling or shouting, exhausts, motor vehicles, drums or musical instruments, construction equipment, airplanes or blasting. (Ord. 3-19-1981)
I. Garbage; Improper Placement: Placement of garbage at curbside or in other than a protected area shall be considered a nuisance within the meaning of this chapter, except during the period of twenty-four (24) hours preceding scheduled collection of such garbage. On garbage collection days, garbage and waste placed at curbside must be contained within bags, cans or other receptacles, unless the trash material is of such size and nature that it would not be practical to fully enclose it. (Ord. 11-21-1985, 11-21-1985)
J. All Terrain And Recreational Vehicles In Specified Areas: 
    1. Consistent with those definitions and provisions of Utah Code Annotated section 41-22-1 et seq., the operation by any person of an all terrain or recreational vehicle within six hundred feet (600') of an inhabited dwelling is determined to be harmful to the environment because of excessive mechanical noise and dust pollution, unless it is on an improved public or private roadway designated for vehicular traffic. Each instance of such operation shall be unlawful and shall constitute an infraction and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 4-3-1986; amd. 2003 Code)
    2. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motorized all terrain or recreational vehicle within the boundaries of the Washington County desert tortoise habitat conservation plan reserve, unless it is on a public or private roadway designated for vehicular traffic. Each instance of such operation shall constitute an infraction and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 8-6-1996, 8-15-1996; amd. 2003 Code)
1See also subsection 5-2-7I of this code for provisions on carcass disposal.

4-2-4: DUTY TO LOCATE; RIGHT OF ENTRY:
It shall be the duty of the chief of police, the fire chief, the animal control officer, and any other city officer charged or entrusted with the duty of enforcing those laws intended to protect the public health, safety and well-being, to locate and discover all nuisances which may offend the order and economy of the city in the areas which they are assigned to protect, and they shall have authority within those areas, by themselves or by their agents, in the daytime, to enter upon any lot or other premises, or any building or structure, in order to inspect and examine the same for the purpose of determining whether or not any conditions or nuisances exist which are prohibited by this chapter. (Ord. 3-19-1981)

4-2-5: ABATEMENT PROCEDURES:
A. Notice To Abate: The city may notify in writing the owner or occupant of any property within the city upon which a nuisance may be found, or it may notify such other person who causes or permits a nuisance to exist, advising that there is a nuisance, describing the same, and requiring the nuisance to be abated in a manner described in the notification within ten (10) days after receipt thereof, unless some other time is specified therein. However, failure to give notice as provided herein shall not relieve the author of a nuisance from the obligation to abate such nuisance, or from the penalty provided herein for the maintenance of that nuisance.
B. Refusal To Abate: Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any person to abate a nuisance after notice in writing has been given, the city is hereby authorized and empowered to order the disposal of the nuisance or to pay for the disposing of the same. When the city effects removal of a nuisance or pays for such removal, the actual cost thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of ten percent (10%) per annum from the date of the completion of the work, shall be charged to the owner of the property on which the nuisance existed. The city may cause a sworn statement to be recorded in the office of the county recorder showing the cost and expense incurred for the work, the date the work was done, and the location of the property on which the work was done. Such recordation of sworn statement shall constitute a lien on the property and shall remain in full force and effect for the amount due in principal and interest, plus collection costs, if any, until final payment has been made. A sworn statement recorded in accordance with the provisions hereof shall be prima facie evidence that all legal formalities have been complied with and that the work has been done properly and satisfactorily, and shall be full notice to every person concerned that the amount of the statement, plus interest, constitutes a charge against the property designated or described in the statement and that the same is due and collectible as provided by law. (Ord. 3-19-1981)

4-2-6: PENALTY:
Every nuisance shall be removed or abated as herein provided, and unless otherwise provided, any person who shall be the author or keeper of a nuisance or otherwise guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 3-19-1981; amd. 2003 Code)

CHAPTER 3 INSPECTION AND CLEANING
(Rep. by Ord. 2015-08-007, 8-6-2015)

CHAPTER 4 SOLID WASTE; RECYCLABLES; COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL


4-4-1:       Definitions
4-4-2:       Use Of Landfill
4-4-3:       Collection And Disposal Of Residential Solid Waste
4-4-4:       Collection And Disposal Of Residential Recyclable Materials
4-4-5:       Opt Out Procedures For The Recycling Program
4-4-6:       Mandatory Use Of Containers; Exceptions
4-4-7:       Collection Procedures
4-4-8:       Fees For Collection And Disposal
4-4-9:       Commercial Or Private Haulers

4-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
BIWEEKLY: Every other week.
COMMERCIAL: Any premises or property:
    A. Used primarily in connection with the supply of goods or services on a regular basis or in the regular course of business;
    B. Used for apartment complexes with more than eight (8) dwelling units;
    C. Condominium or townhome complexes used primarily, when considered as a whole, for rental purposes as determined by the district;
    D. RV parks used primarily for overnight or other rental of less than thirty (30) consecutive days; or
    E. Used for motels or hotels.
COMMERCIAL HAULER: Any person or entity who is engaged primarily in the business of collecting and disposing of commercial solid waste generated by any other person or entity.
COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE: Any solid waste produced by or resulting from the use of commercial property or premises.
CURBSIDE: A location within three feet (3') of any curb, sidewalk or other location immediately adjacent to any street, highway or road which is accessible to waste collection vehicles.
DISTRICT: Washington County special service district 1.
DUMPSTER: Any container constructed of metal, of two (2) yards’ volume or more, and designed to be compatible with mechanical collection equipment.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: Shall have the same meaning as specified in Utah Code Annotated section 19-6-102(10), as amended.
PRIVATE HAULER:
    A. Any person or entity who, as the owner, tenant or other occupant of property or premises classified as commercial, collects and disposes of solid waste generated by the use of said property; and
    B. Any person or entity who collects and disposes of construction debris.
RESIDENCE:
    A. Any property or premises containing a building or structure which is used for human habitation, or which is hooked to culinary water and power and intended for human habitation, but excluding:
        1. Apartment complexes with more than eight (8) dwelling units;
        2. Condominium or townhome complexes used primarily, when considered as a whole, for rental purposes as determined by the district;
        3. RV parks used primarily for overnight or other temporary rental of less than thirty (30) consecutive days;
        4. Condominium or townhome developments approved to utilize dumpsters as a means of solid waste collection as of October 27, 1999, as set forth in section 4-4-6;
        5. Dwelling units in residential developments which, because of limited access, receive weekly collection of residential waste using dumpsters instead of residential solid waste or residential recycling containers; and
        6. Motels or hotels.
    B. Each unit of a building or structure on property or premises classified as residential shall be considered as a separate residence for purpose of billing and collection.
RESIDENTIAL RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Those materials identified by the district as recyclable but specifically excluding glass, plastic bags, used oil, paint, hazardous waste, bulky waste, special waste and stable matter.
RESIDENTIAL RECYCLING CONTAINER: A waste receptacle specifically approved by the district for the automated curbside collection of residential recycling materials.
RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE: Any solid waste produced by or resulting from the use of any residential property or premises, except for hazardous waste and construction/demolition waste.
RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE CONTAINER: A waste receptacle specifically approved by the district for the automated curbside collection of residential solid waste.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY: A utility customer that has, as of October 31, 2015, an existing residential application for utility services on file with the city and a utility account in their name or the name of their spouse.
SOLID WASTE: Shall have the same meaning as specified in Utah Code Annotated section 19-6-502(10), as amended.
UTILITY CUSTOMER: Those customers who receive residential water and/or power services from the city. (Ord. 2020-04-006 § 2, 4-16-2020)

4-4-2: USE OF LANDFILL:
All solid waste generated within the incorporated areas of the city, except for hazardous waste, lead acid batteries, used oil, and solid waste accepted by the city reuse center, shall be transported to and disposed of at the Washington County landfill. (Ord. 2015-08-009, 8-6-2015)

4-4-3: COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE:
Collection and disposal of all residential solid waste within the corporate limits of the city shall be provided exclusively by the district, except for residential solid waste hauled to the landfill or city reuse center by the owner or occupant of the residential property. (Ord. 2015-08-009, 8-6-2015)

4-4-4: COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF RESIDENTIAL RECYCLABLE MATERIALS:
The curbside residential recycling collection program is mandatory for all residences, if the city makes the program available, except for a responsible party that opted out of the program prior to April 1, 2020, or as otherwise provided in this chapter. Collection and disposal of all residential recyclable materials within the corporate limits of the city shall be provided exclusively by the district, except for residential recyclable materials hauled to the landfill or the city reuse center by the owner or occupant of a residence. (Ord. 2020-04-006 § 2, 4-16-2020)

4-4-5: OPT OUT PROCEDURES FOR THE RECYCLING PROGRAM:
A. A utility customer of a residence which has utility services as of October 31, 2015, and opted out of the curbside residential recycling collection program prior to April 1, 2020, may continue to opt out so long as the responsible party resides in the city or until:
    1. A responsible party on the account requests in writing that the election to opt out of curbside residential recycling collection service be canceled or rescinded; or
    2. The responsible party no longer resides in the city and is no longer a utility customer of the city; or
    3. The curbside residential recycling collection program is terminated by the city council.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, a responsible party may file a written request with the city administrative services director or the designee asking to opt out of the recycling program based on a showing of undue hardship or other extraordinary circumstances. The responsible party shall include in their request a statement outlining the hardship or extraordinary circumstances. The city shall receive written evidence, review the evidence, and determine if undue hardship or other extraordinary circumstances exist to justify allowing the responsible party to opt out of the curbside residential recycling program. (Ord. 2020-04-006 § 2, 4-16-2020)

4-4-6: MANDATORY USE OF CONTAINERS; EXCEPTIONS:
Each residence within the incorporated areas of the city shall be required to utilize a residential solid waste container and a residential recycling container, except when otherwise required by the district, or when in:
A. Condominium or townhome developments already utilizing dumpsters as a means of solid waste collection as of October 27, 1999; or
B. Condominium or townhome developments utilizing individual automated or semiautomated containers as a means of collection of solid waste as of October 27, 1999; or
C. Condominium or townhome developments established after October 27, 1999, where use of dumpsters as a means of solid waste collection has been preapproved by the district and the city. (Ord. 2020-04-006 § 2, 4-16-2020)

4-4-7: COLLECTION PROCEDURES:
All residential solid waste and residential recyclable materials shall be required to be placed for collection in accordance with the terms and conditions of the district. Collection for residential solid waste shall be on a weekly basis and collection for residential recyclable materials shall be on a biweekly basis. (Ord. 2015-08-009, 8-6-2015)

4-4-8: FEES FOR COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL:
A. Fees Established: Fees for collection of residential solid waste and residential recyclable materials shall be established by resolution or ordinance of the city council.
B. Monthly Billing; Discontinuance Of Service: Billing for residential solid waste and residential recyclable materials collection and disposal service shall be included in any monthly unified billing for utility services supplied by the city. Failure to pay or have paid the charges for solid waste and recyclable materials collection and disposal services or other utility services supplied by the city on the unified billing, may result in the discontinuance of the provision of utility services, including the collection and disposal of residential solid waste and recyclable materials to the premises. Discontinuance of a service or services shall be in addition to any other remedy available to the city. (Ord. 2015-08-009, 8-6-2015)

4-4-9: COMMERCIAL OR PRIVATE HAULERS:
No private or commercial hauler shall be allowed to collect or dispose of commercial solid waste generated by commercial establishments or through the use of other commercial property within the incorporated areas of the city without having first obtained a license to operate as a private or commercial hauler from the district. (Ord. 2015-08-009, 8-6-2015)

CHAPTER 5 CONSTRUCTION SITE SANITATION AND DEBRIS CONTROL


4-5-1:       Sanitary Facilities
4-5-2:       Disposal Of Waste; Burning By Permit
4-5-3:       Penalty

4-5-1: SANITARY FACILITIES:
No construction of any type shall be permitted within the city unless adequate sanitary facilities are provided at the job site and available at all times that workers are present. Such sanitary facilities shall be available within three hundred fifty feet (350') of any construction area, and in the event such facilities are already so located, the contractor shall have written consent for use of the same by workers on the job. (Ord. 12-1-1992, 12-17-1992)

4-5-2: DISPOSAL OF WASTE; BURNING BY PERMIT:
No construction of any type shall be permitted within the city unless a bin, receptacle or other adequate enclosure is provided within one hundred feet (100') of any construction activity for the disposal of garbage, waste and construction debris of all types. Such bin, receptacle or enclosure shall be considered adequate only if it is able to fully protect its contents from being scattered or disbursed by the wind or otherwise, and it must be amenable to ready transfer of its contents to the landfill when full. Burning at a construction site shall be unlawful unless expressly made the subject of a permit by the fire chief. (Ord. 12-1-1992, 12-17-1992)

4-5-3: PENALTY:
Violation of this chapter shall be an infraction and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code, and each day that a violation continues shall be considered to be a separate offense. (Ord. 12-1-1992, 12-17-1992; amd. 2003 Code)

CHAPTER 6 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS


4-6-1:       Cost Recovery

4-6-1: COST RECOVERY:
A. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases and words shall have the following meanings:
    EXPENSES: All costs incurred for the response, containment and/or removal and disposal of hazardous materials on initial remedial action. It includes, but is not necessarily limited to, the actual labor costs of government and other personnel including workers’ compensation benefits, fringe benefits, administrative overhead, and any costs of equipment, equipment operation, materials, disposal and any contract labor or materials.
    HAZARDOUS MATERIALS EMERGENCY: A sudden and unexpected release of any substance that, because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, presents a direct and immediate threat to public safety or the environment, and requires immediate action to mitigate the threat.
B. Recovery Of Expenses: 
    1. Those persons or entities whose negligent or intentional actions cause or create, in whole or in part, a hazardous materials emergency within the boundaries of the county/city are liable to the county/city for all costs and expenses incurred in or arising from response to such hazardous materials emergency by the county/city and any other political subdivision, agency or cooperative entity. The county/city shall recover all such costs and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees, litigation expenses and court costs incurred in, related to or arising out of, all cost recovery efforts and enforcement of the terms of this section.
    2. All costs and expenses shall be billed at the current rate established and approved by resolution of the executive committee of the interlocal agreement for cooperative hazardous materials protection and services.
    3. The payment of expenses under this section does not constitute an admission of liability or negligence in any legal action for damages.
C. Cost Recovery Procedure: 
    1. The county/city shall investigate and determine the person or entity responsible for causing or creating the hazardous materials emergency and shall notify the responsible party in writing of said determination of responsibility and the amount of costs and expenses incurred by the county/city in responding to the hazardous materials emergency.
    2. The notice required by subsection C1 of this section shall specify that the party determined to be responsible for causing or creating the hazardous materials emergency has the right to appeal the decision determining responsibility to the governing body of the county/city and shall specify a deadline for filing the notice of appeal and the person or office in which it must be filed. The deadline for filing the notice of appeal shall not be less than fifteen (15) days from the date of the notice.
    3. In the event a notice of appeal is filed, the hearing before the governing body shall be an informal public hearing, and the parties shall not be required to adhere to the Utah rules of civil procedure or evidence. The appealing party and the county/city shall each be entitled to present evidence and argument in support of their respective positions, in accordance with procedures established at the hearing by the governing body.
    4. The decision of the governing body shall be final.
D. Action To Recover Costs: In the event the responsible party fails or refuses to pay all of the costs and expenses determined by the county/city related to or arising out of the county/city’s response to the hazardous materials emergency within thirty (30) days after assessment or after the governing body’s decision on an appeal, the county/city may initiate a legal action to recover such costs, including reasonable attorney fees and costs.
E. Expenses Of Other Responding Entities: 
    1. In the event that personnel and equipment from other political subdivisions, agencies or cooperative entities shall respond to assist with the hazardous materials emergency, then the county/city shall recover costs and expenses incurred by such other political subdivisions, agencies or cooperative entities as part of the county/city’s cost recovery efforts.
    2. Upon recovery of costs and expenses from the responsible party, the county/city is authorized to reimburse such other political subdivisions, agencies or cooperative entities for their actual costs incurred in responding to the hazardous materials emergency. (Ord. 2003-03-002, 3-20-2003)

CHAPTER 7 RENTAL FIT PREMISES


4-7-1:       Short Title
4-7-2:       Definitions
4-7-3:       License Required
4-7-4:       City Inspections
4-7-5:       Exclusions From Application Of Chapter
4-7-6:       Minimum Space Requirement
4-7-7:       Identification Of Owner And Agents
4-7-8:       Property Owner To Deliver Possession Of Dwelling Unit
4-7-9:       Maintenance Of Dwelling Unit And Premises; Property Owner’s Duties
4-7-10:      Maintenance Of Dwelling Unit And Premises; Tenant’s Duties
4-7-11:      Landscaping and Exterior Maintenance
4-7-12:      Rules And Regulations
4-7-13:      Access
4-7-14:      Property Owner And Tenant Remedies For Abuse Of Access
4-7-15:      Repair Of Specified Failures
4-7-16:      Tenant Repair And Deduct
4-7-17:      Retaliatory Conduct Prohibited
4-7-18:      Notice
4-7-19:      Penalty

4-7-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the St. George CITY RENTAL FIT PREMISES ORDINANCE. (Ord. 2005-12-002, 12-1-2005)

4-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions are applicable to this chapter:
LANDSCAPING: The combination of elements such as trees, shrubs, ground covers, vines, and other plants that are generally not considered to be weeds or noxious plants, and nonorganic matter such as decorative rock, that is planted or placed on the areas outside of the rental dwelling unit for the purpose of creating an attractive and pleasing environment. All landscaping shall meet the requirements of any applicable city code.
OWNER OCCUPIED:
    A. A natural person who possesses fifty percent (50%) ownership or more in the dwelling and said dwelling is the primary residence of such person; or
    B. A family trust created for the primary purpose of estate planning by one or more trustors who create the trust, place the dwelling in such trust, and whose primary residence is such dwelling.
PERSON: Unless the context otherwise requires, the term “person” means an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an association, a joint stock company, a business trust or any unincorporated organization.
PROPERTY OWNER: An individual, a corporation, a partnership, an association, a joint stock company, a business trust or any unincorporated organization that is the owner of a rental dwelling unit or has a financial interest in the rental dwelling unit.
RENTAL DWELLING UNIT: A building or portion of a building that is:
    A. Used or designated for use as a residence by one or more persons; and
    B. 
        1. Available to be rented, loaned, leased, or hired out for a period of thirty (30) days or longer; or
        2. Arranged, designed, or built to be rented, loaned, leased, or hired out for a period of one (1) month or longer.
RENTAL PROPERTY: Any legally subdivided lot or parcel of property containing one or more rental dwelling units.
TENANT: Any natural person and any individual other than a commercial tenant that signs a rental agreement or is otherwise responsible for payment of rent for the unit.
UNIT: A rental dwelling unit. (Ord. 2005-12-002, 12-1-2005)

4-7-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. It is unlawful for any person to keep, conduct, operate or maintain a rental dwelling unit within the city without a business license for such dwelling. A person who owns multiple rental dwelling units or multiple buildings containing rental dwelling units is not required to obtain more than one business license for the operation and maintenance of those rental dwelling units.
B. A rental dwelling unit business license is not transferable between persons or structures. Any person holding such license shall give written notice within thirty (30) days to the business license official after having transferred or otherwise disposed of legal or equitable control of any rental dwelling unit licensed under this chapter. Such notice of transferred interest shall be deemed a request to cancel an existing business license for such rental dwelling unit and shall include the name, address, and information regarding the person(s) succeeding to the ownership or control thereof. The new owner shall obtain a business license as required by this chapter.
C. A business license shall not be required for a dwelling unit which is ordinarily owner occupied but is temporarily rented because:
    1. The owner is placed in a hospital, nursing home, assisted living facility or other similar facility, or
    2. The owner has a bona fide, temporary absence of three (3) years or less for activities such as temporary job assignments, sabbaticals, or voluntary service. Indefinite periods of absence from the dwelling shall not qualify for this exception. (Ord. 2006-09-005, 9-21-2006)

4-7-4: CITY INSPECTIONS:
The city may require an inspection of the rental dwelling unit as a condition of obtaining a business license with the following conditions:
A. The city may impose a reasonable inspection fee upon an owner of a rental dwelling unit for the inspection of each rental dwelling unit owned by that owner.
B. If the city’s inspection of a rental dwelling unit approves the rental dwelling unit for purposes of a business license, the city may not inspect that rental dwelling during the next thirty-six (36) months, unless the city has reasonable cause to believe that a condition in the rental dwelling is in violation of an applicable law or ordinance.
C. The requirements of this section shall not apply to a property owner with an interest in two (2) or fewer rental dwelling units. (Ord. 2005-12-002, 12-1-2005)

4-7-5: EXCLUSIONS FROM APPLICATION OF CHAPTER:
The following arrangements are not governed by this chapter:
A. Residence at a medical, geriatric, educational, counseling, religious institution, or a government operated detention institution;
B. Occupancy under a bona fide contract of sale of a dwelling unit if the occupant is the purchaser;
C. Occupancy by a member of a bona fide nonprofit fraternal or social organization in a building operated for the benefit of the organization;
D. Transient occupancy in a hotel or motel or lodgings subject to Utah Code section 59-12-301, Utah Code Annotated and title 3, chapter 2 of this code; and
E. Occupancy by an owner of a condominium unit.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect the rights and duties established under Utah Code title 57, chapter 22, Utah fit premises act, or to restrict the city’s ability to enforce its generally applicable health ordinances or building code, a local health department’s authority under Utah Code title 26A, chapter 1, local health departments, or the Utah Department of Health’s authority under title 26, Utah Health Code. (Ord. 2005-12-002, 12-1-2005)

4-7-6: MINIMUM SPACE REQUIREMENT:
Every rental housing unit shall have at least two hundred twenty (220) square feet of floor space and shall contain at least one common room having not less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet. Every habitable room, except a kitchen, shall have not less than seven feet (7') in any dimension. (Ord. 2005-12-002, 12-1-2005)

4-7-7: IDENTIFICATION OF OWNER AND AGENTS:
A. A property owner or any person authorized to enter into an oral or written rental agreement on the property owner’s behalf shall disclose to the tenant, in writing, at or before the commencement of the tenancy, the name, address, and telephone number of:
    1. The owner or person authorized to manage the premises; and
    2. A local person authorized to act for and on behalf of the owner for the purpose of receiving notices and demands and performing the property owner’s obligations under this chapter and the rental agreement if the owner or manager resides outside of Washington County.
B. A person who, acting in the capacity of or on behalf of the property owner, enters into a rental agreement and fails to comply with the requirements of this section becomes an agent of the property owner for the purposes of:
    1. Receipt of notices under this chapter; and
    2. Performing the obligations of the property owner under this chapter and under the rental agreement.
C. The information required to be furnished by this section shall be kept current. This section is enforceable against any successor property owner, agent, or manager.
D. Every rental property with more than one unit rented without a written agreement shall have a notice posted in a conspicuous place inside of the unit with the name, address, and telephone number of the owner or manager and local agent as required by subsection A of this section. The notice shall state in a conspicuous manner the following:This notice shall not be removed unless authorized to do so under City Ordinance.
(Ord. 2005-12-002, 12-1-2005)

4-7-8: PROPERTY OWNER TO DELIVER POSSESSION OF DWELLING UNIT:
A. At the commencement of any rental of a unit, the property owner shall provide to the tenant:
    1. A written inventory of the condition of the premises and all appliances and furnishings therein and make available a written summary of the ordinance codified herein that fairly sets forth its material provisions.
    2. A copy of the lease or rental agreement and rules and regulations, if written.
    3. Any current notice by any utility provider to the property owner to terminate water, gas, electrical, or other utility service to the dwelling unit; the proposed date of termination; and any current uncorrected deficiency list or notice from any government entity along with a written statement explaining how the property owner will correct the termination and/or deficiency.
B. By explicit written agreement, a property owner and a tenant may establish a procedure whereby the tenant notifies the property owner of needed repairs, makes those repairs, and deducts the cost of the repairs from the rent due and owing, however any such agreement shall not relieve the property owner from the duty to ensure that such repairs are completed in an expeditious and satisfactory manner as required in this chapter.
C. A property owner may not allocate any duties to the tenant required of the property owner under this chapter unless authorized to do so under the provisions of this chapter.
D. If the property owner fails to deliver possession of the dwelling unit to the tenant as promised in the rental agreement, rent abates until possession is delivered, and the tenant may terminate the rental agreement by written notice to the property owner and recover all prepaid rent and security deposits, as well as the greater of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or actual damages, and any reasonable attorney fees incurred. (Ord. 2005-12-002, 12-1-2005)

4-7-9: MAINTENANCE OF DWELLING UNIT AND PREMISES; PROPERTY OWNER’S DUTIES:
A property owner shall:
A. Comply with the requirements of applicable building, housing, and health codes and city ordinances and not rent the premises unless they are safe, sanitary, and fit for human occupancy;
B. Maintain the structural integrity of the building;
C. Maintain floors, roofs, balconies, etc., in compliance with safe load bearing requirements;
D. Provide exits, emergency egress, light, and ventilation in compliance with applicable codes;
E. Maintain stairways, porches, walkways, and fire escapes in sound condition;
F. Provide smoke detectors and fire extinguishers as required by code;
G. Provide operable sinks, toilets, tubs, and/or showers free from leaks and in sanitary condition with hot water of at least one hundred ten degrees Fahrenheit (110°F) provided to sinks, tubs, and showers;
H. Provide heating and cooling facilities sufficient to adequately heat and cool the rental dwelling unit to a temperature of at least seventy-eight degrees Fahrenheit (78°F) and installed and operational as required by code;
I. Provide kitchen facilities with an operable sink free from leaks and in sanitary condition with hot water of at least one hundred ten degrees Fahrenheit (110°F) and cold water, and any other facilities as may be required by law;
J. Provide a cooking oven and range or stove, properly connected and in proper working condition;
K. If equipped with a refrigerator, it shall be in proper working condition and properly connected to an electrical outlet and, if needed, a water supply. The refrigerator shall be capable of maintaining a temperature between forty degrees (40°) and forty-five degrees Fahrenheit (45°F), and the freezer shall be capable of keeping food frozen.
L. Provide running water with adequate water pressure with a flow of not less than one gallon per minute;
M. Provide adequate hall and stairway lighting in any common areas;
N. Maintain floors, walls, and ceilings in good condition free from large cracks, peeling, or large holes or any unsafe or unsanitary condition;
O. Supply window screens for each window, free from tears, holes, or other damage that could allow insects or other vermin to enter the home;
P. Maintain windows in working order with operable locks and free from cracks or breaks in the glass. Windows shall fit the window openings and be weathertight;
Q. Maintain the foundation, masonry, chimneys, water heater, air conditioner or swamp cooler, and furnace in good working condition;
R. Prevent the accumulation of stagnant water;
S. Maintain swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs in a clean, safe, and sanitary condition and in good repair;
T. Maintain any sheds or accessory buildings in good repair free from peeling paint, holes, etc., and in accordance with applicable city ordinances.
U. Maintain in good and safe working order and condition all electrical, plumbing, sanitary, heating, ventilating, air conditioning, and other facilities and appliances supplied by the property owner as required by applicable codes;
V. Supply electricity and hot water at all times, and heat during at least the months of October through April and as weather conditions might otherwise reasonably warrant, except where the dwelling unit is so constructed that electricity, heat, or hot water is within the exclusive control of the tenant and supplied by a direct public utility connection;
W. Assure that the premises are free of insects, termites, and rodents, and be responsible for pest control measures when necessary;
X. Not interrupt or disconnect utility service;
Y. Provide adequate locks to exterior doors and furnish keys to tenants as required by applicable codes;
Z. Maintain the dwelling unit in a reasonably insulated and weathertight condition as required by the international building code and Utah State energy conservation codes;
AA. Provide for and protect each tenant’s peaceful enjoyment of the premises;
BB. Ensure that repairs, decorations, alterations, improvements, or exhibiting the dwelling unit shall not unreasonably interfere with the tenant’s right to quiet enjoyment of the premises;
CC. Provide a mailbox, the type and location of which complies with United States postal service regulations;
DD. Provide separate meters for each rental dwelling unit for gas and electricity, unless a legally existing rental dwelling unit as of September 1, 2005, shares such meters, in which case the charges for gas and electricity may be included in the rent;
EE. Provide and maintain appropriate garbage receptacles in a clean area free from debris and arrange for timely garbage removal which shall be at least once a week or more frequently as needed;
FF. Provide a list with the name of the tenant(s) and the number of occupants for each rental dwelling unit to the city business license officer;
GG. Assure that the tenants do not exceed the number of occupants permitted by law in the rental dwelling unit;
HH. Provide parking as required by code; and
II. Change locks, if requested to do so by a tenant who is a victim of a crime, as required under Utah Code Annotated 57-22-5.1 as amended. (Ord. 2005-12-002, 12-1-2005)

4-7-10: MAINTENANCE OF DWELLING UNIT AND PREMISES; TENANT’S DUTIES:
A tenant shall:
A. Comply with all appropriate requirements of applicable provisions of state and local building, housing, health codes, and city ordinances;
B. Maintain the premises occupied in a clean and safe condition and not unreasonably burden any common area;
C. Dispose of all garbage and other waste in a clean and safe manner;
D. Promptly inform the property owner of any defective conditions or problems at the premises;
E. Not interfere with the peaceful enjoyment of the rental dwelling unit of another renter or adjacent property owner;
F. Not increase the number of occupants above that specified in the rental agreement without written permission of the property owners;
G. Not exceed the number of occupants permitted by law; and
H. Dispose of oil, car batteries, and other hazardous waste materials away from the rental premises and in a manner prescribed by federal and local laws. (Ord. 2005-12-002, 12-1-2005)

4-7-11: LANDSCAPING AND EXTERIOR MAINTENANCE:
Property owner shall maintain the landscaping and exterior features of the property in good repair, including maintaining:
A. Paint, siding, stucco, etc., in good repair free from peeling, large holes or cracks;
B. Landscaping of all areas visible from a public street, alley, sidewalk, or neighboring property, including rear and side yards;
C. Landscaping free from weeds, dead plants, litter, refuse, or debris and adequate water provided for landscape maintenance;
D. Lawns mowed and maintained;
E. Sprinkler systems maintained in good repair or, if no in-ground sprinkling system is installed, provide garden hoses and sprinklers sufficient for maintaining the yard;
F. Landscaping maintained as approved on a site plan submitted when the rental dwelling units were approved by the city (for those projects where a site plan was required or submitted) unless a subsequent landscaping plan was approved by the community development director in writing;
G. Curbs and gutters clean and in good repair;
H. Sidewalks, driveways and walkways in good repair free from large holes, cracks or other unsafe conditions;
I. Fences in good repair, free from graffiti, peeling paint, holes, and able to stand upright as designed without propping or additional support; and
J. Carport areas (where applicable) clean and free from boxes, junk, debris, or other storage.
Property owner may contract with a third party, including tenant, to provide the maintenance required under this section, however property owner shall remain liable for any deficiencies or violations of this section. (Ord. 2005-12-002, 12-1-2005)

4-7-12: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
A property owner may adopt rules or regulations concerning the tenant’s use and occupancy of the premises, which become a part of the rental agreement, if they apply to all tenants in the premises in a nondiscriminatory manner; do not conflict with the lease, federal or state law, or city ordinance, and are provided to the tenant in writing before the tenant enters into the rental agreement. Rules, regulations, or lease terms can, by agreement between the parties, be more favorable to the tenant than allowed by federal or state law or city ordinance, but cannot be more restrictive. Rules may be modified from time to time by the property owner. However, no rule adopted after the commencement of any rental agreement shall substantially modify the existing terms, conditions, or rules without written consent of the tenant. (Ord. 2005-12-002, 12-1-2005)

4-7-13: ACCESS:
A. A tenant shall not unreasonably withhold consent to the property owner to enter into the dwelling unit in order to make necessary or agreed inspections, repairs, decorations, alterations, or improvements; or exhibit the dwelling unit to prospective purchasers, tenants, or repairmen.
B. A property owner may enter the dwelling unit without consent of the tenant only in cases of emergency.
C. Except in cases of emergency, the property owner shall give the tenant at least twenty-four (24) hours’ notice of plans to enter, and may enter only between eight o’clock (8:00) A.M. and eight o’clock (8:00) P.M.
D. A property owner has no other right of access except:
    1. Pursuant to court order;
    2. To make repairs requested by the tenant under the provisions of this chapter or by other applicable law; or
    3. If the tenant has abandoned the premises as defined in section 78-36-12.3(3), Utah Code Annotated, or any successor provision. (Ord. 2005-12-002, 12-1-2005)

4-7-14: PROPERTY OWNER AND TENANT REMEDIES FOR ABUSE OF ACCESS:
A. If the tenant refuses to allow lawful access, the property owner may obtain injunctive relief to compel access or may terminate the rental agreement and commence an eviction action. In either case, the property owner may recover actual damages and reasonable attorney fees incurred.
B. If the property owner makes an unlawful entry or makes repeated demands for entry which harass the tenant, the tenant may obtain injunctive relief to prevent the recurrence of the conduct or terminate the rental agreement and vacate the premises. In either case, the tenant may recover the lesser of the actual damages or damages equal to one month’s rent and reasonable attorney fees incurred. (Ord. 2005-12-002, 12-1-2005)

4-7-15: REPAIR OF SPECIFIED FAILURES:
In the event of the failures specified below, the property owner shall take reasonable steps to begin repairing the failures, within the following specified time periods after receipt of written notice of the failure delivered to the person identified in section 4-7-7 of this chapter, and complete the repairs with reasonable diligence.
+-------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------+
|                     Failure                     |             Repair Within              |
+-------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------+
| Broken stair or balustrade                      | Upon notice, if the condition causes   |
|                                                 | a safety hazard or prevents access to  |
|                                                 | the premises; otherwise 24 hours       |
+-------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------+
| Broken or leaking water pipes causing           | 24 hours                               |
| an imminent threat to life, safety,             |                                        |
| or health                                       |                                        |
+-------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------+
| Other broken or leaking water pipes             | 72 hours                               |
+-------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------+
| Disconnection of electrical, water, or          | 24 hours                               |
| natural gas service caused by property          |                                        |
| owner                                           |                                        |
+-------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------+
| Inoperable or missing smoke detector            | 24 hours                               |
| required by code                                |                                        |
+-------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------+
| Inoperable required fire sprinkler system       | 24 hours                               |
| (if smoke detectors are not present             |                                        |
| or operating)                                   |                                        |
+-------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------+
| Inoperable toilet                               | 24 hours                               |
+-------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------+
| Nonfunctioning heating or air conditioning      | 24 hours                               |
| (during a period where heat or air conditioning |                                        |
| is reasonably necessary) or electrical          |                                        |
| system                                          |                                        |
+-------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------+
| Tub, shower, or kitchen and bathroom            | 24 hours                               |
| sink with inoperable drain or no hot            |                                        |
| or cold water                                   |                                        |
+-------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------+
| Broken exterior door or inoperable or           | 48 hours if the premises is otherwise  |
| missing exterior door locks                     | secured from the elements and unwanted |
|                                                 | entry; otherwise 24 hours              |
+-------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------+
| Broken window with missing glass                | 48 hours if the premises is otherwise  |
|                                                 | secured from the elements and unwanted |
|                                                 | entry; otherwise 24 hours              |
+-------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------+
| Inoperable refrigerator or cooking range        | 48 hours                               |
| or stove                                        |                                        |
+-------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------+
| Inoperable electric fixture                     | 72 hours                               |
+-------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------+
| Inoperable exterior lighting                    | 96 hours                               |
+-------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------+
| Inoperable required fire sprinkler system       | 96 hours                               |
| (if smoke detectors are installed and           |                                        |
| operable)                                       |                                        |
+-------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------+
The tenant shall grant the property owner reasonable access as required under section 4-7-13 of this chapter to perform the repairs required in this section. (Ord. 2005-12-002, 12-1-2005)

4-7-16: TENANT REPAIR AND DEDUCT:
If the property owner fails to begin making the repairs required by section 4-7-15 of this chapter within the specified times, and the tenant is current on all rent and other payments to the property owner, the tenant may cause the repairs to be made subject to the following provisions:
A. Critical Repairs: If the repairs involve an inoperable toilet; lack of heat or air conditioning during a period for which heat or air conditioning is required; broken or leaking water pipes posing an immediate threat to life, safety, or health; a complete lack of running water; or disconnected gas, electric, or water service for which the property owner is required to provide, the tenant may, upon the expiration of the notice period specified in section 4-7-15 of this chapter, cause the necessary repairs to be made.
    1. In making such repairs, the tenant must use a licensed contractor if such a licensed contractor is required by applicable building or housing codes.
    2. If a licensed contractor is required for the work, the tenant shall make reasonable efforts to obtain two (2) bids for the work, and, if bids are obtained, shall contract for the work to be done by the lowest bidder.
B. Noncritical Repairs: If the required repairs are not critical repairs subject to the provisions of subsection A of this section, the tenant, after the expiration of the notice time required by section 4-7-15 of this chapter, shall give the property owner or property owner’s agent identified in section 4-7-7 of this chapter a second written notice of intent to repair and deduct. This second notice shall be either delivered and served personally upon the property owner or agent or sent by both certified and regular mail.
    1. The second notice shall state the nature of the problem, the date the tenant sent the first notice required by section 4-7-15 of this chapter, and the intention of the tenant to cause the repairs to be done and to deduct the cost from the rent if the property owner does not make the repairs.
    2. The property owner shall begin making the required repairs within forty-eight (48) hours after the hand delivery of the second notice, or by the end of the second calendar day after the date of mailing of the second notice, and complete the repairs with reasonable diligence.
    3. If the property owner has not begun the required repairs within the time specified in subsection B2 of this section, the tenant may cause the repairs to be made.
    4. In making such repairs, the tenant must use a licensed contractor when a licensed contractor is required by applicable building or housing codes.
    5. If a licensed contractor is required for the work, the tenant shall make reasonable efforts to obtain two (2) bids for the work, and, if bids are obtained, shall contract for the work with the low bidder.
    6. If a licensed contractor is not required for the work, the tenant may do the work on his or her own, or contract for the work to be done at a reasonable cost.
C. Deductible Amount: For any repairs made pursuant to this section, the tenant may deduct from future rent the actual and reasonable cost of the repairs performed up to a maximum deduction of four hundred dollars ($400.00) per repair; provided, however, the tenant shall furnish all original paid receipts to the property owner. The maximum deduction for any one month shall not exceed four hundred dollars ($400.00), regardless of the number or cost of repairs.
D. Nontermination: The property owner may not terminate the tenant’s tenancy for the tenant’s deduction of rent for repairs made pursuant to this section, nor may the property owner terminate the tenancy until the tenant’s costs for repairs made under this section (not to exceed $400.00 per repair) have been offset by deducted rent or reimbursed to the tenant.
E. Tenant Caused Damages: The repair and deduct provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any damages caused or repairs necessitated by actions of the tenant or the tenant’s invited guests or other occupants of the dwelling unit. (Ord. 2005-12-002, 12-1-2005)

4-7-17: RETALIATORY CONDUCT PROHIBITED:
A. Except as provided in this section and Utah Code Annotated section 57-22-4, a property owner may not terminate a rental agreement or bring or threaten to bring an eviction action because the tenant has in good faith:
    1. Complained of code violations at the premises to a government agency, elected representative, or public official charged with responsibility for enforcement of a building, housing, health, or similar code;
    2. Complained of a building, housing, health, or similar code violation or an illegal property owner practice to a community organization or the news media;
    3. Sought the assistance of a community organization or the news media to remedy code violation or illegal property owner practice;
    4. Requested that the property owner make repairs to the premises as required by this chapter, a building or health code, other regulation, or the residential rental agreement;
    5. Become a member of a tenant’s union or similar organization;
    6. Testified in any court or administrative proceeding concerning the condition of the premises; or
    7. Exercised any right or remedy provided by law.
B. If the property owner violates any provision of this section, the tenant may recover the greater of one month’s rent or actual damages, and reasonable attorney fees incurred. (Ord. 2005-12-002, 12-1-2005)

4-7-18: NOTICE:
Notices required under this chapter may be served:
A. By delivering a copy to the tenant or property owner personally or by leaving a copy of the notice with a person of suitable age and discretion;
B. By sending a copy through registered or certified mail addressed to the tenant at his place of residence or addressed to the property owner at the owner’s address listed on the rental agreement or on file with the city business license officer;
C. If a person of suitable age or discretion cannot be found at the rental dwelling unit of the tenant, then by affixing a copy in a conspicuous place on the rental dwelling unit; or
D. As otherwise provided by Utah law. (Ord. 2005-12-002, 12-1-2005)

4-7-19: PENALTY:
In addition to any other penalties and remedies set forth in this chapter, each violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to enforcement under title 1, chapter 12, “Administrative Code Enforcement Hearing Program,” of this code and shall be a class B misdemeanor. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense. (Ord. 2005-12-002, 12-1-2005)

CHAPTER 8 OLEANDER PLANTS


4-8-1:       Definition
4-8-2:       Prohibition Of Oleander Plants

4-8-1: DEFINITION:
“Oleander plant” is defined as a toxic plant that grows as a shrub or sometimes a small tree, with leaves that are lance shaped, thick and leathery, and typically between eight (8) and ten inches (10") long. The plant displays flowers that can be white or any shade of pink or red. The plant contains poisons that are lethally dangerous to animals and humans. (Ord. 2006-09-001, 9-7-2006)

4-8-2: PROHIBITION OF OLEANDER PLANTS:
A. The oleander plant is prohibited within the city in the following zones:
    1. Agricultural zones as defined in title 10, chapter 5 of this code.
    2. Mining and grazing zones as defined in title 10, chapter 6 of this code.
    3. Residential estate zones as defined in title 10, chapter 7, article A of this code.
    4. Open space zones as defined in title 10, chapter 12 of this code.
B. No person, partnership, corporation, public agency, or similar organization shall plant, cultivate, or maintain the oleander plant at any place in the prohibited zones for any purpose. Every oleander plant shall be removed from the prohibited zones within thirty (30) days of the enactment of this chapter.
C. A violation of this section is an infraction and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code.. (Ord. 2006-09-001, 9-7-2006)

CHAPTER 9 AIR QUALITY REGULATIONS


4-9-1:       Short Title
4-9-2:       Authority
4-9-3:       Purpose
4-9-4:       Interpretation
4-9-5:       Definitions
4-9-6:       Compliance, Enforcement And Penalties
4-9-7:       General Provisions
4-9-8:       Minimum Standards For Construction Activities; Demolition Activities; Mining, Blasting and Aggregate Materials Operations
4-9-9:       Hauling Materials On Public Roadways
4-9-10:      Open Areas And Vacant Lots
4-9-11:      High Wind Contingency Measures
4-9-12:      Visual Determination Of Fugitive Dust Emissions
4-9-13:      Informational Sign Requirements
4-9-14:      Reporting And Record Keeping Requirements
4-9-15:      Fees For Initial Review, Monitoring, Inspection And Mitigation

4-9-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as AIR QUALITY REGULATIONS. (Ord. 2007-12-005, 12-6-2007)

4-9-2: AUTHORITY:
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the Utah Air Conservation Act, Utah Code Annotated section 19-2-121. (Ord. 2007-12-005, 12-6-2007)

4-9-3: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum requirements for construction and development activities, demolition activities and other specified land uses in order to reduce fugitive dust and corresponding particulate matter emissions to achieve and maintain levels of air quality which will protect human health and safety, and to the greatest degree practicable, prevent injury to plant and animal life and property, foster the comfort and convenience of the people, promote the economic and social development of the city, and facilitate the enjoyment of the natural attractions of St. George. (Ord. 2007-12-005, 12-6-2007)

4-9-4: INTERPRETATION:
The provisions of this chapter are minimum requirements. More stringent provisions may be required if it is demonstrated that such provisions are necessary to promote the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 2007-12-005, 12-6-2007)

4-9-5: DEFINITIONS:
The terms used in this chapter shall be defined as follows. All words used in the singular shall include the plural and all words used in the plural shall include the singular. Each gender shall include the others; any tense shall include the other tenses. The word “shall” is mandatory and the words “may” and “should” are permissive.
AGGREGATE MATERIAL: Rock fragments, pebbles, sand, dirt, gravel, cobbles, crushed base, milled or used asphalt, used concrete materials, and other similar materials.
BEST PRACTICAL METHODS: Fugitive dust control measures, including, but not limited to, the use of: a phased clearing of the land; a dust palliative; water; “snow fencing” (a fencing material that inhibits the wind); windbreaks; revegetation (excluding noxious weeds); ground cover (e.g., gravel, decorative stone); physical barriers and signs to prohibit access to the disturbed areas by motorized vehicles; controls on single lot development approved as a part of a land division subject to these regulations; or a cessation of operations when wind conditions exceed the operator’s ability to control fugitive dust.
CERTIFIED OBSERVER: An individual currently certified in accordance with U.S. EPA, 40 CFR, part 60, appendix A, method 9, to conduct visible emission evaluations.
COMPLIANCE ADVISORY NOTICE: A notice issued as a means to provide timely warning to owners/operators concerning violations found on their property.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: Any component of the following, including, but not limited to: construction of commercial and residential structures; institutional structures; schools; libraries; churches; hospitals; parks; improvements to lots; parking lots; underground utilities; flood control construction; highway construction; land clearing, maintenance and land cleanup; soil and rock excavation or removal; soil or rock hauling, crushing or screening; filling, compacting, stockpiling and grading; explosive blasting; demolition; implosion; handling of building materials capable of entrainment in air (e.g., sand, cement powder); dismantling or demolition of buildings; mechanized trenching; landscaping; or establishing and/or using staging areas, parking areas, material storage areas, or access routes to or from a construction site.
CONTROL MEASURE: A technique, practice, or procedure used to prevent or minimize the generation, emission, entrainment, suspension, and/or airborne transport of fugitive dust.
DISTURBED AREA: A portion of the earth’s surface (or material placed thereon) that has been physically moved, uncovered, destabilized, or otherwise modified from its undisturbed native condition, thereby increasing the potential for the emission of fugitive dust.
DUST CONTROL PLAN: A plan to formalize the best practical methods (all the selected control measures) for a project specific fugitive dust control program.
DUST PALLIATIVE: Hygroscopic material, nontoxic chemical stabilizer or other material which is not prohibited for ground surface application by the federal environmental protection agency or the Utah Department of Environmental Quality or any applicable law or regulation, used as a treatment material to bind soil together and retain moisture, thus reducing fugitive dust emissions. Water, solutions of water, chemical surfactants, and foam are not dust palliatives for the purpose of these regulations.
DUST SUPPRESSANT: Water; hygroscopic material; solution of water and chemical surfactants; foam; nontoxic chemical stabilizer; or any other “dust palliative,” as defined in this section.
EXCAVATION: The removal of rock, sand, gravel, clay and any other soil by digging, leveling, scraping, blasting, screening, processing, and operating, maintaining and repairing equipment, marketing, advertising and selling aggregate products and services to the general public, or any other process, together with all other types of mining operations where material is removed from the earth.
FUGITIVE DUST: Emissions of solid, airborne particulate matter that could not reasonably pass through a stack, chimney, vent, or a functionally equivalent opening. Fugitive dust is entrained in the air and is caused from human and/or natural activities, such as, but not limited to, movement of soil, vehicles, equipment, blasting, and wind.
HIGH WIND EVENT: A time period of five (5) consecutive minutes with an average wind speed of thirty (30) miles per hour (high wind event threshold level) or higher as measured by: a certified meteorological monitoring station; or an on-site data logging or strip chart wind monitor calibrated and operated in accordance with the manufacturer’s specifications.
OPACITY: A measure of air visibility, or the degree to which an effluent plume or any emission of air contaminants reduces the transmission of light and obscures the view of an object in the background. “Percent opacity” refers to the degree in which the visible emission obscures the transmission of light from the view of background objects.
PARTICULATE MATTER: Any material except uncombined water that exists in a finely divided form as a liquid or solid at reference conditions.
PUBLIC ROAD: Any road, street, alley, land, court, place, viaduct, tunnel, culvert, or bridge laid out or erected as such by the public, or dedicated or abandoned to the public, or made such in an action for the partition of real property, and includes the entire areas within the right-of-way.
UDAQ: The Utah Division of Air Quality and the representatives thereof.
VEHICLE: A truck, trailer or combination that accesses public roads in transporting materials and/or cargo, or transporting an empty cargo container. (Ord. 2007-12-005, 12-6-2007)

4-9-6: COMPLIANCE, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
A. Violations: Violations, punishable by civil or criminal penalties, include, but are not limited to:
    1. Any violation of a provision of this chapter;
    2. Any violation of any provision, term, or condition of a dust control plan;
    3. Failure to pay any fee; or
    4. Falsification of any material statement, representation or certification in any application, notice or report.
B. Response To Violations: In response to a violation the city may take one or more of the following actions:
    1. Issue a compliance advisory notice;
    2. Issue a notice of violation;
    3. Issue a stop work order; or
    4. Issue an administrative citation.
C. Failure To Correct: Failure to correct any condition indicated in a notice of violation within the time frame stated is a class B misdemeanor. In response to this violation the city may initiate one or more of the following actions:
    1. Criminal proceedings;
    2. Civil proceedings to obtain an injunction, or any other relief against the owner or operator to stop operations at the site;
    3. Refusal to issue future permits and/or release of securities bond until the owner or operator has adequately demonstrated compliance with the notice of violation;
    4. Correction of condition by city through agents of the city entering and stabilizing the site of source emissions, and use of any securities bond held under this chapter.
D. Compliance Advisory Notice: A compliance advisory notice may be served as a warning to encourage prompt, voluntary compliance without the need for further administrative action. The notice shall include the information required by subsections 1-12B-1-2A1 through A5 of this code, including the requirements of this chapter and the action needed to bring the property into compliance.
E. Notice Of Violation: If a violation has occurred or continues to exist following the issuance of a compliance advisory notice, the city may issue a notice of violation, which shall follow the requirements of section 1-12B-1-2 of this code.
F. Stop Work Order: The city may issue a stop work order alone or in connection with a compliance advisory notice, notice of violation, or an administrative citation. A stop work order requires the immediate cessation of all activities specified in the stop work order. Continuance with work after a stop work order is in place shall constitute a second violation punishable by fine as set forth in subsection H of this section.
    1. The stop work order shall be removed when the property comes into compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
    2. The owner or permit holder shall submit a signed and dated statement detailing how the work site has been brought into compliance with city approval.
G. Civil Penalties: Civil penalties shall be assessed immediately for each violation listed on the administrative citation. The penalties shall be those established in the city fee schedule. Fines shall be owed to the city for each and every subsequent day of violation. Payment of the penalty shall not excuse the failure to correct the violations, nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city.
H. Criminal Penalties: Criminal penalties shall be as follows:
    1. Violators shall be guilty of an infraction punishable by a minimum fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a first violation and a minimum fine of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for a second violation which occurs within one year of the first.
    2. A third violation, or more, within one year shall be punishable by a minimum fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for no more than six (6) months or both.
    3. Each and every day shall be a separate offense. (Ord. 2007-12-005, 12-6-2007)

4-9-7: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. All performance standards and test methods referenced in this chapter shall adhere to the federal EPA method 9 visible emissions standards and to rule R307-205 emission standards of the UDAQ with respect to fugitive emissions and fugitive dust.
B. Fugitive emissions from sources shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) opacity (with the exception of blasting operations). No person shall allow fugitive dust emissions to exceed this standard.
C. No person shall initiate an activity that results in disturbed areas unless best practical methods are taken to prevent generation of fugitive dust during both the active development phases and thereafter, if the property is to remain unoccupied, unused, vacant, or undeveloped.
D. Any person engaged in the following activities shall employ best practical methods to prevent the generation of fugitive dust due to such activities at all times:
    1. Any project involving one-fourth (1/4) acre or more of disturbed area including: any project involving the import or export of more than one hundred (100) cubic yards of materials; activities involving the handling, transportation or storage of any material; dismantling or demolition of buildings; grubbing; grading; clearing of land; public or private construction; the operation of machines and equipment; the grading of roads; trenching operations; the operation and use of unpaved parking facilities; the organization and supervision of public outdoor events; the operation of livestock or horse arenas or corrals; the operation of raceways and rodeo grounds for animals or motor vehicles.
    2. The use of water to control dust and dirt track out on paved roadways will not be permitted.
E. Construction activities occurring within one thousand feet (1,000') of sensitive areas shall receive a higher level of preventive planning. Sensitive receptors include schools, housing, hospital and care facilities and business areas.
    1. Implementation standards for sensitive areas shall include, but not be limited to, hours of operation, speed restrictions, increased road maintenance, construction activity restrictions, road surfacing, wind breaks and barriers and vehicle access controls.
F. Hours of construction activities shall be limited to between sunrise and sunset Monday through Friday and between eight o’clock (8:00) A.M. to four o’clock (4:00) P.M. on Saturdays. Work shall not proceed beyond these hours or on Sunday, New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, or Christmas Day without prior approval from the city.
G. The application of a dust palliative under this chapter shall be done in conformance with all federal, state and local standards.
H. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
    1. Agricultural operations, including on field sources and unpaved roads used solely for agricultural operations.
    2. Any dust generating activity where necessary fugitive dust preventative or mitigative actions are in conflict with either federal or state endangered species act provisions as determined in writing by the appropriate federal or state agency.
    3. Emergency activities conducted by any fire departments, utility, or government agency that is necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. (Ord. 2007-12-005, 12-6-2007)

4-9-8: MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES; DEMOLITION ACTIVITIES; MINING, BLASTING AND AGGREGATE MATERIALS OPERATIONS:
A. Scope:
    1. The following requirements shall apply to:
        a. Any construction activity involving in aggregate one or more acres of disturbed area;
        b. Any commercial project;
        c. Any industrial project;
        d. Any demolition project; and
        e. All mining, blasting and aggregate materials operations.
    2. This section shall not apply to:
        a. Construction or demolition activities occurring entirely within an enclosed structure from which no visible airborne particulate matter escapes;
        b. Landscaping by an individual at his place of residence;
        c. Emergency maintenance activities conducted by government agencies on publicly maintained roads, road shoulder, right-of-way and public flood control facilities; and
        d. Dust palliative application projects conducted solely for the purpose of compliance with section 4-9-11 of this chapter, wherein no grade elevation is changed, no cut and fill operations occur, and no soil or rock is imported or exported, except for the importing of gravel or rock for use as a dust palliative.
B. Basic Requirements: Both the owner and the operator are responsible to ensure that the following are complied with:
    1. File a complete dust control plan with the city of St. George development services department before initiating activities on any site;
        a. The plan shall specify and describe the best practical methods to be used to control the generation of fugitive dust;
    2. Obtain a dust control permit, issued by the city of St. George which shall be valid for one year unless revoked earlier;
    3. Implement the best practical methods as outlined in the dust control plan;
    4. Install a sign that conforms to the signage requirement of this chapter;
    5. Compile and retain a written record of self-inspection made each day when soil disturbing work is conducted as required by this chapter; and
    6. Implement long term stabilization within ten (10) days of the cessation of active operations, if construction is complete, or a site or part thereof becomes inactive for a period of thirty (30) days or longer. An operator or owner shall implement at least one of the following long term stabilization techniques for any disturbed surface area where activities are not scheduled to occur for at least thirty (30) days:
        a. Revegetation that results in seventy five percent (75%) ground coverage to be maintained until the city determines vegetation is established; or
        b. Use of watering or chemical stabilizers to establish a stabilized surface with physical access restriction surrounding the areas;
    7. A person who has successfully completed a city of St. George environmental management dust control class must be on site at all times when construction activity is in progress.
C. Certification: The following individuals shall be required to have successfully completed a city of St. George environmental management dust control class:
    1. Any individual responsible for preparing a dust control plan;
    2. The construction site superintendent(s), foreman and other designated on-site representatives;
    3. All individuals required to attend and successfully complete the environmental management dust control class shall do so at least once every three (3) years.
D. Mining, Blasting And Aggregate Materials Operations:
    1. Hours for detonation of explosives shall be limited to between eight o’clock (8:00) A.M. and five o’clock (5:00) P.M. Monday through Friday and shall not proceed beyond these hours or on Saturday, Sunday, New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, or Christmas Day without prior approval from the city.
    2. Blasting shall be limited and conducted only during favorable weather conditions. No blasting shall be allowed when the national weather service forecasts sustained winds above thirty (30) miles per hour (mph).
E. Vehicles Exiting Site: 
    1. Control Measures: Any operator of a project with a disturbed surface area of one or more acres or of any project that involves the import or export of at least one hundred (100) cubic yards of bulk material per day shall install and maintain at least one of the following control measures at the intersection of each site entrance and any paved road open to through traffic with all vehicles exiting the site routed over the selected device(s):
        a. Pad consisting of minimum three inch (3") rock maintained in a clean condition to a depth of at least eight inches (8") and extending at least thirty feet (30') wide and at least fifty feet (50') long;
        b. Paved surface extending at least one hundred feet (100') and at least twenty feet (20') wide;
        c. Wheel shaker/wheel spreading device consisting of raised dividers (rails, pipes, or grates) at least three inches (3") tall and at least six inches (6") apart and twenty feet (20') wide; or
        d. A wheel washing system.
    2. Track Out Material: Any material outside a truck or other equipment exiting a construction activity site shall be cleaned from the truck or equipment. Any material which is tracked onto a paved roadway shall be removed as quickly as is safely possible and if such track out materials extend from any project at any access point, the materials shall be removed promptly.
    3. Removal Of Accumulated Materials: Dirt and dust materials that have accumulated in curb and gutter areas as well as sidewalk locations as a result of track out or development activities shall be removed promptly.
    4. Excavation Permit Conditions: In order to mitigate the impact of construction activities and related activities on public roads and highways, the conditions of an excavation permit may include a requirement to install road base, chip seal or asphalt to access roads for a prescribed distance before entering a public road. All access roads shall be kept clean to prevent dirt and debris track out onto public roads. (Ord. 2007-12-005, 12-6-2007)

4-9-9: HAULING MATERIALS ON PUBLIC ROADWAYS:
A. Commercial vehicles transporting aggregate or demolition material upon a public roadway shall have a covering over the entire load to prevent materials from blowing, spilling, or otherwise escaping from the vehicle.
    1. The following materials are exempt from this provision:
        a. Hot mix asphalt; and
        b. Boulder type materials or scrap metal if the materials or metal is a size and in a form not susceptible to blowing dust or being blown out of the vehicle. (Ord. 2007-12-005, 12-6-2007)

4-9-10: OPEN AREAS AND VACANT LOTS:
A. The owner of any property with a disturbed area of more than one-fourth (1/4) acre shall control the release of fugitive dust from the parcel or contiguous parcels by implementing one or more of the following best practical methods:
    1. Physical barriers and signs to prohibit access to the disturbed areas by motorized vehicles;
    2. The use of ground covers (e.g., gravel, decorative stone);
    3. The use of dust palliative;
    4. The use of “snow fencing” (a fencing material that inhibits the wind);
    5. The use of windbreaks; or
    6. The application of water in an amount and frequency adequate for the soil to develop a crust.
    7. In the event that the disturbed areas are primarily the result of recurrent unauthorized use of the property by motorized vehicles, the application of water is not a suitable control measure without the erection and maintenance of physical barriers. (Ord. 2007-12-005, 12-6-2007)

4-9-11: HIGH WIND CONTINGENCY MEASURES:
All construction activities that are capable of producing fugitive dust must cease during high wind events. Equipment used for dust suppression shall be permitted to continue operations. (Ord. 2007-12-005, 12-6-2007)

4-9-12: VISUAL DETERMINATION OF FUGITIVE DUST EMISSIONS:
A. Method: Opacity shall be determined by a visual observation made by a currently certified evaluator in accordance with U.S. EPA, 40 CFR, part 60, appendix A, method 9, using the procedures set forth in subsections A1 and A2 of this section. A copy of the observer’s certification shall accompany the vision emission evaluation (VEE).
    1. Time Averaged Opacity Method: This procedure is used for continuous fugitive dust emission sources, such as earthmoving, grading, and trenching, that produce emissions continuously. The certified observer should do the following:
        a. Position: Stand at a position at least twenty feet (20') from the fugitive dust source in order to provide a clear view of the emissions with the sun oriented in the one hundred forty degree (140°) sector to the back. Consistent as much as possible with maintaining the above requirements, make opacity observations from a position such that the line of sight is approximately perpendicular to the plume and wind direction. The observer may follow the fugitive dust plume generated by mobile earthmoving equipment, as long as the sun remains oriented in the one hundred forty degree (140°) sector to the back. As much as possible, do not include more than one plume in the line of sight at one time.
        b. Field Records: Record the name of the site, fugitive dust source type (e.g., earthmoving, grading, trenching), method of control used, if any, observer’s name, certification data and affiliation, and a sketch of the observer’s position relative to the fugitive dust source and respective sun location. Also, record the time, estimated distance to the fugitive dust source location, approximate wind direction, estimated wind speed, description of the sky condition (presence and color of clouds), and observer’s position relative to the fugitive dust source, and color of the plume and type of background on the visible emission observation when opacity readings are initiated and completed.
        c. Observations: Make opacity observations, to the extent possible, using a contrasting background that is perpendicular to the line of sight. Make opacity observations at a point just beyond where material is no longer being deposited out of the plume (normally three (3) feet above the surface from which the plume is generated). The initial observation should begin immediately after a plume has been created above the surface involved. Do not look continuously at the plume, but instead observe the plume momentarily at fifteen (15) second intervals. For fugitive dust from earthmoving equipment, make opacity observations at a point just beyond where material is not being deposited out of a plume (normally three (3) feet above the mechanical equipment generating the plume).
        d. Recording Observations: : Record the opacity observations to the nearest five percent (5%) every fifteen (15) seconds on a VEE record sheet. Each momentary observation recorded represents the average opacity of emission for a fifteen (15) second period. If a multiple plume exists at the time of an observation, do not record an opacity reading. Mark an “x” for that reading. If the equipment generating the plume travels outside of the field of observation, resulting in the inability to maintain the orientation of the sun within the one hundred forty degree (140°) sector or if the equipment ceases operating, mark an “x” for the fifteen (15) second interval reading. Readings identified as “x” shall be considered interrupted readings.
        e. Data Reduction For Time Averaged Method: Opacity observations of emissions from stationary sources shall be conducted in accordance with EPA method 9.
    2. Intermittent Emissions Method: This procedure is for evaluating intermittent fugitive dust emissions. Intermittent fugitive dust sources include activities that produce emissions intermittently such as screening, dumping, and stockpiling, where predominant emissions are produced intermittently.
        a. Position: See subsection A1a of this section.
        b. Field Records: See subsection A1b of this section.
        c. Opacity Observations: Opacity observations shall use procedures similar to method 9, but the requirement for observation to be made at fifteen (15) second intervals over a six (6) minute period shall not apply. (Ord. 2007-12-005, 12-6-2007)

4-9-13: INFORMATIONAL SIGN REQUIREMENTS:
A. Any activity that requires a dust control permit shall install and maintain a project information sign in accordance with the following requirements:
    1. The sign shall be installed prior to beginning actual construction activities and initiating any type of earthmoving operations.
    2. The sign shall be installed at a prominent location on the property near the main entrance of the construction site. Traffic visibility shall be maintained by placing the sign back from the main ingress/egress location and at any applicable intersection for proper sight triangle clearances.
    3. The sign may be removed once final stabilization has been achieved on all portions of the site for which the person is responsible and is approved by the city.
B. The following information shall be displayed on the project information sign with the designated alpha and numeric dimensions (signboards written in longhand are unacceptable):
+-----------------------------------+----------------------------+
|             Sign Size             |        48"H X 48"W         |
+-----------------------------------+----------------------------+
| DEVELOPERS NAME                   | 4" Upper Case Bold Letters |
+-----------------------------------+----------------------------+
| PROJECT NAME                      | 4" Upper Case Bold Letters |
| PERMIT NUMBER                     | 4" Bold Numbers            |
+-----------------------------------+----------------------------+
| FOR DUST CONCERNS CONTACT         | 6" Upper Case Bold Letters |
+-----------------------------------+----------------------------+
| Office Phone Contact ###-###-#### | 4" Bold Numbers            |
| Cell Phone Contact ###-###-####   | 4" Bold Numbers            |
+-----------------------------------+----------------------------+
| IF NO RESPONSE CONTACT CITY       | 3" Upper Case Bold Letters |
| OFFICE AT 435-627-4000            | 3" Upper Case Bold Numbers |
+-----------------------------------+----------------------------+
    1. The project information text height shall be a minimum as shown on the template above, and must contrast with lettering, typically black text with white background.
    2. The lower edge of the signboard must be a minimum of three feet (3') and a maximum of five feet (5') above grade. (Ord. 2007-12-005, 12-6-2007)

4-9-14: REPORTING AND RECORD KEEPING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Prior to construction, any operator of a project with one acre or more of construction activities shall notify the city through the inspections department at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to initiating activities.
B. Owners and operators of construction activities shall complete a daily inspection log in the format provided by the city. Records of self-inspection shall be compiled and retained for a minimum of one (1) year or for six (6) months beyond the project duration, whichever is longer.
C. Any operator subject to the provisions of section 4-9-8 of this chapter shall notify the city within ten (10) days of completion of long term stabilization activities.
D. All required information shall be provided to the city and UDAQ representatives upon request. (Ord. 2007-12-005, 12-6-2007)

4-9-15: FEES FOR INITIAL REVIEW, MONITORING, INSPECTION AND MITIGATION:
A. Fees shall be charged all applicants for dust control permits, plan review and costs incurred in the administration of this program, such as investigation of violations, preparation for hearings, hearings, and the collection process. The fee assessed shall be the amount set in the city fee schedule.
B. If construction activity begins prior to obtaining a dust control permit, the owner or operator shall pay a late fee of twice the normal fee.
C. If during any one hundred eighty (180) day period an owner and/or operator has three (3) violations that have been adjudicated either civilly or criminally for the same owner and/or operator, the city may require the posting of a surety bond, an irrevocable letter of credit, a cash certificate or deposit, or an equivalent form approved by the city in an amount necessary to ensure implementation of the mitigation measures set forth in the approved dust control permit for the subject site(s). If an owner and/or operator has two (2) or more violations that have been adjudicated either civilly or criminally for: failure to obtain a dust control permit; failure to implement best management practices; or failure to comply with a corrective action order, the city may, as a condition of obtaining or maintaining a dust control permit, issue a corrective action order requiring the owner and/or operator to post a surety bond, an irrevocable letter of credit, a cash certificate or deposit, or an equivalent form approved by the city in an amount necessary to ensure the implementation of the mitigation measures set forth in said dust control permits. (Ord. 2007-12-005, 12-6-2007)

CHAPTER 10 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE


4-10-1:      Definitions
4-10-2:      Outside Storage
4-10-3:      Inoperable Vehicles and Vessels
4-10-4:      Weeds and Plant Material
4-10-5:      Dumping or Disposal
4-10-6:      Habitable Dwelling

4-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
Terms used in the present tense include the future tense. Terms defined in the singular number include the plural and the plural the singular. Terms that have not been defined herein, but are separately defined in the St. George City Code, shall be construed as defined therein. The terms below are defined as follows:
DELETERIOUS OBJECT: Anything injurious, or with the reasonable potential to become injurious, to the health, safety or welfare of any persons.
GARBAGE: All putrescible wastes, including animal offal and carcasses of dead animals, but excluding human excreta, sewage and other water carried wastes.
INOPERABLE VEHICLE: Any vehicle or vessel that is not capable of being operated as a vehicle or vessel in its present state or existing mechanical condition. A vehicle or vessel is inoperable if the parts necessary for operation are removed, destroyed, damaged, deteriorated or nonfunctioning, rendering it incapable of legally functioning as a vehicle or vessel. A vehicle or vessel is inoperable if any of the following conditions exist: dismantled; flat or no tires; broken or missing windshield; missing or inoperable engine; missing or inoperable drive train; missing driver’s seat; missing or inoperable steering wheel or column; missing or inoperable gas or brake pedals; missing fenders, hood, or trunk; will not start; is not drivable; is on blocks, jacks, or other means of elevation; on or under which there is an accumulation of weeds, trash or debris; or any other condition exists that renders a vehicle or vessel inoperable.
JUNK: Any scrap metal, rope, batteries, debris, waste, or inoperable, dismantled or wrecked automobiles or parts thereof, iron, steel and other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous material. Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material or debris, whether or not stored or used in conjunction with dismantling, processing, salvage, storage, disposal or other use or disposition. Junk includes, but is not limited to, tires, furniture, tools, cordage, scrap iron or other metal, glass, brush, used or scrap wood and lumber, wastepaper products, discarded building materials, building materials, machinery and appliances or parts thereof, or vehicles and parts thereof.
LITTER: All waste material that can be, or is subject to being, blown from place to place or scattered by the elements, including, but not limited to: paper; cardboard; cartons; boxes; plastics; rags; cloth; fibers and fabrics; leather; polyethylene; or polystyrenes.
RUBBISH: All solid waste, except garbage and hazardous waste, including, but not limited to, ashes, bedding, cardboard, paper, wood, cans, glass, crockery, rubber, plastic, leather, rags, or yard trimmings.
SOLID WASTE:
    1. Garbage, refuse, trash, rubbish, litter, junk, combustible material, tree limbs and cuttings, landscape debris, hazardous waste, construction and demolition waste, dead animals, manure or feces, sludge, liquid or semi-liquid waste, asphalt other than that being used for hard surfacing, organic materials, and waste concrete or rocks, or other spent, useless, worthless or discarded materials;
    2. Materials stored or accumulated for the purpose of discarding;
    3. Materials that have served their original intended purpose; or
    4. Waste material resulting from industrial, manufacturing, mining, commercial, agricultural, residential, institutional, recreational or community activities.
TRASH: Materials including, but not limited to, garbage, construction or demolition debris, clothing, rags, yard trimmings, or other refuse resulting from the conducting of any business, trade, or industry.
UTILITY SERVICE: Means electrical, gas, oil, water, or sewer service.
VEHICLE: A motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, off-highway vehicle, camper, park model recreational vehicle, manufactured home, or mobile home, as defined in Utah Code Annotated section 41-1a-102.
VESSEL: Every type of watercraft, other than a seaplane on the water, used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water as defined in Utah Code Annotated section 72-18-2.
WEEDS: Useless and troublesome plants generally accepted as having no value and frequently of uncontrolled growth. A plant that is usually of vigorous growth, one that tends to overgrow or choke out more desirable plants, one that grows in competition with cultivated plants. Weeds include, but are not limited to, the following:
    1. Plants that have become a fire hazard;
    2. Grasses, vines and bushes, except grasses, vines and bushes that are part of a landscaping theme and are not associated with a general deterioration of the property, and are not in an overgrown or unmanaged condition;
    3. Stubble, brush, tumbleweeds, clippings or cuttings; and
    4. Plants specified as weeds in the Utah Noxious Weed Act, Utah Code Annotated title 4, chapter 17, and its subsequent regulations. (Ord. 2020-02-006 § 2 (Att.), 2-6-2020)

4-10-2: OUTSIDE STORAGE:
A. It is unlawful for a person who owns, possesses, controls, or is in charge of property to keep, store, or allow solid waste, deleterious objects, or similar materials to remain on the property unless inside of an approved container or in compliance with a lawfully situated and licensed business.
B. It is unlawful for a person who owns, possesses, controls, or is in charge of property to keep, store, or allow any personal property, equipment, materials, products, tools, sinks, toilets, cabinets, household fixtures, household items, goods, products, wares, lumber, construction materials, machinery components, equipment, appliances, furniture not designed and intended for exterior use, or any similar object that is not clearly intended for outdoor use, to be on property that is visible from an area open to the public, such as a sidewalk, alley, or street, or from an adjoining property.
C. These restrictions do not apply to a licensed business located in a zone where the city allows the business to store outdoors the materials described in this section. Such businesses include but are not limited to junk and salvage yards. (Ord. 2020-02-006 § 2 (Att.), 2-6-2020)

4-10-3: INOPERABLE VEHICLES AND VESSELS:
A. It is unlawful for a person who owns, possesses, controls, or is in charge of property to keep, store, or allow any inoperable vehicles or vessels, or vehicle or vessel parts or similar materials, to be on the property.
B. Exception:
    1. A maximum of one (1) inoperable vehicle may be parked or stored on a property in the front yard setback of a residential property outside a fully enclosed permanent residential dwelling or a permanent accessory structure if:
        a. The inoperable vehicle is covered with a car cover with no tears or holes (no tarps allowed) whenever work is not being done upon it; and
        b. The vehicle parts used in the restoration are stored in the motor vehicle or in a completely enclosed structure.
    2. Any additional inoperable vehicles shall be stored in a completely enclosed structure, or in an area that is not visible from an area open to the public, such as a sidewalk, alley, or street, or from an adjoining property.
    3. These restrictions do not apply to a licensed business which is related to inoperable vehicles, parts and storage thereof, located in a zone where the city allows the business to have outdoor storage of the materials described in this section. Such businesses include but are not limited to automobile repair shops, junk and salvage yards. This exception does not apply to home occupations. (Ord. 2020-02-006 § 2 (Att.), 2-6-2020)

4-10-4: WEEDS AND PLANT MATERIAL:
A. It is unlawful for a person who owns, possesses, controls, or is in charge of property to maintain that property in such a manner that grass or weeds are overgrown to a height in excess of six inches (6") and to fail to remove all cuttings and plant debris from the property immediately or store it in an approved container.
B. It is unlawful for a person who owns, possesses, controls, or is in charge of property to maintain that property in such a manner that grass or weeds are overgrown to a height to create an unsightly appearance, or create breeding grounds and shelter for rats, mice, snakes, mosquitoes, and other vermin.
C. It is unlawful for a person who owns, possesses, controls, or is in charge of property larger than two acres to maintain that property in such a manner that grass or weeds are overgrown to a height in excess of six inches (6") within fifteen feet (15') of the edge of a road or within two hundred feet (200') of another property’s dwelling.
D. Exception: 
    1. Exempted from the provisions of this chapter are portions of lands lawfully used for cultivated agriculture, flower gardens, plots of shrubbery, vegetable gardens and grain plots. An exemption under the terms of this section cannot be claimed unless the land has been cultivated and cared for in a manner appropriate to such exempt categories. This exemption shall not be construed to permit any crops, plots or gardens to become overgrown with weeds in violation of the remaining terms of this chapter.
    2. Any property in its natural, beneficial, and undisturbed condition, or if it has been disturbed, it is now soil-crusted and stabilized from erosion and fugitive dust by watering, chemical applications, revegetation, or covering with wind resistant material (i.e., gravel or wood chips).
    3. Any property that is located outside any improved subdivision and is located more than one hundred feet (100') from any boundary of any lot or parcel of real estate upon which any dwelling is located, or more than one hundred feet (100') from any commercial enterprise.
    4. The restrictions of subsections A through C of this section do not apply to lots or parcels of property in the following zones: agricultural, open space, or gravel and grazing. (Ord. 2020-02-006 § 2 (Att.), 2-6-2020)

4-10-5: DUMPING OR DISPOSAL:
A. Prohibited: The use of land for the dumping or disposal of scrap metal, junk, garbage, rubbish or other refuse, or of ashes, slag, or other industrial wastes or byproducts, shall be prohibited in every zone, except as otherwise provided in city ordinances.
B. Excavated Fill Material: The dumping of dirt, sand, rock or other material excavated from the earth shall be permitted in any zone; provided, that the surface of such dumped material is graded, leaving the ground surface in a condition suitable for other use permitted in the zone; and provided further, that such fill does not increase the susceptibility of the ground to erosion, landslide, flooding or other dangerous condition. Concrete may be dumped as fill in excavations where it will be buried and not remain on the land surface.
C. Topsoil: No person, firm or corporation shall strip, excavate or otherwise remove topsoil for sale or for use other than on the premises from which the same shall be taken, except in connection with the construction or alteration of a building on those premises or where an excavation permit has been issued by the city. (Ord. 2020-02-006 § 2 (Att.), 2-6-2020)

4-10-6: HABITABLE DWELLING:
A. It is unlawful for a person who owns, possesses, controls, or is in charge of property to permit occupancy of any building, structure, or part thereof for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating:
    1. If the building, structure, or part thereof, was not intended to be used for such occupancy; or
    2. If the building, structure, or part thereof is unfit for use. A dwelling is unfit if it does not have hot and cold potable running water for every kitchen sink, bathroom lavatory, bathtub, and shower; does not have an operational toilet and plumbing; or does not have the ability to heat and cool the dwelling as required by the Uniform Building Code.
B. It is unlawful for a person who owns, possesses, controls, or is in charge of property to occupy a dwelling or dwelling unit that does not have all utility services connected and operating.
C. It is unlawful for a person who owns, possesses, controls, or is in charge of property to fail to maintain all parts of the premises in a clean and sanitary condition. This includes the proper disposal of garbage, refuse, and fecal matter. (Ord. 2020-02-006 § 2 (Att.), 2-6-2020)

TITLE 5 PUBLIC SAFETY

Chapter
1            Police Department
2            Animal Control
3            Crimes And Offenses; Public Safety
4            Firearms, Weapons, Trapping of Animals
5            Minors
    5A           Curfew
    5B           Occupancy Of Rented Rooms By Minors

CHAPTER 1 POLICE DEPARTMENT


5-1-1:       Police Department
5-1-2:       Police Chief
5-1-3:       Duties Of Police Officers
5-1-4:       Arrests; Authority
5-1-5:       Special Police Officers

5-1-1: POLICE DEPARTMENT:
There shall be a police department consisting of a chief of police and subordinate police officers and other employees. (Ord. 2002-01-008, 1-17-2002)

5-1-2: POLICE CHIEF:
A. Appointment; Removal: The mayor shall, subject to the advice and consent of the city council, appoint a person to act as chief of police. The chief of police may be removed from office by the mayor as otherwise provided by law.
B. Powers And Duties: 
    1. The chief of police shall direct the police work of the city, be responsible for the enforcement and maintenance of law and order, and ensure that each necessary function of police service required by law or directed by the city council and mayor is carried out.
    2. With the advice and consent of the mayor, the chief of police may appoint assistant police chiefs or other command level officers to perform such duties as may be delegated to them by the chief of police.
    3. The chief of police may assign any subordinate officer or employee in the department to any duty which in his or her judgment the good of the service may require, and may change such assignment from time to time whenever in his or her judgment the good of the service requires.
    4. The chief of police shall make and adopt rules and regulations for the operation of the department. Such rules and regulations shall be approved by the mayor, with the advice of the city manager, and shall be binding on all members and employees of the department. Such rules and regulations may cover the conduct of the members and employees of the department, uniforms and equipment to be worn or carried, assignments, hours of service and all other similar matters necessary or desirable for the better efficiency of the department.
    5. The chief of police shall consult and advise with the mayor, and act with the mayor’s approval on all matters pertaining to the police department not herein specifically provided for, and shall from time to time make such reports as the mayor shall require and shall annually report to the city council on the state of affairs and conditions of the police department.
    6. It shall be the duty of the chief of police to keep all lost, stolen or evidentiary property that comes into the possession of the police department or any of its members, and all reasonable efforts shall be made to discover the owners and restore the property to the owners. The chief of police shall be obligated to comply with the requirements of Utah Code Annotated sections 77-24-1 through 77-24-5 concerning the disposal of property received by peace officers. The preceding provision shall not prohibit the chief of police from disposing of firearms as provided for by Utah Code Annotated section 76-10-525. (Ord. 2002-01-008, 1-17-2002)

5-1-3: DUTIES OF POLICE OFFICERS:
Police officers shall possess the powers conferred upon deputy sheriffs by law, including at all times the authority to preserve the public peace, prevent crime, detect and arrest offenders, suppress riots, protect persons and property, remove nuisances existing in the public streets, roads and highways, enforce every law relating to the suppression of offenses, perform all duties required of them by ordinance or resolution, and enforce every law, both state and municipal, relating to the suppression of offenses. The preceding provision is not a limitation of a police officer’s statewide authority as otherwise provided by law. (Ord. 2002-01-008, 1-17-2002)

5-1-4: ARRESTS; AUTHORITY:
Police officers shall have the power and authority, without process, to arrest and take into custody any person who shall commit or threaten or attempt to commit in the presence of the officer, or within his or her view, any breach of the peace, or any offense directly prohibited by the laws of this state or by city ordinance. (Ord. 2002-01-008, 1-17-2002)

5-1-5: SPECIAL POLICE OFFICERS:
A. Appointment: The chief of police, with the advice and consent of the mayor, may at any time appoint special police officers to serve without pay from the city. Said appointments shall be made for a period not to exceed one year from the date thereof, and shall be subject to revocation and removal prior thereto, as herein provided.
B. Certificate; Records: The city recorder shall issue to each special police officer so appointed a certificate of appointment which shall designate whether the appointee is authorized to act as such special police officer throughout the city or at a particular place therein, and if at any particular place, the place shall be designated in such certificate. The city recorder shall keep a book containing the names of such appointees, the date of appointment and the date of expiration of said appointment.
C. Supervision; Removal: The chief of police shall exercise general supervision over such special police officers, and may, with the consent of the mayor, at any time remove such officers and revoke the police powers conferred upon any special police officer before the period for which he or she was appointed has expired, without charges being preferred and without trial, hearing or opportunity to be heard whenever, in the chief’s opinion, the good of the service will be served thereby, and such removal and revocation of authority shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 2002-01-008, 1-17-2002)

CHAPTER 2 ANIMAL CONTROL1


5-2-1:       Definitions
5-2-2:       Division Of Animal Control
5-2-3:       Shelter
5-2-4:       Dog Licensing
5-2-5:       Regulatory Permits
5-2-6:       Rabies Control
5-2-7:       Prohibited Acts And Activities
5-2-8:       Nuisance Animals
5-2-9:       Wild Animals
5-2-10:      Impounding
5-2-11:      Sterilization Requirements
5-2-12:      Penalty
1See also subsection 7-3-2I for provisions on animal control in public parks and public squares.

5-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
ABANDONED OR STRAYED: An animal whose owner cannot be immediately identified through reasonable diligence.
ADEQUATE HOME: Existing facilities to meet the physical and emotional needs of the adopted animal, including food, water, shelter and companionship.
ANIMAL SHELTER: A facility owned and/or operated by a governmental entity or any society incorporated in the state of Utah for the purpose of preventing cruelty to animals and used for the care and custody of seized, stray, homeless, quarantined, abandoned or unwanted dogs, cats or other small domestic animals.
AT LARGE: Any domesticated animal off the premises of the owner or custodian of the animal, and not under immediate control of the owner or custodian. In the case of a dog, immediate control shall mean on a leash, cord, chain or confined within a vehicle.
BITE: An actual puncture, tear or abrasion of the skin inflicted by the teeth of an animal.
CATTERY: An establishment for boarding, breeding, buying, grooming or selling cats for profit.
DOMESTICATED ANIMALS: Animals accustomed to living in or about the habitation of man.
GROOMERY: Any establishment maintained for the purpose of offering cosmetic services for animals for profit.
KENNEL1: An establishment having three (3) or more dogs for the purpose of boarding, breeding, buying, grooming, letting for hire, training for fee or selling, except where such establishment shall be licensed as having sportsman’s privileges as provided in section 5-2-5 of this chapter.
PET SHOP: Any establishment containing cages or exhibition pens, not part of a kennel or cattery, wherein dogs, cats, birds or other pets for sale are kept or displayed.
QUARANTINE: The isolation of an animal in a substantial enclosure so that the animal is not subject to contact with other animals or unauthorized persons.
RESPONSIBLE ADULT: A person eighteen (18) years of age or older, who is employed or otherwise capable of providing the physical, medical and emotional needs of the adopted animal. A person found guilty or who pled no contest to violating the provisions of this chapter or any other federal, state or local law concerning the abuse of or cruelty to animals, within five (5) years of the animal adoption application, is not a “responsible adult” for the purposes of this chapter.
RIDING SCHOOL OR STABLE: An establishment which offers boarding and/or riding instruction for any horse, pony, donkey, mule or burro, or which offers such animals for hire.
VICIOUS ANIMAL: Any animal which has bitten a person or other animal without provocation or has a known propensity to attack or bite human beings or other animals.
WILD ANIMAL: Any animal of a species that in their natural life are wild.
1See also subsection 5-2-4A6 of this chapter for limitations.
(Ord. 81-11-2, 11-5-1981; amd. Ord. 6-1-1988, 6-2-1988; Ord. 2001-08-002, 8-2-2001; 2003 Code)

5-2-2: DIVISION OF ANIMAL CONTROL:
A. Created: There is hereby created a division of animal control with power to apprehend, take and impound any animal found in violation of this chapter, including licensable dogs for which no license has been procured in accordance with this chapter, and otherwise carry out and enforce the provisions hereof.
B. Division Lieutenant: The division lieutenant of the division shall be accountable to the chief of police, and he may be assisted in his duties by any peace officer or animal control officers as the chief of police may designate.
C. Duties Of Officials: 
    1. Division Lieutenant: The division lieutenant shall:
        a. Enforce this chapter and perform other responsibilities pursuant thereto.
        b. Supervise the municipal animal shelter under his jurisdiction.
        c. Keep adequate records of all animals impounded and all monies collected.
        d. Implement and enforce the provisions hereof requiring dogs to be licensed and commercial establishments to have regulatory permits.
        e. Establish, in cooperation with other interested governmental agencies, adequate measures for rabies immunization and control.
    2. Officers: Each animal control officer or designated peace officer shall:
        a. Enforce this chapter in all respects pertaining to animal control within the jurisdiction, including the care and impounding of animals and prevention of cruelty to animals.
        b. Carry out all duties prescribed or delegated by the division lieutenant.
D. Interference With Officers Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and intentionally interfere with the division lieutenant, or any animal control officer or peace officer under his direction, in the lawful discharge of his duties as herein prescribed. (Ord. 81-11-2, 11-5-1981; amd. 2003 Code)

5-2-3: SHELTER:
The division of animal control shall provide suitable premises and facilities to be used as an animal shelter where impounded animals can be adequately kept and supplied with food and humane care. It shall provide for the painless and humane destruction of animals where necessary, or it may furnish medical treatment for impounded animals. (Ord. 81-11-2, 11-5-1981; amd. 2003 Code)

5-2-4: DOG LICENSING:
A. Licensing Requirements; Fees: 
    1. License Required: All dogs must be licensed each year, except as otherwise provided herein, to a person of the age of eighteen (18) years or older.
    2. Time Limit: Any person owning, possessing or harboring any dog shall obtain a license for such animal within thirty (30) days after the dog reaches the age of four (4) months; or in the case of a dog over four (4) months, within ten (10) days after acquisition of the dog. (Ord. 81-11-2, 11-5-1981)
    3. Application: License applications must be submitted annually to the division of animal control, utilizing a standard form which requests name, address and telephone number of the applicant; breed, sex, color and age of the animal; and rabies information. The application shall be accompanied by the prescribed license fee and by a current rabies vaccination certificate. Rabies vaccinations shall be given by a licensed veterinarian every three (3) years. If the dog is under five (5) years of age the second rabies vaccination shall be given only one (1) year after the first vaccination is given. (Ord. 2007-12-004, 12-6-2007)
    4. Fee For License: The license fees shall be in such amounts as established by resolution of the city council. No dog will be licensed as spayed or neutered without proof that such surgery was performed. (Ord. 81-11-2, 11-5-1981; amd. 2003 Code)
    5. Term Of License; Late Fees: The license shall be effective from the date of purchase through the end of February of the following year, after which a late fee may be imposed. Licenses for the following year may be purchased within ninety (90) days prior to the end of February. (Ord. 81-11-2, 11-5-1981)
    6. Number Permitted; Exception: No person or person at any one dwelling unit, as defined in the zoning ordinance of the city, shall at any one time own or license more than two (2) dogs in any combination, except as otherwise provided herein. Sole exception shall be where the person occupies a dwelling unit with exclusive location on an acre or more of land, or where the dwelling unit adjoins an open space or agricultural zone on at least one side of the property upon which it is located. In the event of an exception, as provided herein, up to four (4) dogs may be allowed at a dwelling unit but no more. The purpose of this subsection is to minimize the health and nuisance effect upon neighbors of keeping dogs, and nothing herein shall waive the requirement of full compliance with all other provisions of this chapter or the city nuisance ordinance. Because of the difficulty of keeping record of dog ownership, the issuance of a dog license by the city to more than the permitted number of dogs shall in no way waive the city’s right to require compliance with the provisions of this subsection. (Ord. 12-1-1990, 12-13-1990)
B. License Tag: 
    1. Required; Attachment: Upon payment of the license fee, the division of animal control shall issue to the owner a certificate and a tag for each dog licensed. The tag shall have stamped thereon the license number corresponding with the tag number on the certificate. The owner shall attach the tag to the collar or harness of the animal and see that the collar and the tag are constantly worn. Failure to attach the tag as provided shall be in violation of this chapter, except that dogs which are kept primarily for show purposes are exempt from wearing the tag.
    2. Transferability; Lost Tags: Dog tags are not transferable from one dog to another. No refunds shall be made on any dog license fee for any reason whatsoever. Replacements for lost or destroyed tags shall be issued upon payment of a fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city council to the division of animal control.
    3. Removal Prohibited: Any person removing or causing to be removed the collar, harness or tag from any licensed dog without the consent of the owner or keeper thereof, except a licensed veterinarian or animal control officer who removes such for medical and other reasons, shall be in violation of this chapter.
C. Exemptions: 
    1. The provisions of subsections A and B of this section shall not apply to:
        a. Dogs licensed elsewhere whose owners are nonresidents temporarily (up to 30 days) within the jurisdiction; licensed dogs whose owners remain within the jurisdiction longer than thirty (30) days may transfer to the local license upon payment of a fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city council and proof of current rabies vaccination. (Ord. 81-11-2, 11-5-1981; amd. 2003 Code)
        b. Individual dogs within a properly licensed dog kennel or other such establishment when such dogs are held for resale.
    2. The fee provisions of subsection A of this section shall not apply to:
        a. Seeing eye dogs properly trained to assist blind persons if such dogs are actually being used by blind persons to assist them in moving from place to place.
        b. Hearing dogs properly trained to assist deaf persons if such dogs are actually used by deaf persons to aid them in responding to sounds.
        c. Dogs especially trained to assist officials of government agencies in the performance of their duties and which are owned by such agencies.
    3. Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to exempt any dog from having a current rabies vaccination. (Ord. 81-11-2, 11-5-1981)

5-2-5: REGULATORY PERMITS:
A. Types Of Permits: 
    1. Commercial Permits: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a kennel, cattery, pet shop, groomery, riding stable, veterinary clinic or hospital, or any similar establishment, unless such person first obtains a regulatory permit from the division of animal control, in addition to all other required licenses. All applications for permits to operate such establishments shall be submitted, together with the required permit fee, on a printed form provided by the animal control division to that division. Establishments operated by a governmental or humane society shall be exempt from this section.
    2. Sportsman’s Permit: Where permitted by other applicable ordinances of the city, the owner of purebred dogs may obtain a permit to keep up to five (5) dogs in a residential area provided:
        a. Such dogs are individually licensed;
        b. Such dogs are registered with a national registry (AKC, UKC, Field Dog);
        c. Approval is granted by the department of community development and the division of animal control;
        d. Adequate runs (not necessarily concrete) are provided; and
        e. Other provisions of this chapter are complied with, and no dog or premises is deemed to be a nuisance.
B. Posting Of Permit; Transferability; Changes: A valid permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place in each establishment, and a permit shall not be transferable to another location. The permittee shall immediately notify the division of animal control of any change in location or ownership.
C. Fee For Permit: The fees for a commercial permit shall be in such amounts as established by resolution of the city council.
D. Term Of Permit; Renewal: Any permit issued pursuant to this section shall automatically expire on December 31 immediately following date of issue. Within two (2) months prior to the expiration of the permit, the permittee shall apply for a renewal of the permit and pay the required fee. Any application made after December 31, except an application for a new establishment opening subsequent to that date, shall be accompanied by a late application fee in addition to the regular permit fee.
E. Rules And Regulations: The division of animal control shall promulgate reasonable rules and regulations governing the operation of kennels, catteries, groomeries, pet shops, riding stables and veterinary clinics or hospitals. Such rules and regulations shall have the effect of law, and violation of such rules and regulations shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and grounds for revocation of a permit issued by the division of animal control.
F. Suspension Or Revocation Of Permit: 
    1. Grounds: A permit may be suspended or revoked or a permit application rejected for falsification of facts in the permit application or for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any other law or regulation governing the establishment.
    2. Procedure: If the inspection of a commercial permittee discloses a violation, the inspector shall notify the permittee of the following:
        a. The specific violations found;
        b. A specific and reasonable period of time for the correction of the violations found;
        c. Notice that failure to correct may result in immediate suspension of the permit; and
        d. An opportunity for appeal from the notice and inspection findings will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the division of animal control within five (5) days of the date of notice.
    3. Notice Served: Notice shall be deemed to have been properly served when the original of the inspection report form or other notice has been delivered personally to the permittee or person in charge, or such notice has been sent by certified mail to the last known address of the permittee. A copy of such notice shall be filed with the records of the division of animal control. (Ord. 81-11-2, 11-5-1981; amd. 2003 Code)

5-2-6: RABIES CONTROL:
A. Duty To Report Bites: Any person having knowledge of any individual or animal having been bitten by an animal of a species subject to rabies shall report the incident immediately to the division of animal control, giving the name and address of the person bitten and of the owner or custodian of the biting animal, if available. Failure to provide such information or otherwise assist the division in discovering possible exposure to rabies or in ascertaining the immunization status of an animal shall be in violation of this chapter.
B. Vaccination: Rabies vaccination is required for dogs and cats. The owner or custodian of a dog or cat shall have said animal vaccinated within thirty (30) days after it reaches the age of four (4) months. Unvaccinated dogs or cats over four (4) months of age acquired by the owner or brought into the jurisdiction must be vaccinated within thirty (30) days. Every dog shall be revaccinated thereafter every twenty-four (24) months, and every cat shall be revaccinated thereafter every twelve (12) months with a modified rabies virus rabies vaccine approved by the division. This provision shall not apply to veterinarian or kennel operators temporarily maintaining on their premises animals owned by others. Each veterinarian, when vaccinating any animal for rabies, shall complete a certificate of rabies vaccination (in duplicate) which includes the following information:
    1. Owner’s name and address;
    2. Description of animal (breed, sex, markings, age, name);
    3. Date of vaccination;
    4. Rabies vaccination tag number;
    5. Type of rabies vaccine administered;
    6. Manufacturer’s serial number of vaccine;
    and a copy of the certificate shall be distributed to the owner and original retained by the issuing veterinarian. Any unvaccinated animal shall be impounded but may be reclaimed prior to disposal by payment of impound fees and by obtaining a rabies vaccination within seventy-two (72) hours of release. Any animal not reclaimed prior to the five (5) day period provided in section 5-2-10 of this chapter may be disposed of pursuant to provisions of that section.
C. Quarantine: 
    1. An animal that has rabies or shows signs of having rabies, and every animal bitten by another animal afflicted with rabies or that has been exposed to rabies, shall be reported by the owner, as set forth above, and shall immediately be confined in a secure place by the owner. The owner shall turn over the animal to the division of animal control upon demand. The division shall quarantine the animal for observation for a period of not less than ten (10) days. The owner of the animal shall bear the cost of confinement. The animal shelter or a veterinary kennel shall be the normal place for quarantine, but other arrangements, including confinement by the owner, may be made by the division lieutenant if the animal had a current rabies vaccination at the time the bite was inflicted or if there are other special circumstances justifying an exception. A person who has custody of an animal under quarantine shall immediately notify the division of animal control if the animal shows any signs of sickness or abnormal behavior, or if the animal escapes confinement. It shall be unlawful for any person who has custody of a quarantined animal to fail or refuse to allow a health or animal control officer to make an inspection or examination during the period of quarantine. If the animal dies within ten (10) days from the date of the bite, the person having custody shall immediately notify the division of animal control who shall immediately remove and deliver the head of such animal to the state health laboratory to be examined for rabies. If, at the end of the ten (10) day period, the division lieutenant examines the animal and finds no sign of rabies, the animal may be released to the owner, or in the case of a stray, it shall be disposed of as provided in section 5-2-10 of this chapter.
    2. In the case of an unvaccinated animal species subject to rabies which is known to have been bitten by a known rabid animal, said bitten or exposed animal should be immediately destroyed. If the owner is unwilling to destroy the bitten or exposed animal, the animal shall be immediately isolated and quarantined for six (6) months under veterinary supervision, the cost of such confinement to be paid in advance by the owner. The animal shall be destroyed if the owner does not comply herewith.
    3. If the bitten or exposed animal has been vaccinated, the animal shall be revaccinated within twenty-four (24) hours and quarantined for a period of thirty (30) days following revaccination. If the animal is not revaccinated within twenty-four (24) hours, the animal shall be isolated and quarantined under veterinary supervision for six (6) months. The animal shall be destroyed if the owner does not comply herewith. (Ord. 81-11-2, 11-5-1981; amd. 2003 Code)

5-2-7: PROHIBITED ACTS AND ACTIVITIES:
A. Harboring Stray Dogs: It shall be unlawful for any person, except an animal shelter, to harbor or keep any lost, abandoned or strayed dog. Whenever any dog shall be found which appears to be lost or strayed, it shall be the duty of the finder to notify the animal control division within twenty-four (24) hours, and the division shall impound the dog as herein provided.
B. Animals Running At Large: It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any animal, other than domestic cats, to allow such animals at any time to run at large. The owner or person charged with responsibility for an animal found running at large shall be strictly liable for a violation of this subsection regardless of the precautions taken to prevent the escape of the animal and regardless of whether or not he knows that the animal is running at large.
C. Animals On Unenclosed Premises: It shall be unlawful for any person to chain, stake out or tether any animal on any unenclosed premises in such a manner that the animal may go beyond the property line unless such person has permission of the owner of the affected property.
D. Female Dogs In Heat: It shall be unlawful for the custodian of any female dog in heat to fail to confine such dog in a secure enclosure so as to prevent it from coming into contact with other dogs and creating a nuisance, except for planned breeding.
E. Places Prohibited To Animals: It shall be unlawful for any person to take or permit any animal in or about any establishment or place or business where food or food products are sold or displayed, regardless of how the animal may be restrained, except for seeing eye dogs, hearing dogs and dogs assisting governmental officials. (Ord. 81-11-2, 11-5-1981; amd. 2003 Code)
F. Attacking Dogs: 
    1. It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any dog to allow the dog to attack, chase or worry any person, any domestic animal having a commercial value, or any domestic fowl. “Worry,” as used in this subsection, shall mean to harass by tearing, biting or shaking with the teeth. Killing of a dog by any person while the dog is engaged in any act prohibited by this subsection, is reasonably necessary to stop the dog’s actions, shall not be a violation of any other provision of this chapter, provided such killing in no way endangers another’s safety or property.
    2. When there have been three (3) reported attacks by the same dog, the animal control officer shall impound and destroy the animal pursuant to section 5-2-10 of this chapter. Prior to destroying such a dog, the animal control officer shall provide notice of the decision to destroy to the owner of the dog by written notice mailed to the owner’s last known address. The owner may oppose the dog’s destruction by making a written request for a hearing to the city attorney’s office within ten (10) days of the date of the mailing of the notice. Upon a request for a hearing, a hearing examiner, appointed by the city attorney, shall conduct a hearing as soon as is reasonably possible. At the hearing, the hearing examiner shall allow the animal control officer and the owner, or the representative of either, to present any relevant evidence, including reliable hearsay evidence, and shall then, based on the evidence presented, affirm or overturn the decision to destroy the dog. If the hearing examiner affirms the decision, the animal control officer shall destroy the dog as soon as possible. (Ord. 81-11-2, 11-5-1981; amd. Ord. 6-1-1988, 6-2-1988; Ord. 9-4-1999, 9-2-1999)
G. Vicious Animals: It shall be unlawful for the owner of a vicious animal to permit such animal to go or be off the premises of the owner or custodian unless such animal is under control and properly muzzled so as to prevent it from injuring any person or property. Every animal so vicious and dangerous that it cannot be effectively controlled by its owner or custodian shall be considered a hazard to public safety, and the division lieutenant may impound and destroy the animal pursuant to section 5-2-10 of this chapter. (Ord. 81-11-2, 11-5-1981; amd. Ord. 6-1-1988, 6-2-1988; 2003 Code)
H. Animal Waste Disposal: It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of an animal to permit the animal to defecate upon a public street, sidewalk, park or other area, or upon the property of another unless the owner or custodian removes and properly disposes of all animal waste that may result. (Ord. 81-11-2, 11-5-1981)
I. Carcass Disposal: It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian, or if ownership cannot be ascertained, for any person causing the death of an animal, to allow the carcass of a dead animal to remain anywhere in the city, whether interred or otherwise, and whether on private or public property. Disposal shall be at the county sanitary landfill by arrangement directly with the operator thereof who shall effect an appropriate interment at the landfill site. This subsection shall have no application to animals killed for consumption purposes, although unused portions of the carcass must be disposed of in accordance herewith. This provision shall not apply to domesticated animals as provided for in section 4-2-3A. (Ord. 12-4-1988, 12-1-1988; amd. 2003 Code)
J. Cruelty To Animals: 
    1. Cruelty to animals is prohibited. Cruelty shall consist of those acts designated in Utah Code Annotated section 76-9-301, together with injurious hobbling and malicious impounding.
    2. The operator of a motor vehicle that strikes and injures any domestic animal shall immediately stop and give such aid as can reasonably be rendered. In the absence of the owner, he shall also immediately notify the animal control division, furnishing requested facts relative to the incident. Emergency vehicles are exempted from the requirements of this provision.
    3. It shall be unlawful for any person to take or kill any birds, or to rob or destroy any nest, eggs or young of any bird.
K. Sale Of Animals: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, barter or give away any baby rabbits or fowl under two (2) months of age in any quantity less than six (6). Such animals shall not be artificially dyed or colored. It shall be unlawful for any person to offer a live animal as a premium prize, award, novelty or incentive to purchase merchandise. (Ord. 81-11-2, 11-5-1981; amd. 2003 Code)

5-2-8: NUISANCE ANIMALS:
Any owner or custodian of an animal causing a “nuisance,” as defined below, shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to the penalties provided herein. An animal creates a nuisance if it:
A. Causes damage to the property of anyone other than its owner;
B. Is a vicious animal not in compliance with subsection 5-2-7G of this chapter;
C. Causes unreasonable fouling of the air by odors;
D. Causes continuous unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings;
E. Molests passersby or chases passing vehicles;
F. Attacks other domestic animals;
G. Is otherwise determined by the division of animal control to be a public nuisance for any reason designated in section 4-2-1. (Ord. 81-11-2, 11-5-1981; amd. 2003 Code)

5-2-9: WILD ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale barter, give away, keep or purchase any wild animal which is not domesticated, or an animal belonging to an endangered species, except for the animal shelter, a zoological park, veterinary hospital, circus, sideshow, amusement show, or facility for education or scientific purposes if protective devices adequate to prevent such animal from escaping or injuring the public are provided. (Ord. 81-11-2, 11-5-1981)

5-2-10: IMPOUNDING:
A. Authority; Applicable Animals: The division lieutenant shall place any animals which he takes into custody in a designated animal impound facility. The following animals may be taken into custody by the division lieutenant and impounded without the filing of a complaint:
    1. Any animal being kept or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter;
    2. Any animal running at large contrary to the provisions of this chapter;
    3. Any animal which is by this chapter required to be licensed and is not licensed. Any animal not wearing a tag shall be presumed to be unlicensed for purposes of this section;
    4. Any abandoned animal;
    5. Animals which are not vaccinated for rabies in accordance with the requirements of this chapter; or
    6. Any vicious animal not in compliance with section 5-2-7G of this chapter.
B. Information Required: The impounding of any animal in this chapter shall require the following information to be kept by the division lieutenant:
    1. Complete description of the animal, including tag numbers if any;
    2. The manner and date of impound;
    3. The location of the pick up and name of the officer picking up the animal;
    4. The manner and date of disposal;
    5. The name and address of the redeemer or purchaser;
    6. The name and address of any person relinquishing an animal to the impound facility;
    7. All fees received; and
    8. All expenses accrued during impoundment. (Ord. 81-11-2, 11-5-1981; amd. 2003 Code)
C. Animals shall be impounded for a minimum of three (3) days before further disposition, unless relinquished by the owner or custodian for the express purpose of destruction. Disposition by destruction shall not occur until after the fifth day of impound, except in the case of attacking dogs or vicious animals when deemed necessary by the animal control officer in the public interest. Reasonable effort shall be made to notify the owner of any animal wearing a license or other identification during that time. Notice shall be deemed given when sent to the last known address of the listed owner. Where owner notification has occurred, and at the animal control officer’s discretion, impoundment of an animal may be extended at the owner’s expense for up to ten (10) days before disposition. (Ord. 6-1-1988, 6-2-1988)
D. Disposition: All dogs and cats, except for those quarantined or confined by court order, held longer than the minimum impound period, and all dogs and cats voluntarily relinquished to the impound facility, may be destroyed or sold as the division lieutenant shall direct. Any licensed animal impounded and having or suspected of having serious physical injury or contagious disease requiring medical attention, may, without waiting the minimum impound period, in the discretion of the division lieutenant, be released to the care of a veterinarian or destroyed for humane reasons, provided consent be obtained in advance from the owner or custodian, if known and available.
E. Redemption: The owner of any impounded animal or his authorized representative may redeem such animal before disposition as provided in subsection D of this section, provided he pays:
    1. The impound fee;
    2. The daily board charge;
    3. Veterinary costs incurred during the impound period, including rabies vaccination; and
    4. License fee, if required. (Ord. 81-11-2, 11-5-1981; amd. 2003 Code)
F. Fees For Impound; Waiver: 
    1. Impound fees shall be in such amounts as established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2000-03-003, 3-16-2000; amd. 2003 Code)
    2. The animal control officer, in his discretion, may waive an impound fee under appropriate circumstances for animals confined pursuant to section 5-2-6C of this chapter, but board charges shall be paid in any event. (Ord. 6-1-1988, 6-2-1988)
G. Adoption: 
    1. Animals may be given up after three (3) days to responsible adults for “adoption,” upon a showing that they can provide an adequate home, and disposition by that method shall relieve the city of further responsibility to any party for the animal. The city reserves the right to refuse any adoption. No warranty of any type may be given as to the health, disposition or suitability of the animal so adopted, although records shall be kept of any person to whom an animal is given. There shall be no charge for animals given up for adoption, except that no animal shall be given to a former owner, directly or indirectly, without payment by the recipient of all fees required by subsection E of this section, and any attempt to bypass the payment of impound charges shall be unlawful.
    2. Any person denied the right to adopt an animal may appeal the denial by filing a notice of appeal with the city recorder’s office within ten (10) days of the denial. The notice of appeal shall contain the applicant’s name, mailing address, daytime telephone number, and the relief sought. Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the appeal officer shall conduct a hearing within five (5) working days following receipt of the notice of appeal, unless an extension is requested by the applicant. At the hearing, the appeal officer shall allow the animal control officer and the petitioner, or the representative of either, to present any relevant evidence, including reliable hearsay evidence, and shall then, based on the evidence presented, affirm or overturn the decision to deny the adoption. During the appeal process, the adoptee animal shall be retained by the shelter. If the appeal officer affirms the denial, the adoptee animal shall be treated as any other animal. If the appeal officer overturns the denial, the adoptee animal shall be adopted to the petitioner as soon as reasonably practical.
    3. The city council shall appoint an appeal officer to hear a notice of appeal. (Ord. 2001-08-002, 8-2-2001)

5-2-11: STERILIZATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Definitions: As used in this section:
    AGREEMENT: The city of St. George animal shelter’s written animal sterilization agreement.
    ANIMAL: A cat or dog.
    ANIMAL SHELTER: The city of St. George animal shelter.
    CLAIMANT: An owner claiming an animal upon the animal’s second impound within a twelve (12) month period and upon any subsequent impound of that animal.
    PERSON: An individual, an entity or a representative of an entity.
    PROOF OF STERILIZATION: A written document signed by a veterinarian licensed under Utah Code Annotated title 58, chapter 28, the Utah Veterinary Practice Act, stating: 1) a specified animal has been sterilized; 2) the date on which the sterilization was performed; and 3) the location where the sterilization was performed.
    RECIPIENT: The person to whom the animal shelter transfers an animal for adoption.
    STERILIZATION DEPOSIT: The portion of a fee charged by the animal shelter to a recipient or claimant of an unsterilized animal to ensure the animal is timely sterilized in accordance with an agreement between the recipient or the claimant and the animal shelter.
    STERILIZED: An animal has been surgically altered, either by the spaying of a female animal or by the neutering of a male animal, so it is unable to reproduce.
    TRANSFER: The animal shelter sells, gives away, places for adoption or transfers an animal to a recipient.
B. Sterilization Required; Written Agreement: 
    1. The animal shelter may not transfer an animal that has not been sterilized, except as provided below.
    2. The animal shelter may transfer an animal for adoption that has not been sterilized only if:
        a. Recipient signs the animal shelter’s written agreement which states that the animal is not sterilized and the recipient agrees to be responsible for ensuring the animal is sterilized:
            (1) Within thirty (30) days after the agreement is signed, if the animal is six (6) months of age or older; or
            (2) If the animal is younger than six (6) months of age, within thirty (30) days after the animal becomes six (6) months of age; and
        b. The animal shelter receives from the recipient a sterilization deposit as provided under the terms of the written agreement executed by the recipient under this section.
C. Sterilization Deposit: 
    1. Recipient or claimant shall deposit with the animal shelter a sterilization deposit which will enable the recipient or claimant to take the animal for sterilization to a veterinarian with whom the animal shelter has an agreement that the veterinarian will bill the animal shelter directly for the sterilization.
    2. The deposit shall be forfeited to the animal shelter if proof of sterilization is not presented to the animal shelter in compliance with subsection B of this section. (Ord. 2002-05-004, 5-16-2002)
    3. Sterilization deposits shall reflect the average reduced cost of a sterilization of an animal, based on the gender and weight of the animal. The amount of the sterilization deposit shall conform to schedule A, which is attached to the ordinance codified herein and on file in the city office. (Ord. 2002-05-004, 5-16-2002; amd. 2003 Code)
    4. If a female animal and her litter are transferred to one person, a sterilization deposit is required only for the female animal.
    5. All sterilization deposits forfeited or unclaimed under this section shall be retained by the animal shelter and shall be used by the animal shelter only for:
        a. A program to sterilize animals, which may include a sliding scale fee program;
        b. A public education program to reduce and prevent overpopulation of animals and the related costs to the city;
        c. A follow up program to assure that animals transferred by the animal shelter are sterilized in accordance with the agreement; and
        d. Any additional costs incurred by the animal shelter in the administration of the requirements of this section.
D. Failure To Comply With Agreement: If a recipient or claimant fails to comply with the agreement:
    1. The failure is grounds for seizure and impoundment of the animal by the animal shelter;
    2. The recipient relinquishes all ownership rights regarding the animal and any claim to expenses incurred in maintenance and care of the animal; and
    3. The recipient forfeits the sterilization deposit.
E. Deposit; When Required For Redemption By Claimant: 
    1. Upon the second impound within a twelve (12) month period and upon any subsequent impound of an animal that is claimed by its owner, an animal shelter may release the impounded animal to its owner only upon payment of all impound fees required by the shelter; and:
        a. Receipt of proof the animal has been sterilized; or
        b. A sterilization deposit.
    2. The sterilization deposit shall be refunded to the claimant only if the claimant provides proof of sterilization to the animal shelter within thirty (30) days of release of the animal to the claimant.
F. Penalty; Appeal: 
    1. 
        a. A person who knowingly commits any of the violations in subsection F2 of this section is subject to a civil penalty of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) on a first violation of subsection F2 of this section, and a civil penalty of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) on any second or subsequent violation of subsection F2 of this section.
        b. The supervisor of the animal shelter imposes the civil penalties under this section.
    2. A person is subject to the civil penalties under subsection F1a of this section who:
        a. Falsifies any proof of sterilization submitted for the purpose of compliance with this section;
        b. Provides to the animal shelter or a licensed veterinarian inaccurate information regarding ownership of any animal required to be submitted for sterilization under this section;
        c. Submits to the animal shelter false information regarding sterilization fees or fee schedules; or
        d. Issues a check for insufficient funds for any sterilization deposit required of the person or claimant under this section.
    3. Any person or claimant who contests a civil penalty imposed under this section may appeal by filing a notice of appeal with the city recorder’s office within ten (10) days of the imposition of the penalty. The notice of appeal shall contain the person’s or claimant’s name, mailing address, daytime telephone number, and the relief sought. Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the appeal officer shall conduct a hearing within five (5) working days following receipt of the notice of appeal, unless an extension is requested by the person or claimant. At the hearing, the appeal officer shall allow the animal control officer and the person or claimant, or a representative of either, to present any relevant evidence, including reliable hearsay evidence, and shall then, based on the evidence presented, affirm, modify or overturn the imposition of penalty.
    4. The city council shall appoint an appeal officer to hear a notice of appeal from imposition of penalty.
    5. All penalties collected under this section shall be retained by the animal shelter to be used solely for the purposes under subsection C5 of this section. (Ord. 2002-05-004, 5-16-2002)

5-2-12: PENALTY:
A. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter, either by failing to do those acts required herein or by doing any act prohibited herein, shall be subject to the following:
    1. An infraction.
    2. In the case of the owner or custodian of a dog, three (3) or more different violations during any twelve (12) month period, may cause the division of animal control to revoke the license of such dog for a period of one year, subjecting the dog to impoundment in accordance with section 5-2-10 of this chapter. In such event, the owner or custodian at the time of impoundment shall be barred from redeeming the dog.
    3. Restitution of the cost of all damages incurred by anyone whose person, property or animal has been injured or destroyed by a dog or animal under section 5-2-7F of this chapter, or other provision of this chapter.
B. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1. (Ord. 81-11-2, 11-5-1981; amd. 2003 Code)

CHAPTER 3 CRIMES AND OFFENSES; PUBLIC SAFETY


5-3-1:       State Statute Provisions Adopted
5-3-2:       Sound Amplifiers And Speakers
5-3-3:       Reserved (Rep. by Ord. 2019-09-001, 9-5-2019)
5-3-4:       Loitering (Rep. by Ord. 2020-03-001, 3-5-2020)
5-3-5:       Aggressive Solicitation
5-3-6:       Prohibition Of Smoking
5-3-7:       Fireworks And Other Ignition Source Restrictions
5-3-8:       Consuming or Possessing Alcohol in a Public Place

5-3-1: STATE STATUTE PROVISIONS ADOPTED:
A. The city council, pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 10-8-84, hereby adopts by reference and incorporates into this code all sections of Utah Code Annotated title 53 (Public Safety Code); title 53A chapter 3, part 5 (State System of Public Education, Local School Boards, Offenses) and chapter 11, part 1 (Students in Public Schools, Compulsory Education Requirements); title 58 (Division of Occupational and Professional Licensing Act); title 62A, chapter 4a, parts 4 and 5 (Utah Human Services Code, Child and Family Services, Child Abuse or Neglect Reporting Requirements, Runaways); title 76 (Utah Criminal Code); title 77, chapter 7 (Utah Code of Criminal Procedure, Arrest, By Whom, and How Made) and title 78 (Judicial Code), that relate to class B misdemeanors, class C misdemeanors or infractions, including all amendments, deletions and additions made thereto as of the effective date hereof.
B. Any provisions of these sections are excluded to the extent that they would limit the discretion of the city attorney to charge an offense as either a misdemeanor or an infraction, as permitted by Utah Code Annotated section 10-8-84. (Ord. 10-4-1997, 10-16-1997; amd. Ord. 9-7-1999, 9-2-1999)

5-3-2: SOUND AMPLIFIERS AND SPEAKERS:
A. Prohibited Conduct: It is unlawful for any person on or adjacent to a city street or road to operate a sound amplifier or speaker which emits noise which can be heard more than two hundred feet (200') from the sound amplifier or speaker.
B. Exemptions: This section does not apply to:
    1. The operation of sound amplifiers or speakers used by law enforcement or emergency personnel in the performance of their official duties; and
    2. The operation of horns or other warning devices required or permitted by Utah Code Annotated section 41-6-146. (Ord. 3-1-98, 3-5-1998)
C. Penalty: A violation of this section is an infraction and upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 3-1-98, 3-5-1998; amd. 2003 Code)

5-3-3: RESERVED:
Rep. by Ord. 2019-09-001, 9-5-2019 (Ord. 9-3-1999, 9-2-1999)

5-3-4: LOITERING:
Rep. by Ord. 2020-03-001, 3-5-2020 (Ord. 3-2-98, 3-5-1998; amd. 2003 Code)

5-3-5: AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION1:
A. Definitions: For purposes of this section:
    AGGRESSIVE MANNER: Means and includes:
        1. Intentionally or recklessly making any physical contact with or touching another person in the course of the solicitation without the person’s consent;
        2. Following the person being solicited, if that conduct is: (a) intended to or likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person’s possession; or (b) is intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation;
        3. Continuing to solicit within five feet (5') of the person being solicited after the person has made a negative response, if continuing the solicitation is: (a) intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person’s possession; or (b) is intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation;
        4. Intentionally or recklessly blocking the safe or free passage of the person being solicited or requiring the person, or the driver of a vehicle, to take evasive action to avoid physical contact with the person making the solicitation. Acts authorized as an exercise of one’s constitutional right to picket or legally protest, and acts authorized by a permit issued by the city shall not constitute obstruction of pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
        5. Intentionally or recklessly using obscene or abusive language or gestures: a) intended to or likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person’s possession; or b) words intended to or reasonably likely to intimidate the person into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; or
        6. Approaching the person being solicited in a manner that: a) is intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person’s possession; or b) is intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation.
    AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE: A device linked to a financial institution’s account records, which is able to carry out transactions, including, but not limited to: account transfers, deposits, cash withdrawals, balance inquiries and mortgage and loan payments.
    AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE FACILITY: The area comprised of one or more automatic teller machines, and any adjacent space which is made available to banking customers after regular banking hours.
    BANK: Any banking corporation under any state or federal law.
    CHECK CASHING BUSINESS: Any person duly licensed by the superintendent of banks to engage in the business of cashing checks, drafts or money orders for consideration pursuant to the provisions of the banking laws.
    PUBLIC AREA: An area to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access, and includes, but is not limited to, alleys, bridges, buildings, driveways, parking lots, parks, playgrounds, plazas, sidewalks, and streets open to the general public, and the doorways and entrances to buildings and dwellings, and the grounds enclosing them.
    SOLICIT: To request an immediate donation of money or other thing of value from another person, regardless of the solicitor’s purpose or intended use of the money or other thing of value. The solicitation may be, without limitation, by the spoken, written or printed word, or by other means of communication.
B. Prohibited Acts: It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value, or to solicit the sale of goods or services:
    1. In an aggressive manner in a public area;
    2. In any public transportation vehicle or bus station or stop;
    3. Within fifteen feet (15') of any entrance or exit of any bank or check cashing business or within fifteen feet (15') of any automated teller machine during the hours of operation of such bank, automated teller machine or check cashing business without the consent of the owner or other person legally in possession of such facilities; provided, however, that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility;
    4. On private property, if the owner, tenant or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property, or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property; or
    5. From any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic on a public street, whether in exchange for cleaning the vehicle’s windows, or for blocking, occupying or reserving a public parking space, or directing the occupant to a public parking space; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the operator or passengers of such vehicle.
C. Construction: 
    1. This section is not intended to prescribe any demand for payment of services rendered or goods delivered.
    2. This section is not intended to create a result through enforcement that is absurd, impossible or unreasonable. This section should be held inapplicable in any such cases where its application would be unconstitutional under the constitution of the state or the Constitution of the United States of America.
D. Penalty: 
    1. A violation of this section is a Class C misdemeanor. A first offense shall carry a minimum fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or such imprisonment as ordered by the court, or both. If the person has been convicted of a violation of this section within the previous period of one (1) year, the person shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or imprisonment as determined by the court, or both.
    2. In lieu of, or in addition to the penalty provided in this section, a person in violation of this section may be required to perform community service work as described by the court.
    3. Any arrest or conviction under this section shall be disclosed to government social service agencies who request that the applicable public official be notified of such events.
1See also title 3, chapter 2, article B of this code for provisions regarding registration of solicitors.
(Ord. 9-4-1998, 9-24-1998)

5-3-6: PROHIBITION OF SMOKING:
A. Definitions: As used in this section, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
    MASS GATHERING: An outdoor assembly of one hundred (100) or more people on city owned property that reasonably can be expected to continue for two (2) or more hours.
    PUBLIC PARK: Public land which has been designated for park or recreational activities, including, but not limited to, a park, playground, nature trail, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis court, pedestrian or bicycle path, open space, wilderness area, or similar public land within the city which is under the control, operation, or management of the city. Public park does not include a public square.
    PUBLIC SQUARE: Property owned and maintained by the city that has been designated as a public square and is open for public use as provided in this chapter.
    SMOKE OR SMOKING: Possession, carrying, or holding a lighted pipe, cigar, electronic cigarette, or cigarette of any kind, or any other lighted smoking equipment, or the lighting or emitting or exhaling of smoke of a pipe, cigar, electronic cigarette, or cigarette of any kind, or of any other lighted smoking equipment.
B. Smoking Prohibited In Public Parks, Cemeteries And Near Mass Gatherings: 
    1. Prohibitions: Smoking is hereby prohibited in public parks, public squares, city owned cemeteries, within twenty-five feet (25') of bus stops, and within fifty feet (50') of mass gatherings.
    2. Posting Of Signs: “No smoking” signs or the international “no smoking” symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly and conspicuously posted in every public park and public square.
C. Penalty: A violation of this section is an infraction and, upon conviction, a person is subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1. Each violation shall be a separate offense. (Ord. 2017-04-002, 4-6-2017)

5-3-7: FIREWORKS AND OTHER IGNITION SOURCE RESTRICTIONS:
A. Definition: All terms relating to fireworks used in this section shall have the same meaning as they are defined in Utah Code Annotated section 53-7-202 of the Utah Fire Prevention Act.
B. Prohibition Of The Use Of Fireworks: 
    1. No person may detonate, ignite, or in any way use Class C common state approved explosives in any portion of the city designated by the fire chief and city council as a restricted area due to hazardous environmental conditions in accordance with Utah Code Annotated section 15A-5-202.5(1)(b). All restricted areas are shown on the Prohibited Use of Ignition Sources/Fireworks Map, which map is attached to the ordinance codified in this section and made a part of this section by this reference. Each year the city council shall approve the Prohibited Use of Ignition Sources/Fireworks Map in accordance with Utah Code Annotated section 15A-5-202.5(1)(b).
    2. No person may negligently discharge a Class C common state approved explosive. “Negligent discharge” has the same meaning as used in Utah Code Annotated section 73-7-225.
C. Prohibition Of The Use Of Ignition Sources: 
    1. No person may detonate, ignite, or in any way use any ignition source, including fireworks, lighters, matches, sky lanterns, and smoking materials, in any portion of the city designated by the fire chief and city council as a restricted area due to hazardous environmental conditions in accordance with Utah Code Annotated section 15A-5-202.5(1)(b). These areas include any brush-covered, forest-covered, and dry grass-covered areas; within two hundred feet (200') of waterways, trails, canyons, washes, ravines, or similar areas; and the wildland urban interface areas of the city when it is determined by the fire chief that there exists a hazardous environmental condition which necessitates restricting the use of any ignition source in those areas. All restricted areas are shown on the Prohibited Use of Ignition Sources/Fireworks Map, which map is made a part of this section by this reference. Each year the city council shall approve the Prohibited Use of Ignition Sources/Fireworks Map in accordance with Utah Code Annotated section 15A-5-202.5(1)(b).
    2. The fire chief is hereby authorized to designate other areas of the city as restricted. The fire chief shall cause the dates of restriction and the specific restricted areas to be posted on the city website when he declares an area to be restricted.
D. Enforcement: Enforcement shall be pursuant to Utah Code Annotated chapter 53-7, Utah Code Annotated section 15A-5-202.5(1)(b), and the International Fire Code.
E. Punishment: 
    1. A violation of subsection B of this section shall be prosecuted under Utah Code Annotated section 53-7-225.
    2. A violation of subsection C of this section shall be a Class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 2020-06-001 § 2, 6-4-2020)

5-3-8: CONSUMING OR POSSESSING ALCOHOL IN A PUBLIC PLACE:
A. It is unlawful for a person to consume or possess an open container of an alcoholic beverage in: a public park; a public square; a public roadway; a public sidewalk; any publicly owned building or real property; a bus stop; a public transport facility; an outdoor area open to the public on the premises of a commercial or manufacturing building, except with the permission of the owner or lawful possessor of the property; or a vacant lot in areas zoned for commercial or manufacturing uses except with the permission of the owner or lawful possessor of the property.
B. Exception: Alcohol may be consumed or possessed on a premises or in an area where an alcohol license or permit has been issued by the city authorizing the possession or consumption of an alcoholic beverage so long as there is conformance with the applicable license or permit restrictions.
C. Penalty: A violation of this section is a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1. (Ord. 2019-07-001 § 2, 7-11-2019)

CHAPTER 4 FIREARMS, WEAPONS1, TRAPPING OF ANIMALS


5-4-1:       Definitions
5-4-2:       Discharge Of Firearms, Dangerous Weapons
5-4-3:       Trapping Prohibited; Exceptions
5-4-4:       Penalty
1See also subsection 7-3-2J for prohibition of weapons in public parks and public squares.

5-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
DANGEROUS WEAPON: A firearm, or an object that in the manner of its use or intended use is capable of causing death or serious bodily injury, as defined by Utah Code Annotated section 76-10-501(6), as amended.
FIREARM: A pistol, revolver, shotgun, short barreled shotgun, rifle or short barreled rifle, or a device that could be used as a dangerous weapon from which is expelled a projectile by action of an explosive, as defined by Utah Code Annotated section 76-10-501(10), as amended.
TRAP: Any device, including a “body gripping” device, which entraps, snares or snaps closed on any animal.
TRAPPING: The use or placing of any device, including a “body gripping” device, capable of trapping, snaring or snapping closed on any animal. (Ord. 2017-12-005, 12-7-2017)

5-4-2: DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS, DANGEROUS WEAPONS:
Unless allowed by state law and city ordinance, it shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm or dangerous weapon within the city except when it is discharged at a city approved shooting range or gallery. (Ord. 2017-12-005, 12-7-2017)

5-4-3: TRAPPING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
A. It is unlawful for any person to trap, set a trap, or engage in trapping within the city, except for the following:
    1. Any trapping deemed necessary and performed by either the Utah Division of Wildlife Resources or the city police department;
    2. Live box or cage traps;
    3. When performed by a licensed trapper in accordance with Utah law; provided, that no lethal conibear type traps are used; or
    4. When performed on private property in accordance with Utah law by a person having legal ownership of or right to use the property. (Ord. 2017-12-005, 12-7-2017)

5-4-4: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any section of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 2017-12-005, 12-7-2017)

CHAPTER 5 MINORS


5A           Curfew
    5-5A-1:      Definitions
    5-5A-2:      Minor Curfew
    5-5A-3:      Liability Of Parents And Businesses
    5-5A-4:      Aiding Minor To Violate Curfew
    5-5A-5:      Exceptions
    5-5A-6:      Enforcement; Parental Responsibility
    5-5A-7:      Prima Facie Evidence
5B           Occupancy Of Rented Rooms By Minors
    5-5B-1:      Definitions
    5-5B-2:      Hotel Owner Responsibility
    5-5B-3:      Duty Of Parents
    5-5B-4:      Penalty

ARTICLE A. CURFEW


5-5A-1:      Definitions
5-5A-2:      Minor Curfew
5-5A-3:      Liability Of Parents And Businesses
5-5A-4:      Aiding Minor To Violate Curfew
5-5A-5:      Exceptions
5-5A-6:      Enforcement; Parental Responsibility
5-5A-7:      Prima Facie Evidence

5-5A-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this article shall have the following meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
CARE AND CUSTODY: The legal authority of a parent or guardian to supervise or otherwise be responsible for a minor, or the express authority given from such parent or legal guardian of a minor to a responsible adult to supervise or otherwise be responsible for the activities and care of the minor.
EMERGENCY ERRAND: Any errand or travel undertaken to directly and immediately seek to prevent or reduce the consequences of an illness or injury, criminal or potentially criminal activity, or fire or other accident and shall include the seeking of aid and assistance from medical or emergency response personnel or the purchase of medications.
MINOR: Any unmarried, unemancipated person who is not a member of the armed forces of the United States and who is under the age of eighteen (18) years for the purpose of this article.
PUBLIC PLACES: Any place open to the public whether privately owned, including, but not limited to, parking lots and the interiors and exteriors of commercial establishments such as restaurants, stores or places of entertainment. (Ord. 2002-1-004, 1-3-2002; amd. 2003 Code)

5-5A-2: MINOR CURFEW:
It shall be unlawful for any minor to remain or loiter upon any of the sidewalks, streets, alleys or public places in the city between the hours of twelve o’clock (12:00) midnight and five o’clock (5:00) A.M. the following morning. (Ord. 2002-1-004, 1-3-2002)

5-5A-3: LIABILITY OF PARENTS AND BUSINESSES:
A. Parents: It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian, or other person authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of any minor to knowingly allow or permit the minor to violate the provisions of this article.
B. Businesses: No person owning or operating a “business,” as defined by this code, shall knowingly permit any minor to remain on the premises of such business in violation of the provisions of this article. This article, however, shall not apply to any minor who is lawfully employed on the premises. (Ord. 2009-04-003, 4-2-2009)

5-5A-4: AIDING MINOR TO VIOLATE CURFEW:
It is unlawful for any person to assist, aid, abet or encourage any minor to violate the provisions of this article. It is unlawful for any person to use any influence or otherwise to entice or persuade any minor from his or her parents, guardians or other persons having charge or custody of such minor without the consent of such parents, guardians or custodians. (Ord. 2002-1-004, 1-3-2002)

5-5A-5: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any circumstances in which the minor is:
A. Accompanied by a parent, guardian or other responsible adult authorized by a parent or guardian to have care and custody of such minor;
B. Engaged in a legitimate trade, employment or occupation which requires the minor’s presence in or on the sidewalks, streets, alleys or public places while working at or traveling to or from such employment;
C. Engaged on an emergency errand directed by the minor’s parent, guardian or other responsible person having care and custody;
D. In a motor vehicle engaged in normal interstate travel beginning in, traveling through or ending in the city;
E. Attending, traveling to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, political or recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, school, civic organization, or other similar entity;
F. Exercising first amendment rights protected by the constitutions of the United States and the state of Utah such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or
G. Within the boundaries of the minor’s place of residence. (Ord. 2009-04-003, 4-2-2009)

5-5A-6: ENFORCEMENT; PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
A. Arrest And Citation: Any minor who is in violation of the provisions of this article is subject to arrest and citation.
B. Return To Custody Of Parent: Upon arrest, the minor shall be returned to the custody of the parent, guardian or other person charged with the care and custody of the minor.
C. Refusal To Take Custody: It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person charged with the care and custody of a minor who is in violation of this article to knowingly refuse to appear and take custody of said minor within a reasonable time after being ordered to do so by a peace officer. (Ord. 2002-1-004, 1-3-2002)
D. Misdemeanor: Any person who violates the provisions of this article is guilty of a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1. (Ord. 2002-1-004, 1-3-2002; amd. 2003 Code)

5-5A-7: PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE:
Except as provided in section 5-5A-5 of this article, any remaining or loitering upon any of the sidewalks, streets, alleys or public places in the city by a minor in excess of the times prescribed for said minor in section 5-5A-2 of this article is prima facie evidence that said remaining or loitering is unlawful. (Ord. 2002-1-004, 1-3-2002)

ARTICLE B. OCCUPANCY OF RENTED ROOMS BY MINORS


5-5B-1:      Definitions
5-5B-2:      Hotel Owner Responsibility
5-5B-3:      Duty Of Parents
5-5B-4:      Penalty

5-5B-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions are applicable to this article:
ADULT: Any competent person eighteen (18) years of age or older.
HOTEL: Any hotel, motel, apartment house or other rental units holding, or required to hold, a business license permit from the city.
MINOR CHILD: Any person seventeen (17) years of age or younger.
OCCUPANCY: Includes, but is not limited to, any type of rental, lease, sublease, or letting of hotel rooms for compensation or otherwise.
PARENT: The natural or adopted parent or relative eighteen (18) years or more of age, legal guardian, or a responsible adult authorized in writing by a parent or legal guardian of the minor child.
ROOM: Means and includes any unit or accommodation provided by a “hotel,” as defined in this section. (Ord. 3-1-92, 3-5-1992; amd. 2003 Code)

5-5B-2: HOTEL OWNER RESPONSIBILITY:
No hotel owner, operator or employee shall permit the occupancy of any room during the week prior to Easter Sunday of each year by any minor child unless such minor child is accompanied by a “parent,” as defined in section 5-5B-1 of this article. It shall constitute an offense of strict liability for a hotel owner to violate this section, and the hotel owner may be liable in addition to an agent or employee who actually permits the occupancy. (Ord. 3-1-92, 3-5-1992)

5-5B-3: DUTY OF PARENTS:
No “parent,” as defined in section 5-5B-1 of this article, who registers at a hotel with a minor child shall, except in the case of sickness, death or act of God, fail to remain registered and occupy the room during the entire period of occupancy by their minor child. (Ord. 3-1-92, 3-5-1992)

5-5B-4: PENALTY:
Violation of any portion of this article is an infraction and upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1, and each day during which a violation may continue shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 3-1-92, 3-5-1992; amd. 2003 Code)

TITLE 6 MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC

Chapter
1            Motor Vehicles
2            Parking Regulations
    2A           Civil Infractions
3            Roller Skates, Skateboards And Roller Blades
4            Parades And Processions
5            Personal Motorized Mobility Devices On Sidewalks

CHAPTER 1 MOTOR VEHICLES


6-1-1:       State Statute Provisions Adopted
6-1-2:       Speeding In Parking Lots
6-1-3:       Negligent Collision
6-1-4:       Improper Lookout
6-1-5:       Cutting Through Corners
6-1-6:       State Traffic Laws In Full Force And Effect On Washington County School District Property

6-1-1: STATE STATUTE PROVISIONS ADOPTED:
A. The city council, pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 10-8-84, hereby adopts by reference and incorporates into this code all sections of Utah Code Annotated title 41 (Motor Vehicle Act), excluding chapter 6, article 14 (Stopping, Standing and Parking); title 72, chapter 7, part 4 (Protection of Highways Act, Vehicle Load Limits) and chapter 9 (Motor Carrier Safety Act), that relate to class B misdemeanors, class C misdemeanors or infractions, including all amendments, deletions and additions made thereto as of the effective date hereof.
B. Any provisions of these sections are excluded to the extent that they would limit the discretion of the city attorney to charge an offense as either a misdemeanor or an infraction, as permitted by Utah Code Annotated section 10-8-84. (Ord. 10-4-1997, 10-16-1997; amd. Ord. 9-7-1999, 9-2-1999)

6-1-2: SPEEDING IN PARKING LOTS:
It shall be a class C misdemeanor for any person operating a motor vehicle in any area open to the public for vehicular traffic, including, but not limited to, private parking lots, to engage in any speed contest, exhibition of speed, or speeding too fast for the conditions in the area. (Ord. 2003-04-006, 4-17-2003)

6-1-3: NEGLIGENT COLLISION:
It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle in a manner as to cause the vehicle to collide with any vehicle, person or object. (Ord. 2009-04-002, 4-2-2009)

6-1-4: IMPROPER LOOKOUT:
No person shall drive a vehicle on the streets of the city without keeping a reasonable and proper lookout for traffic. (Ord. 2009-04-002, 4-2-2009)

6-1-5: CUTTING THROUGH CORNERS:
A. Avoiding Traffic Regulation: It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle, with the purpose and intent of avoiding obedience of any traffic control device, to:
    1. Drive through any private driveway or across any private property, whether vacant or occupied; or
    2. Drive across any public property not intended or marked for use as a public street.
B. Harass Or Annoy: The driver of a vehicle shall not drive through any private driveway or across private property for the purpose and with the intent of harassing or annoying the private property owner or the owner’s patrons.
    1. Prima Facie Evidence: It shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section if a person drives a motor vehicle, without stopping, upon or through any such private driveway, lot, or similar area, for any purpose. (Ord. 2009-04-002, 4-2-2009)

6-1-6: STATE TRAFFIC LAWS IN FULL FORCE AND EFFECT ON WASHINGTON COUNTY SCHOOL DISTRICT PROPERTY:
A. Property Owned By Washington County School District: All streets, roadways, alleys, and parking lots on property owned or controlled by the Washington County school district are “streets” or “highways” as these terms are used in title 41, chapter 6a, Utah traffic code as adopted by section 6-1-1 of this chapter.
B. Penalty: A violation of this section shall be the same level offense as specified in title 41, chapter 6a, Utah traffic code and carry the same minimum and maximum penalties as the offense in said title; upon conviction, a person is subject to the same fine, for said offense, as provided in the uniform fine and bail forfeiture schedule for the state of Utah. (Ord. 2011-09-002, 9-22-2011)

CHAPTER 2 PARKING REGULATIONS


6-2-1:       Stopping Or Parking On Roadway
6-2-2:       Parallel Stopping Or Parking Upon Roadway
6-2-3:       Unattended Vehicle; Duty Of Driver
6-2-4:       Stopping Or Parking Prohibited In Specified Places
6-2-5:       Parking In Alleys
6-2-6:       Parking Time Limited
6-2-7:       Parking Contiguous To Schools
6-2-8:       Parking On Narrow Streets Or Alleys
6-2-9:       Standing and Parking On One-Way Roadway
6-2-10:      Parking For Certain Purposes Prohibited
6-2-11:      Approach To Parking Space
6-2-12:      Truck Parking Prohibited
6-2-13:      Exceptions From Regulation
6-2-14:      Parking In Handicapped Zones
6-2-15:      Parking In Fire Lanes
6-2-16:      Lights On Parked Vehicles
6-2-17:      Parking Of Bicycles
6-2-18:      Traffic Control Devices
6-2-19:      Police Officer Authorized To Move Vehicle
6-2-20:      Parking On Unimproved Lots, Vehicle Display
6-2-21:      Penalty
2A           Civil Infractions
    6-2A-1:      Intent
    6-2A-2:      Civil Violations Hearing Examiner
    6-2A-3:      Acts Made Civil Infractions
    6-2A-4:      Notice Of Infraction
    6-2A-5:      Response To Notice
    6-2A-6:      Fee For Infractions
    6-2A-7:      Contesting A Civil Infraction
    6-2A-8:      Special Provisions Relating To Parking Regulations
    6-2A-9:      Civil Appeals
    6-2A-10:     Criminal Violation
    6-2A-11:     Civil Collection Actions

6-2-1: STOPPING OR PARKING ON ROADWAY:
No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon any roadway within the city when it is practical to stop, park or leave such vehicle off the roadway. In every event, an unobstructed width of the roadway opposite a standing vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles and a clear view of such stopped vehicles shall be available from a distance of two hundred feet (200') in each direction upon such roadway. (Ord. 12-3-91, 12-19-1991)

6-2-2: PARALLEL STOPPING OR PARKING UPON ROADWAY:
No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the right hand wheels of the vehicle as close as practical to, but in any event within twelve inches (12") of the curb or edge of the roadway, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (Ord. 12-3-91, 12-19-1991)

6-2-3: UNATTENDED VEHICLE; DUTY OF DRIVER:
A. No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition and removing the key, placing the transmission in “park” or the gears in “low,” or “reverse” if the vehicle has a manual shift, or effectively setting the brakes thereon, and, when standing upon any perceptible grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway.
B. No person driving or in charge of a truck in excess of three-fourths (3/4) ton rated capacity shall park or stand such truck on any street, parking lot or area abutting any street within the city where there is a perceptible grade without first securely blocking the wheels of the truck and turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway. (Ord. 12-3-91, 12-19-1991)

6-2-4: STOPPING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES:
A. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, whether attended or unattended:
    1. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street;
    2. On a sidewalk;
    3. Within an intersection;
    4. On a crosswalk;
    5. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet (30') of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings;
    6. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
    7. Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway, or within a highway tunnel;
    8. On any railroad tracks;
    9. On any controlled access highway;
    10. In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including crossovers;
    11. In front of a public or private driveway;
    12. Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant;
    13. Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection;
    14. Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway;
    15. Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire station; and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within seventy-five feet (75') of said entrance when properly signposted;
    16. Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing; at any place where official traffic control devices prohibit parking.
B. No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under such person’s control into any prohibited area or any unlawful distance from the curb. (Ord. 12-3-91, 12-19-1991)

6-2-5: PARKING IN ALLEYS:
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley except during the necessary and expeditious loading and unloading of merchandise and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property or interfere with the free movement of traffic through the alley. (Ord. 12-3-91, 12-19-1991)

6-2-6: PARKING TIME LIMITED:
No person who owns or has possession or control of any vehicle or trailer shall park or allow the vehicle or trailer to be parked upon any street or alley for more than a consecutive period of ninety-six (96) hours. (Ord. 2019-08-004 § 2, 8-1-2019)

6-2-7: PARKING CONTIGUOUS TO SCHOOLS:
No person shall park a vehicle upon that side of any street contiguous to any school property during school hours when posted with signs prohibiting the same. (Ord. 12-3-91, 12-19-1991)

6-2-8: PARKING ON NARROW STREETS OR ALLEYS:
No person shall park a vehicle:
A. On any private or public street or alley where the width of the roadway is less than twenty feet (20');
B. On the south or east side of any private or public street or alley where the width of the roadway is over twenty feet (20'), but less than thirty feet (30'), unless otherwise directed by traffic control devices;
C. Upon any private driveway within a central traffic district where the width of the driveway is less than twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 12-3-91, 12-19-1991)

6-2-9: STANDING AND PARKING ON ONE-WAY ROADWAY:
Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a one-way roadway shall be stopped or parked parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway in the direction of authorized traffic movement with its right hand wheels within twelve inches (12") of the right hand curb or as close as practical to the right edge of the right hand shoulder. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon the left side of any such roadway. (Ord. 12-3-91, 12-19-1991)

6-2-10: PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED:
No person shall park, stand, stop or operate a vehicle upon any roadway, parking lot or area abutting any roadway within the city, any vehicle for the principal purpose of:
A. Greasing, repairing or servicing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency;
B. Selling foodstuffs or any other merchandise. (Ord. 2003-01-011, 1-23-2003)

6-2-11: APPROACH TO PARKING SPACE:
A. No person shall move a motor vehicle in any manner or leave a parking space and then reenter it to avoid the intent of this chapter.
B. Every driver of a motor vehicle about to enter a parking space being vacated by another motor vehicle shall stop the vehicle and wait to the rear of the vehicle in actual process of vacating a parking space and having so waited shall have prior right to the parking space over all other drivers.
C. No driver of a motor vehicle shall stop his vehicle ahead of a parking space being vacated and attempt to interfere with a driver who has waited properly to the rear of a parking space being vacated.
D. No driver of a motor vehicle shall stop and wait for a parking space to be vacated unless the vehicle vacating the space is actually in motion in the process of vacating such space.
E. No person shall park any motor vehicle in such a manner or under such conditions as to obstruct any sidewalk, crossing or private driveway or to obstruct the view of any person within such sidewalk, crossing or driveway of the adjacent roadway for a distance of one hundred feet (100'). (Ord. 12-3-91, 12-19-1991)

6-2-12: TRUCK PARKING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing on any public road, street, alley or municipal property a semi-truck or trailer, except for the commercial delivery or loading of cargo, and for such purpose the parking or standing shall be limited to a period not in excess of four (4) hours. “Semi-truck” is defined as any vehicle/trailer combination that has at least three (3) axles and is of the type commonly used for commercial transport purposes; “trailer,” as used herein, refers to a carrier used for cargo or commercial purposes and intended to be used in tandem with a tractor or motorized vehicle. (Ord. 12-3-91, 12-19-1991)
A. The chief of police, or an authorized representative or designee, after making reasonable effort to locate the owner, is empowered to effect removal and impoundment of a semi-truck or trailer that is in violation of this section, and the cost of removal and impoundment shall be charged to the owner or person claiming the impounded vehicle or trailer. (Ord. 12-3-91, 12-19-1991; amd. 2003 Code)
B. Nothing herein shall be construed to abrogate the provisions of the uniform fire code as adopted by the city in its application to semi-trucks or trailers hauling flammable products, and the parking of such vehicles shall be prohibited in the manner set forth therein. (Ord. 12-3-91, 12-19-1991)

6-2-13: EXCEPTIONS FROM REGULATION:
The provisions of sections 6-2-1 through 6-2-12 of this chapter shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is disabled while on the paved or main traveled portion of any roadway in such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving such disabled vehicle in such position. (Ord. 12-3-91, 12-19-1991)

6-2-14: PARKING IN HANDICAPPED ZONES:
Except for those vehicles carrying a distinctive handicapped license plate or transferable identification card and actually transporting a handicapped person, no person shall park any motor vehicle in a parking space located on any public property or private property which is used or intended for use by the public, which is clearly identified as reserved for use by the handicapped. For purposes of this section, a parking space is clearly identified as reserved for use by the handicapped if it has vertical signage which includes the international symbol of accessibility that is visible from a passing vehicle. A parking space reserved for use by the handicapped includes an access aisle, if provided, that is adjacent to and considered part of the parking space if the access aisle is clearly marked on the surface. (Ord. 2001-12-001, 12-13-2001)

6-2-15: PARKING IN FIRE LANES:
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, whether attended or unattended, in any portion of a fire lane, or obstruct any portion thereof, unless specifically marked and designated for parking with the written approval of the fire chief. (Ord. 12-3-91, 12-19-1991; amd. 2003 Code)

6-2-16: LIGHTS ON PARKED VEHICLES:
A. Whenever any vehicle is lawfully parked upon any street within a residential district, no lights need be displayed upon the parked vehicle.
B. Except as provided in subsection A of this section, whenever any vehicle is lawfully parked upon a street during any hours between one-half (1/2) hour after sunset and one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise and in the event there is sufficient light to reveal persons and vehicles within a distance of one thousand feet (1,000') upon such street or highway, no lights need be displayed upon such parked vehicle.
C. Except as provided in subsection A of this section, whenever any vehicle is parked or stopped on a street, or shoulder adjacent thereto, whether attended or unattended, during the hours between one-half (1/2) hour after sunset and one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise and there is insufficient light to reveal any person or object within a distance of one thousand feet (1,000') upon such street, such vehicle so parked or stopped shall display parking lamps meeting the requirements of the Utah motor vehicle division. Any lighted headlamps upon such a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed. (Ord. 12-3-91, 12-19-1991)

6-2-17: PARKING OF BICYCLES:
A. Except as provided herein, bicycles parked anywhere on a street within the city shall conform with the requirements of this chapter regarding the parking of vehicles.
B. A bicycle may not be parked on any roadway in a manner as to obstruct the movement of a legally parked motor vehicle.
C. Unless otherwise prohibited or restricted by an official traffic control device, a person may park a bicycle on a sidewalk so long as the parking of such bicycle does not impede the normal and reasonable movement of pedestrian or other traffic.
D. Except as otherwise prohibited or restricted by an official traffic control device, a bicycle may be parked on the roadway at any angle to the curb or edge of the roadway at any location where parking is allowed, and may be parked on the roadway abreast of another bicycle or bicycles near the side of the roadway at any location where parking is allowed. (Ord. 12-3-91, 12-19-1991)

6-2-18: TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
A. Authority For Placement: The city engineer is hereby authorized to place traffic control devices prohibiting or restricting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles on any highway where, in his opinion, such stopping, standing or parking is dangerous to those using the highway, or where the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would unduly interfere with the free movement of traffic. Where appropriate signs or traffic control devices have been erected or placed according to this section, no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in violation of the restriction indicated by such devices.
B. Curb Markings Defined: When the city engineer determines that it is appropriate to use painted curbs or zones to indicate parking restrictions, such markings shall designate the zones and shall have the meanings herein set forth.
    1. “Red” shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time, except for the individual purposes of emergency vehicles.
    2. “Yellow” with the words “restricted zone” stenciled thereon, shall mean no stopping, standing or parking except as stated on any accompanying signs or markings giving notice thereof, except that this provision shall not apply on Sundays and legal holidays. (Ord. 12-3-91, 12-19-1991)

6-2-19: POLICE OFFICER AUTHORIZED TO MOVE VEHICLE:
A. Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle in violation of this chapter, such officer is hereby authorized to move such vehicle, or require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position off the roadway, or in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Any police officer is authorized to remove or cause to be removed to a place of safety any unattended vehicle illegally left standing upon any highway, bridge, causeway or in any tunnel in such position or under such circumstances as to obstruct the normal movement of traffic.
C. Any police officer is authorized to remove or cause to be removed to the nearest garage or other place of safety any vehicle found upon a highway when:
    1. Report has been made that such vehicle has been stolen or taken without the consent of its owner; or
    2. The person or persons in charge of such vehicle are unable to provide for its custody or removal; or
    3. When the person driving or in control of such vehicle is arrested for an alleged offense for which the officer is required by law to take the person arrested before a proper magistrate without unnecessary delay; or
    4. When it is discovered that there are five (5) or more outstanding parking violations with respect to the subject vehicle. (Ord. 12-3-91, 12-19-1991)

6-2-20: PARKING ON UNIMPROVED LOTS, VEHICLE DISPLAY:
Parking of any vehicle for display or for commercial purposes on an unimproved lot or on an unpaved surface is prohibited. (Ord. 2005-06-001, 6-2-2005)

6-2-21: PENALTY:
Persons guilty of violating sections of this chapter shall be punished as follows:
+---------------------+--------------+---------+------------------+-----------------------+
|      Violation      | Code Section |   Fee   | Fee After 5 Days |   Fee After 10 Days   |
+---------------------+--------------+---------+------------------+-----------------------+
| Handicapped zone    | 6-2-14       | $125.00 | $145.00          | $165.00 ($25.00       |
|                     |              |         |                  | per month thereafter) |
+---------------------+--------------+---------+------------------+-----------------------+
| Fire lane violation | 6-2-15       | $35.00  | $45.00           | $55.00 ($25.00        |
|                     |              |         |                  | per month thereafter) |
+---------------------+--------------+---------+------------------+-----------------------+
| Parking of vehicle  | 6-2-20       | $25.00  | $75.00           | $100.00 ($25.00       |
| for display         |              |         |                  | per day thereafter)   |
+---------------------+--------------+---------+------------------+-----------------------+
| All other parking   |              | $25.00  | $35.00           | $45.00 ($25.00        |
| violations          |              |         |                  | per month thereafter) |
+---------------------+--------------+---------+------------------+-----------------------+
(Ord. 2005-06-001, 6-2-2005)

ARTICLE A. CIVIL INFRACTIONS1


6-2A-1:      Intent
6-2A-2:      Civil Violations Hearing Examiner
6-2A-3:      Acts Made Civil Infractions
6-2A-4:      Notice Of Infraction
6-2A-5:      Response To Notice
6-2A-6:      Fee For Infractions
6-2A-7:      Contesting A Civil Infraction
6-2A-8:      Special Provisions Relating To Parking Regulations
6-2A-9:      Civil Appeals
6-2A-10:     Criminal Violation
6-2A-11:     Civil Collection Actions
1See also title 1, chapter 4 of this code for general penalty provisions.

6-2A-1: INTENT:
It is the intent of the city to decriminalize certain violations of municipal law which have traditionally been regulated by the criminal laws, including, but not limited to, parking violations. The procedures set forth below shall be utilized to expedite resolution of cases coming within their application and to remove the social stigma attached to criminal actions. (Ord. 12-5-91, 12-19-1991)

6-2A-2: CIVIL VIOLATIONS HEARING EXAMINER:
The position of civil violations hearing examiner is hereby created within the legal department. A hearing examiner shall be a member in good standing of the Utah State Bar and shall perform all duties and exercise all powers prescribed in this article. A hearing examiner may perform his duties through subordinates, except that a hearing shall be conducted only by a hearing examiner if a person charged with a civil infraction so requires in writing. The amount of a hearing examiner’s or subordinate’s compensation shall not be based directly or indirectly upon the outcome of cases heard by the hearing examiner or subordinate, as the case may be. (Ord. 12-5-91, 12-19-1991)

6-2A-3: ACTS MADE CIVIL INFRACTIONS:
The following acts are hereby declared to be civil infractions, and not criminal offenses, and they shall be within the jurisdiction of the city’s civil violations hearing examiner:
Violation of any of the parking regulations set forth in chapter 2 of this title. (Ord. 12-5-91, 12-19-1991; amd. Ord. 9-2-1999, 9-2-1999)

6-2A-4: NOTICE OF INFRACTION:
A written notice of infraction shall be issued to each person charged with a civil infraction, which notice shall contain not less than the following information:
A. The name and address of the person charged with the civil infraction;
B. The civil infraction charged;
C. The date and place of the civil infraction;
D. If the civil infraction involved the use of a motor vehicle, the make of the vehicle and its license number;
E. Written warning that the notice of infraction must be responded to at the police department; and
F. Other information, including, in the discretion of the civil violation hearing examiner, information related to payment by mail. (Ord. 12-5-91, 12-19-1991)

6-2A-5: RESPONSE TO NOTICE:
A. Any person to whom a notice of infraction has been issued shall respond within five (5) days thereof by:
    1. Paying the fee described in section 6-2A-6 of this article;
    2. Contesting the violation in the manner described in section 6-2A-7 of this article; or
    3. Demonstrating financial inability to pay the applicable fee on any reasonable terms, in which event the hearing examiner may require the performance of a stipulated public service to be performed in not more than thirty (30) days in lieu of paying the fee.
B. Fees may be paid by mail, but all risk that payments may be lost in the mail shall be on the sender, and payments shall be considered made on the day received by the city and not on the day the payment is mailed. (Ord. 12-5-91, 12-19-1991)

6-2A-6: FEE FOR INFRACTIONS:
A. Fees and other money related to civil infractions shall be paid to the finance department, except in the case of parking violations, in which case the fees are paid to the police department. Payment shall be in such manner, not inconsistent with this article, as the director of administrative services shall direct, but fees shall not be paid to the hearing examiner and/or his subordinate in any event. (Ord. 2006-07-001, 7-6-2006; amd. Ord. 2016-01-003, 1-21-2016)
B. The fee for violation of a parking regulation shall be as follows:
    1. Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) if paid or contested within five (5) calendar days after a notice of infraction is issued.
    2. Thirty-five dollars ($35.00) if paid or contested between six (6) calendar days and ten (10) calendar days after a notice of infraction is issued.
    3. Forty-five dollars ($45.00) if paid or contested between eleven (11) calendar days and fifteen (15) calendar days after a notice of infraction is issued.
    4. A parking infraction not paid within fifteen (15) calendar days after the notice of infraction is issued shall, in addition to the forty-five dollar ($45.00) fee provided above, accrue additional penalty at the rate of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per month until paid. A parking infraction not paid within fifteen (15) calendar days shall be deemed to be in default and shall thereafter be subject to the remedies described in sections 6-2A-10 and 6-2A-11 of this article.
    5. Notwithstanding the above, the fee for a violation of section 6-2-14 or 6-2-15 of this chapter shall be as provided in section 6-2-21 of this chapter. (Ord. 2006-07-001, 7-6-2006)

6-2A-7: CONTESTING A CIVIL INFRACTION:
A. Any person charged with a civil infraction may contest the same instead of paying the fee. Such contest shall be commenced no later than fifteen (15) calendar days after the notice of infraction has been issued by causing written request for a hearing to be delivered to the office of the civil violations hearing examiner. Failure to contest the notice of infraction within five (5) calendar days or ten (10) calendar days as provided in section 6-2A-6 of this article, may affect the fee chargeable in the manner indicated in the event the violation is not successfully contested. If a person contesting a civil infraction refuses to give a correct mailing address on the written notice of contest, the infraction shall be deemed to be in default and not contested.
B. When a civil infraction is contested, the hearing examiner shall conduct a civil hearing with respect thereto. The notice of infraction shall constitute prima facie evidence that the infraction alleged therein actually occurred. The hearing shall be conducted as informally as the circumstances will allow and shall be based on the civil standards of a preponderance of the evidence. At the hearing, any party may be required to testify.
C. The hearing examiner shall decide if the alleged civil infraction occurred. If the hearing examiner finds that it did not occur, the notice of infraction shall be without any further force or effect. If the hearing examiner finds that it did occur, the person to whom the notice of infraction was issued shall have the obligation set forth in sections 6-2A-5 and 6-2A-6 of this article. Compliance with those sections shall be within five (5) calendar days after the hearing, unless the decision is given by mail rather than at the hearing, in which event compliance shall be within ten (10) calendar days after the decision is mailed to the address given on the written notice of contest. The notice of infraction shall be considered to be in default if there is not compliance with this article in the time periods provided in this subsection. (Ord. 12-5-91, 12-19-1991)

6-2A-8: SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO PARKING REGULATIONS:
If the civil infraction relates to a parking regulation, the following rules shall apply:
A. The notice of infraction may be issued by affixing the same to the subject motor vehicle in a conspicuous place.
B. Notwithstanding section 6-2A-4 of this article, a notice of infraction placed on a parked motor vehicle need not include a name and address.
C. Whenever a motor vehicle has been parked in violation of any parking regulation, the person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be prima facie responsible for such violation and liable for payment of the applicable fee.
D. Any motor vehicle with respect to which five (5) or more notices of infraction are in default is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the city or any police office employed by the city may authorize said motor vehicle to be towed from the public streets at the expense and risk of the registered owner. Said motor vehicle shall be held and not released until the unpaid fees, together with reasonable costs of towing and storage, have been paid.
E. If a motor vehicle has been towed from the public streets pursuant to the provisions of this section and is being held for the payment of fees and charges, the owner thereof, or the agent of the owner, may request in writing a hearing before the civil violations hearing examiner to determine the validity of the action taken with respect to said motor vehicle. Said hearing shall take place within seventy-two (72) hours from the date of the request, unless the applicant agrees to a longer period of time before the hearing. The hearing examiner may order the release of any motor vehicle without cost to the owner or the owner’s agent if said motor vehicle was towed from the public streets and is being held in violation of this article or other applicable law. (Ord. 12-5-91, 12-19-1991)

6-2A-9: CIVIL APPEALS:
Any person dissatisfied with the decision of the civil violations hearing examiner may appeal the same within fifteen (15) calendar days of the date of the decision to the court with original jurisdiction over traffic citations, and that court shall hear the action de novo in the manner described in section 6-2A-7 of this article. Failure to respond to a notice of infraction shall not be a decision from which an appeal can be taken. (Ord. 12-5-91, 12-19-1991)

6-2A-10: CRIMINAL VIOLATION:
A. Notwithstanding any contrary provision in this article, it shall be a class C misdemeanor, with exclusive jurisdiction in an appropriate court:
    1. For a person to whom a notice of infraction has been issued to allow the subject action to go into default; or
    2. For a person to willfully fail or refuse to completely perform the public service agreed to, pursuant to section 6-2A-5 of this article.
B. For the purposes of this section, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that the notice of infraction and any other notices have been received by the addressee. (Ord. 12-5-91, 12-19-1991)

6-2A-11: CIVIL COLLECTION ACTIONS:
The city may bring civil suit in appropriate courts to recover the amount of overdue and unpaid fees, together with any other reasonable charges related thereto. (Ord. 12-5-91, 12-19-1991)

CHAPTER 3 ROLLER SKATES, SKATEBOARDS AND ROLLER BLADES


6-3-1:       Downtown Sidewalks
6-3-2:       Arterial Roadways
6-3-3:       Penalty

6-3-1: DOWNTOWN SIDEWALKS:
No person upon roller skates, roller blades, go-peds or skateboards shall go upon any sidewalk within the downtown “historic district,” as defined in section 10-13E-1, made a part hereof by reference, or upon any private or public property where prohibited by signs. (Ord. 5-5-1998, 5-21-1998)

6-3-2: ARTERIAL ROADWAYS:
No person upon roller skates, roller blades, go-peds or skateboards shall go upon any arterial roadway of the city where the posted speed limit is forty (40) miles per hour or more, except while crossing such roadway in a crosswalk, and when so crossing, the person shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. (Ord. 5-5-1998, 5-21-1998)

6-3-3: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be issued a civil infraction citation as provided in chapter 2, article A of this title, and the fee for violation shall be governed by section 6-2A-6 of this title, except that the amounts to be paid for a first offense shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00), thirty dollars ($30.00) after six (6) days, and thirty-five dollars ($35.00) after eleven (11) days. Amounts to be paid for a second offense shall be fifty dollars ($50.00), fifty-five dollars ($55.00) after six (6) days, and sixty dollars ($60.00) after eleven (11) days. If a violator is under the age of eighteen (18) years, notice shall be given to the appropriate parent or guardian of the citation as well as any further notice in the event of a failure to pay. (Ord. 5-5-1998, 5-21-1998)

CHAPTER 4 PARADES AND PROCESSIONS


6-4-1:       Defined
6-4-2:       Permit Required; Exceptions
6-4-3:       Application For Permit; Fee; Bond
6-4-4:       Standards For Issuance
6-4-5:       Notice Of Rejection
6-4-6:       Appeal Procedure
6-4-7:       Alternate Permit
6-4-8:       Notice To Other City Officials
6-4-9:       Contents Of Permit
6-4-10:      Duties Of Permittee
6-4-11:      Public Conduct During Parades
6-4-12:      Revocation Of Permit
6-4-13:      Penalty

6-4-1: DEFINED:
“Parade” is any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, park or other public place in the city. (Ord. 1-1-1988, 1-7-1988)

6-4-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS:
A. No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade, unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the chief of police.
B. This chapter shall not apply to:
    1. Funeral processions;
    2. Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, providing such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; or
    3. A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. (Ord. 1-1-1988, 1-7-1988)

6-4-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FEE; BOND:
A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with the chief of police on forms provided by such officer.
A. Filing Period: An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the chief of police not less than thirty (30) days nor more than sixty (60) days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade.
B. Information Required: The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information:
    1. The name, address and telephone number of the person or organization seeking to conduct such parade;
    2. If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible head of such organization;
    3. The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct;
    4. The date when the parade is to be conducted;
    5. The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point;
    6. The approximate number and type of entries expected to participate in the parade;
    7. The hours when such parade will start and terminate;
    8. A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed;
    9. The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade;
    10. The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly area or areas;
    11. The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade;
    12. If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of, or for any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the chief of police a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf;
    13. Any additional information which the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should issue.
C. Late Applications: The chief of police, where good cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application hereunder which is filed less than thirty (30) days before the date such parade is proposed to be conducted. (Ord. 1-1-1988, 1-7-1988)
D. Fee; If Required: There shall be paid at the time of filing the application for a parade permit a fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city council if the parade route is to include or cross St. George Boulevard or Bluff Street, because of the increased police personnel necessary for traffic purposes on those thoroughfares. There shall be no fee for parade permits at other locations.
E. Bond: In the event it is expected that the parade will result in the necessity of street cleaning, has the potential for unusual noise or other disruption of commercial activity in the city, or will otherwise pose a hazard to the order and economy of the city, the chief of police may in his discretion require the permittee to post a bond in an amount not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) to assure compliance with the standards and conditions required in the permit. (Ord. 1-1-1988, 1-7-1988)

6-4-4: STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE:
The chief of police shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that:
A. The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route;
B. The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city;
C. The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto;
D. The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas;
E. The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire;
F. The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance;
G. The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route;
H. The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, goods or commercial activity, and is not designed to promote private profit. (Ord. 1-1-1988, 1-7-1988)

6-4-5: NOTICE OF REJECTION:
The chief of police shall act upon the application for a parade permit within ten (10) days after the filing thereof. If the chief of police disapproves the application, he shall mail to the applicant within ten (10) days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of his action, stating the reasons for his denial of the permit. (Ord. 1-1-1988, 1-7-1988)

6-4-6: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade permit to the city council. The appeal shall be taken within ten (10) days after notice. The city council shall act upon the appeal within ten (10) days after its receipt. (Ord. 1-1-1988, 1-7-1988)

6-4-7: ALTERNATE PERMIT:
The chief of police, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept such alternate permit shall, within ten (10) days after notice of the action of the chief of police, file a written notice of acceptance with the chief of police. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade permit under this chapter. (Ord. 1-1-1988, 1-7-1988)

6-4-8: NOTICE TO OTHER CITY OFFICIALS:
Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the chief of police shall send a copy thereof to the following:
A. The city manager;
B. The city attorney;
C. The fire chief; and
D. The director of public works. (Ord. 1-1-1988, 1-7-1988)

6-4-9: CONTENTS OF PERMIT:
Each parade permit shall state the following information:
A. Starting time;
B. Minimum speed;
C. Maximum speed;
D. Maximum interval of space to be maintained between units of the parade;
E. The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade;
F. The maximum length of the parade in miles and/or fractions thereof; and
G. Such other information and conditions as the chief of police shall find necessary and desirable for the enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 1-1-1988, 1-7-1988)

6-4-10: DUTIES OF PERMITTEE:
A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. (Ord. 1-1-1988, 1-7-1988)

6-4-11: PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING PARADES:
A. Interference: No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or interfere with any parade or parade assembly, or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade.
B. Driving Through Parades: No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade, unless specifically directed to do so by a police officer.
C. Parking On Parade Route: The chief of police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a public street or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The chief of police may post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. However, no person shall be liable for parking on a street that is not posted in the manner provided herein, or who is not otherwise advised not to park thereon by a police officer. (Ord. 1-1-1988, 1-7-1988)

6-4-12: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued hereunder upon failure of the permittee or participants in the parade to meet the standards and conditions provided herein and on the parade permit. (Ord. 1-1-1988, 1-7-1988)

6-4-13: PENALTY:
Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code, or such lesser offense as the city attorney in his discretion shall choose. (Ord. 1-1-1988, 1-7-1988; amd. 2003 Code)

CHAPTER 5 PERSONAL MOTORIZED MOBILITY DEVICES ON SIDEWALKS


6-5-1:       Definitions
6-5-2:       Use Of Personal Motorized Mobility Devices On Sidewalks
6-5-3:       Penalty

6-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
DIRECT SUPERVISION: Shall have the same meaning as Utah Code Annotated section 41-6a-102(11) or its successor.
MOTORIZED MOBILITY DEVICE: Shall have the same meanings as Utah Code Annotated section 41-6a-102(44) or its successor.
PEDESTRIAN: Shall have the same meaning as Utah Code Annotated section 41-6a-102(41) or its successor.
PEDESTRIAN VEHICLE: Shall have the same meaning as Utah Code Annotated section 41-6a-1011(1)(a) or its successor. (Ord. 2005-05-004, 5-19-2005)

6-5-2: USE OF PERSONAL MOTORIZED MOBILITY DEVICES ON SIDEWALKS:
Use of personal motorized mobility devices shall be permitted on city sidewalks upon the following conditions:
A. The operator of the personal motorized mobility device shall be at least twelve (12) years of age.
B. If the operator of the personal motorized mobility device is between twelve (12) and sixteen (16) years of age, they must be under the direct supervision of the person’s parent or guardian at all times;
C. The operator of the personal motorized mobility device shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians and pedestrian vehicles;
D. The operator of the personal motorized mobility device shall be subject to and obey all laws applicable to pedestrians;
E. The operator of the personal motorized mobility device shall comply with the protective headgear requirements established by the Utah Department of Public Safety.
F. The operator of the personal motorized mobility device shall comply with all other state laws pertaining to such devices not in conflict with section 6-5-1 of this chapter, and this section. (Ord. 2005-05-004, 5-19-2005)

6-5-3: PENALTY:
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 2005-05-004, 5-19-2005)

TITLE 7 PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY

Chapter
1            Streets, Sidewalks And Public Ways
2            Excavations
3            Public Parks And Public Squares
4            Trees
5            Cemeteries
6            Airport
7            Small Wireless Facilities in Public Rights-of-Way

CHAPTER 1 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS


7-1-1:       Supervision Of Streets
7-1-2:       Names Of Streets; Official Map
7-1-3:       Permit Required To Occupy Street
7-1-4:       Failure To Restore Street
7-1-5:       Sidewalks And Shade Trees; Limit Measurements
7-1-6:       Repair Of Sidewalks
7-1-7:       Obstructions
7-1-8:       Reserved
7-1-9:       Use Of Streets
7-1-10:      Public Highways; Jurisdiction
7-1-11:      Cellar Doors
7-1-12:      Sidewalk Construction
7-1-13:      Driveway Construction Permit
7-1-14:      Installation Of Pumps And Bowsers

7-1-1: SUPERVISION OF STREETS:
A. Duties; Reports: It shall be the duty of the public works director to see that all provisions of this chapter, resolutions, orders, and policies of the city council relating to the improvement of streets, alleys, sidewalks, bridges or culverts are carried into effect. The public works director shall have charge of all tools and materials used for street purposes.
B. Supervision Of Work On Streets: It shall be the duty of the public works director to take charge of all streets in the city and superintend all work done thereon, whether under contract or otherwise; provided, that he shall at all times be subject to and act under the direction of the city council. During the progress of any improvement he shall observe and report whether any breach is made in the terms of any contract in pursuance of which any such work or improvement is in progress; and no work done upon the streets under any contract shall be paid for in full until the public works director shall report the same to be complete.
C. Access Management Policy: The public works director shall prepare an access management policy to govern the location, number, spacing, and design of access points on city streets to minimize site access conflicts and maximize the traffic capacity of city streets. The public works director shall present the access management policy to the city council for approval. Upon approval of the city council, the access management policy shall remain in force unless amended by the city council. The director of public works shall have authority to approve minor deviations from the policy for good cause, all other deviations shall be approved by the city council. The approved access management policy shall be made available for inspection and copying at the public works department office during regular business hours. (Ord. 2008-03-001, 3-6-2008)

7-1-2: NAMES OF STREETS; OFFICIAL MAP:
All streets of the city shall be known by the names by which they are so designated on the official map of the city, filed in the city offices, and such additions, changes and corrections of the names of streets as shall from time to time be made by the city council, shall be placed upon the official map. (1962 Code § 9-1-1; amd. 2003 Code)

7-1-3: PERMIT REQUIRED TO OCCUPY STREET:
It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy or use any portion of a public street for the erection or repair of any building abutting thereon, without first making application to and receiving from the public works encroachment officer a permit authorizing the same. Any permit may be revoked by the public works encroachment officer, at any time, when the holder thereof fails to comply with any rule or regulation under which it is granted, or when, in the opinion of the public works encroachment officer, the public good requires such revocation. (1962 Code § 9-1-5; amd. 2003 Code)

7-1-4: FAILURE TO RESTORE STREET:
It shall be unlawful for any person having made an excavation or having placed any building materials in any street, whether under permit or otherwise, to fail, neglect or refuse for a period of five (5) days after notice from the public works encroachment officer, to restore said street to its normal condition. (1962 Code § 9-1-6; amd. 2003 Code)

7-1-5: SIDEWALKS AND SHADE TREES; LIMIT MEASUREMENTS:
When required by the city council, the public works director, aided by the city engineer, shall, where the same has not already been defined, cause a measurement to be made defining the outside limits of the sidewalks on any street of the city, and establish the line of shade trees thereon; and every person owning a city lot or land adjoining any sidewalk is hereby required to keep the sidewalk in good repair in the manner prescribed by, and to the acceptance of the public works director. (1962 Code § 9-1-7; amd. 2003 Code; Ord. 2008-03-001, 3-6-2008)

7-1-6: REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS:
Wherever any person or entity fails or neglects to keep the sidewalk adjoining a city right-of-way or land owned by it in good repair and free from obstruction, the same may be repaired by the public works director at the expense of the property owner. (Ord. 12-7-1988, 12-15-1988; amd. 2003 Code; Ord. 2008-03-001, 3-6-2008)

7-1-7: OBSTRUCTIONS:
A. Sidewalks And Streets: It shall be unlawful for any person, without a permit issued by the city encroachment officer, to cause an encroachment or obstruction upon any street, alley or sidewalk of the city, which shall hinder the free travel of pedestrians, automobiles or other traffic along the streets or sidewalks, or which shall obstruct the view1 along the same.
B. Ditch Or Gutter: It shall be unlawful for any person to make or place any obstruction of any kind or nature in or over any irrigation ditch, stormwater ditch, or in any gutter situated upon any street or sidewalk within the city. Placing or allowing the accumulation of leaves, construction materials, garbage or debris of any type in gutters along city streets shall be considered an obstruction within the intent of this subsection. The adjoining property owners shall be responsible for keeping gutters free from such obstruction. No bridge, flume or conduit of any kind shall be placed or installed in or upon any ditch, canal or gutter, without permission from the city being first obtained, and every such structure shall be installed in accordance with the instructions of and to the satisfaction of the city. Any obstruction or installation made in violation of the provisions of this subsection, may be immediately removed by the city, and any person who violates the provisions of this subsection shall be deemed guilty of a class B misdemeanor and upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1.
1See also provisions regarding clear view at sections 9-13-4A2a and 10-18-2B of this code.
(Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

7-1-8: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2015-09-003, 9-3-2015)

7-1-9: USE OF STREETS:
A. Business Purposes: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or carry on any business on any street or sidewalk or from any vehicle, stand or structure located upon the streets or sidewalks of the city, except upon permission from the city council. (1962 Code § 9-1-14)
B. Display Purposes: It shall be unlawful for any person to use any part of the streets or sidewalks within the city for the purpose of displaying any goods, wares or merchandise for sale or for displaying signs, billboards or advertising displays. (1962 Code § 9-1-15; amd. 2003 Code)

7-1-10: PUBLIC HIGHWAYS; JURISDICTION:
Where public highways extend through the city they shall conform to the direction and grade and be subject to all regulations of other streets within the city. (1962 Code § 9-1-17)

7-1-11: CELLAR DOORS:
It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of a building having a cellar opening upon any street or sidewalk to fail to keep the door or other covering thereof in good repair and safe for the passage of the customary traffic on the street or sidewalk; and if the owner or occupant shall neglect or refuse to repair properly any such door or covering for twenty-four (24) hours after notice from the public works director so to do, the public works director shall forthwith cause the repairs to be made at the expense of the owner or occupant. (1962 Code § 9-1-19; amd. 2003 Code; Ord. 2008-03-001, 3-6-2008)

7-1-12: SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION:
A. Conformance Required: It shall be unlawful for any person, either as owner, contractor or employee, to construct any sidewalk in the city unless the sidewalk is constructed to lines and grades approved or as given and established by the city engineer, unless special permission to deviate from such lines and grades is first obtained from the city council. (1962 Code § 9-1-20; amd. 2003 Code)
B. Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to construct any permanent sidewalk in the city, without having first obtained a permit so to do. The acceptance of the permit shall be deemed an agreement upon the part of the person to construct the sidewalk in accordance with the specifications given by and grades approved by the city engineer as to the character and quality of work; and if the sidewalk be constructed of concrete, the character and quality of the concrete, the constituent parts of the mixture, and the thickness of the walk. When the walk is extended from the main sidewalk to the back of the curb already constructed, there shall be placed between the back of the curb and the walk, an expansion joint designated by the city engineer. It shall be unlawful to construct any sidewalk in violation of the specifications given by the city engineer. (1962 Code § 9-1-21; amd. 2003 Code)
C. Inspection Costs: 
    1. Where property owners construct sidewalks, driveways and curbs and gutters at their own expense, in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the approval of the city council and the city engineer, the cost of indicating grades and lines and inspection shall be paid for by the property owner before issuance of the permit required. (1962 Code § 9-1-22)
    2. The charges for inspection of sidewalks shall be in such amounts as established by resolution of the city council. (1962 Code § 9-1-22; amd. 2003 Code)

7-1-13: DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION PERMIT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct any driveway across sidewalk space, or to cut or change the construction of a sidewalk, curb or gutter, for the purpose of making a driveway, without first making written application and obtaining a permit so to do. The acceptance of the permit shall be deemed an agreement on the part of the person to construct the driveway in accordance with specifications furnished by the city engineer. (1962 Code § 9-1-23)

7-1-14: INSTALLATION OF PUMPS AND BOWSERS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to install any gasoline pump, bowser or similar device for the storage, handling and/or dispensing of gasoline, oil or similar products on the sidewalk, street, curb line, or other property owned or subject to the control or supervision of the city, unless a resolution granting such right in each specific case is passed by the city council. (1962 Code § 9-1-24)

CHAPTER 2 EXCAVATIONS


7-2-1:       Permit Required; Applicability
7-2-2:       Application For Permit
7-2-3:       Notification To Utility Companies; Damage Or Injury
7-2-4:       Fees For Permit
7-2-5:       Bond And Insurance Requirements
7-2-6:       Duration Of Permit
7-2-7:       Protective Measures
7-2-8:       Restoration Of Surface
7-2-9:       Protection Of Utilities
7-2-10:      Inspections
7-2-11:      Virgin And Santa Clara River Areas
7-2-12:      Penalty

7-2-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICABILITY:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to tunnel under or to make any excavation in any street, alley or other public place in the city without having obtained a permit as is herein required, or without complying with the provisions of this chapter, or in violation of or variance from the terms of any such permit. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to and be binding upon all property owners, developers, agents, contractors or employees engaged in activities regulated by this chapter. (Ord. 1-2-96, 1-18-1996)

7-2-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Applications for such permits shall be made to the public works encroachment officer, and shall describe the location of the intended excavation or tunnel, the size thereof, the purpose therefor, and the person, firm or corporation doing the actual excavating work and the name and address of the person, firm or corporation for whom or which the work is being done, and shall contain an agreement that the applicant will comply with all ordinances and laws relating to the work to be done. (Ord. 79-5-4, 5-3-1979; amd. 2003 Code)

7-2-3: NOTIFICATION TO UTILITY COMPANIES; DAMAGE OR INJURY:
No permit shall be issued under this chapter until the applicant shall exhibit proof that he has given at least twenty-four (24) hours’ notice to all utility companies, which provide utility services in the area of the proposed excavation, that such excavation is anticipated. No injury shall be done to any pipes, cables or conduits in the making of such excavations or tunnels; and notice shall be given to the persons maintaining any such pipes, cables or conduits or to the city department or officer charged with the care thereof, which are or may be endangered or affected by the making of any such excavation or tunnel, before such pipes, cables or conduits shall be disturbed. No unnecessary damage or injury shall be done to any tree or shrub or the roots thereof. (Ord. 79-5-4, 5-3-1979)

7-2-4: FEES FOR PERMIT:
The fee for each permit issued hereunder shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 79-5-4, 5-3-1979)

7-2-5: BOND AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
A. No permit shall be issued under this chapter until and unless the applicant therefor has filed with the city an acceptable corporate surety permit bond in a sum not less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), or as established by the public works director, conditioned upon the permittee’s full compliance with the requirements of city ordinances, the city standards and specifications for design and construction, and any conditions of the permit issued hereunder.
B. In addition to the permit bond, the permittee shall file with the city a performance bond in the sum of one hundred percent (100%) of the cost of the work to be performed under the permit, guaranteeing the faithful performance of the work authorized by the permit.
C. The bonds required hereunder shall have as surety a corporation licensed to do business in the state as a surety company.
D. Prior to the issuance of any permit hereunder, the applicant shall, in addition to the bonds set forth above, furnish to the city a certificate of insurance showing the city as an additional insured and evidencing that the applicant has comprehensive general liability and property damage coverage with minimum limits, as established by resolution of the city council, insuring against property damage and personal injury, including accidental death.
E. The type of bond or amount of bond may be increased or decreased in the discretion of the public works encroachment officer based upon variances in the cost of the work to be performed and the amount of other required bonds hereunder. (Ord. 2007-01-005, 1-18-2007)

7-2-6: DURATION OF PERMIT:
The duration of any permit issued under this chapter shall be set at the time of issuance of the permit. Each permit issued shall be valid only in connection with the project for which the permit is issued. If no duration is specified at the time of issuance of the permit, the duration of the permit shall be ninety (90) days. Permits may be extended at the discretion of the public works encroachment officer for good cause up to an additional thirty (30) days from the original expiration date. Any application for an extension of the encroachment permit must be made to the public works encroachment officer prior to the expiration of the original permit and shall set forth the reason for the requested extension. (Ord. 1-2-96, 1-18-1996; amd. 2003 Code)

7-2-7: PROTECTIVE MEASURES:
A. Barriers, Warning Devices: It shall be the duty of every person cutting or making an excavation in or upon any public place, to place and maintain barriers and warning devices necessary for safety of the general public.
B. Conformance; Warning Lights: Barriers, warning signs, lights, etc., shall conform to the requirements of the manual on uniform traffic control devices (MUTCD) and the public works encroachment officer. Warning lights shall meet MUTCD standards to indicate a hazard to traffic from sunset of each day to sunrise of the next day.
C. Emission Of Light: Electrical markers or flashers shall emit light at sufficient intensity and frequency to be visible at a reasonable distance for safety. Reflectors and reflecting materials shall be used to supplement, but not replace, light sources.
D. Traffic: The permittee shall take appropriate measures to assure that during the performance of the excavation work, traffic conditions as near normal as possible shall be maintained at all times so as to minimize inconvenience to the occupants of the adjoining property and to the general public. When traffic conditions permit, the public works encroachment officer may by written approval, permit closing of streets and alleys to all traffic for a period of time prescribed by him, if in his opinion it is necessary. Such written approval may require that the permittee give notification to various public agencies and to the general public. In such cases, such written approval shall not be valid until such notice is given.
E. Advance Warning: Warning signs shall meet MUTCD standards and be placed far enough in advance of the construction operation to alert traffic within a public street, and cones or other approved devices shall be placed to channel traffic, in accordance with the instructions of the public works encroachment officer. (Ord. 79-5-4, 5-3-1979; amd. 2003 Code)

7-2-8: RESTORATION OF SURFACE:
Any person, firm or corporation making any excavation or tunnel in or under any public street, alley or other public place in the city where no pavement exists, shall immediately upon completion of the project restore the surface to its original condition. Additionally, any opening in a paved or improved portion of a street shall immediately, upon completion of the project, be repaired and the surface relaid by the applicant. All work site restoration as required by this section shall comply with all ordinances of the city, the city standard specifications for design and construction, any requirements set forth by the public works encroachment officer in issuance of the permit, and under supervision of the director of public works, and shall include, but not be limited to, repair, cleanup, backfilling, compaction and stabilization, paving and other work necessary to place the site in an acceptable condition following the conclusion of the work or the expiration or revocation of the permit. (Ord. 1-2-96, 1-18-1996; amd. 2003 Code)

7-2-9: PROTECTION OF UTILITIES:
In case any pipes, conduits, poles, wires or apparatus should be damaged, the permittee shall promptly notify the owner thereof. All damaged facilities shall be repaired by the agency or person owning them and the expense of such repairs shall be charged to the permittee. It is the intent of this section that the permittee shall assume all liability for damage to facilities and any resulting damage or injury to anyone because of such facility damage, and such assumption of liability is a contractual obligation of the permittee. The only exception will be such instances where damage is exclusively due to the negligence of the owning utility. The city shall not be made a party to any action because of this section. The permittee shall inform itself as to the existence and location of all underground facilities and protect the same against damage. (Ord. 79-5-4, 5-3-1979)

7-2-10: INSPECTIONS:
A. The public works encroachment officer may from time to time inspect or cause to be inspected, all excavations and tunnels being made in or under any public street, alley or other public place in the city to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. Notice shall be given to the public works encroachment officer at least two (2) hours before the work of backfilling any such tunnel or excavation commences.
B. The public works encroachment officer may make such inspection as is reasonably necessary in the enforcement of this chapter. The director of public works shall have the authority to promulgate and cause to be enforced such rules and regulations as may be reasonably necessary to enforce and carry out the intent of this chapter. (Ord. 79-5-4, 5-3-1979; amd. 2003 Code)

7-2-11: VIRGIN AND SANTA CLARA RIVER AREAS:
A. Permit Required: 
    1. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to grade, excavate or otherwise cause the diversion of the waterway along the Virgin and Santa Clara Rivers without first obtaining a permit from the city engineer.
    2. For purposes of this section, the term “waterway” shall be defined as areas subject to actual or potential flooding and erosion resulting from the flood on January 9th through 12th, 2005, or any area as recorded in the city engineer’s office.
B. Penalty: Any violation of this section shall be a class A misdemeanor. (Ord. 2005-02-007, 2-3-2005)

7-2-12: PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise stated, shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense hereunder. (Ord. 1-2-96, 1-18-1996; amd. 2003 Code; Ord. 2005-02-007, 2-3-2005)

CHAPTER 3 PUBLIC PARKS AND PUBLIC SQUARES


7-3-1:       Definitions
7-3-2:       Rules, Regulations And Requirements
7-3-3:       Reservation Permits
7-3-4:       Golf Courses
7-3-5:       Penalty

7-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
JUNK PERSONAL PROPERTY: Personal property that is refuse or waste, is valueless, is not being used for the originally intended manufactured use of the personal property, is not being used for any beneficial purpose under a reasonable person’s standard, is in a dilapidated condition, is in a state of disrepair, is not capable of being used for its original purpose or constitutes litter or garbage or trash or rubble.
PUBLIC PARK: City owned property held for parks or recreational activities, including, but not limited to, a groomed park, playground, golf course, paved and unpaved trails and paths, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian or bicycle paths, open space, wilderness areas, or similar public land within the city which is under the control, operation or management of the city, including the adjoining parking lot. Public park does not include a public square.
PUBLIC SQUARE: Property owned and maintained by the city that has been designated as a public square and is open for public use as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2017-04-002, 4-6-2017)

7-3-2: RULES, REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
A. Posted Rules: City has the right to post rules and regulations for all public parks and public squares. No person shall violate any provision of a posted rule or regulation.
B. Destruction; Dumping: In any public park or public square, it shall be unlawful to cut, break, move, take or otherwise injure, destroy or deface any trees, shrubs, plants, turf, rock or any building, fence, bridge, sign or other structure, or foul any spring or stream or leave waste items or rubbish of any kind. No person shall dump any earth, rubbish or other substance or material in or upon any public park without written permission of the city Manager or designee. No person shall leave, dump, abandon, or discard junk personal property in or upon any public park. No person shall throw, discard or deposit any paper, rubbish, debris, ashes, bottles, cans, trash or litter of any kind or nature whatsoever, except in receptacles specifically provided for waste.
C. Rep. by Ord. 2019-07-001, 7-11-2019
D. Open Fires: No person shall make or kindle any open fire in a public park or public square except in fireplaces and grills provided by the city for this purpose or approved by the city manager or designee.
E. Fireworks: Fireworks are prohibited in public parks and public squares except if approved with a special event permit or approved by the city manager or designee.
F. Trapping Or Injuring Animals: No person shall, in any public park or public square, set a trap or snare, or shoot, injure, annoy, disturb or poison any wild animal or bird, or injure or destroy any nest.
G. Motor Vehicles; Speed Limit And Parking: No person shall ride in or drive any motor vehicle in any public park or public square except upon approved roads or as approved by the city. It is prohibited for any person to commit any act, by use or operation of any motor vehicle in any public park, which if committed upon a public highway or street in the State, would be prohibited and unlawful. Speed limits within all public parks shall be fifteen (15) miles per hour unless otherwise posted. There shall be no parking at any time except in areas designated for such purposes. Abandoned vehicles shall be towed at owner’s expense.
H. Signs And Advertising: No person shall erect, paint, paste or otherwise affix any signs in a public park or public square except as approved by the city.
I. Animal Control: Animals are prohibited in all public parks and public squares except in public parks expressly designated for that purpose or expressly permitted by the city. Dogs or cats are allowed in groomed public parks, public squares, playgrounds, paved and unpaved trails and paths, at athletic fields, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian or bicycle paths, open space, and wilderness areas if the dog or cat is on a leash no more than six feet (6') in length and under the control of a person. Dogs are allowed off leash in a park designated as a dog park. The person in control of the dog or cat is responsible for removal of the animal’s waste.
J. Weapons: While in a public park or public square, no person shall possess or discharge a firearm or dangerous weapon in violation of state code and city ordinance. No person shall have possession of, or discharge, a BB gun, air rifle, bow and arrow, or other similar dangerous weapon.
K. Vending: No person or group may utilize any public park or public square for profit or financial gain without a special event permit or written approval of the city manager or designee. This includes but is not limited to selling, entertainment, concerts, and other activities that charge a fee.
L. Park And Square Hours Of Operation: No person shall enter, remain, stay, or loiter in any of the following public parks or public squares between the hours of ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. and sunrise of the following day except in those areas posted with alternative hours or if extended hours were approved for a city approved event:
1100 East Park
2450 East Park
All-Abilities Park
Black Hill View Park
Blake Memorial Park
Bloomington Hills North Park
Bloomington Hills Park
Bloomington Park
Brooks Nature Park
Canyons Softball Complex
Centennial Park
Christensen Park
College Park
Cottonwood Cove Park
Cox Park
Crosby Family Confluence
Dixie Downs Park
Firehouse
Forest Park
Hela Segmiller Farm Park
Hidden Valley Park
J.C. Snow Park
Larkspur Park
Mathis Park
Middleton Park
Millcreek Park
Petroglyph Park
Pioneer Park
Royal Oaks Park
St. James Park
Sandtown Park
Shadow Mountain Park
Silkwood Park
Skyline Pond
Slick Rock Park
Springs Park
Sunset Park
TAWA Ponds
The Fields at Little Valley
The Fields Phase 2 at Little Valley
Tonaquint Park
Town Square
Vernon Worthen Park
Zion’s Square
M. Entertainment And Similar Activities: No entertainment, exhibition, meeting, concert or tournament, whether public or private, and whether for profit or not, shall be given in any public park or public square without a special event permit or approval of the city manager or designee.
N. Glass Bottles And Containers: No person shall bring onto or possess on any park, except for golf courses, a glass bottle or container.
O. Sound Systems: No person shall use loudspeakers, amplifiers or public address systems in a public park or public square without a special event permit or approval of the city manager or designee.
P. Personal Property: No person shall leave, discard, or store personal property in a public park or public square.
    1. Any personal property left, discarded, stored or unattended in a public park or public square is deemed abandoned and may be immediately impounded.
    2. If any personal property is in a public park or public square after the closure times or in violation of other posted rules, notice shall be deemed to have been given and the personal property may be seized immediately.
    3. If any personal property is in a public park or public square without posted closure times, notice shall be given ordering the personal property to be removed within twenty-four (24) hours, by serving the person with the personal property or by prominently and conspicuously posting the notice on the personal property.
    4. Moving personal property to another location in the park or public square or returning personal property to the same park or public square within a seven (7) day period shall not be considered removing the personal property from the park or public square and the personal property shall be subject to immediate seizure.
    5. Junk personal property or personal property that poses an immediate threat to the health or safety of the public may be seized and discarded immediately without prior notice.
    6. When personal property is seized, a notice shall be left stating where the property is being held, how long it will be held and how to contact the holder of the property. All seized personal property shall be retained and disposed of pursuant to the Utah State Code for abandoned property. (Ord. 2017-04-002, 4-6-2017; amd. Ord. 2019-07-001 § 1, 7-11-2019)

7-3-3: RESERVATION PERMITS:
Any person may make a reservation for use of a public park, public square, field, court, pavilion, or grill. Reservations are required for league athletic games or practices held at a public park if the practice involves more than one (1) team or any single team holding a tryout. A person with a reservation shall have the right to use the reserved area. (Ord. 2017-04-002, 4-6-2017)

7-3-4: GOLF COURSES:
Golf is prohibited on all public parks or public squares except on the following:
Dixie Red Hills
St. George Golf Club
Southgate Golf Course
Sunbrook Golf Course
It is unlawful to use any of these golf courses for any public park purpose other than or related to the game of golf. (Ord. 2017-04-002, 4-6-2017)

7-3-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision in this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1. Each violation shall be a separate offense. After the second conviction for the same offense, the violation shall be a Class C misdemeanor. (Ord. 2017-04-002, 4-6-2017)

CHAPTER 4 TREES


7-4-1:       Definitions
7-4-2:       Shade Tree And Beautification Board
7-4-3:       City Forester
7-4-4:       Tree Pruners; License Required
7-4-5:       Planting
7-4-6:       Pruning For Visibility
7-4-7:       Hazardous Trees Removed
7-4-8:       Removal Or Abuse Of Trees On Public Property
7-4-9:       Natural Forest Protection
7-4-10:      Review By City Council; Appeal
7-4-11:      Interference Prohibited
7-4-12:      Violations; Remedies
7-4-13:      Penalty

7-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
PARK TREES: Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public parks and areas owned by the city to which the public has free access as a park.
STREET TREES: Includes all trees on public lands lying within the right-of-way of all streets, avenues or ways within the city. (Ord. 7-1-1993, 7-1-1993; amd. 2003 Code; Ord. 2017-06-011, 6-15-2017)

7-4-2: SHADE TREE AND BEAUTIFICATION BOARD:
A. Created; Organization: There is hereby created a shade tree and beautification board consisting of five (5) members, one (1) being a council member, and a minimum of four (4) members being residents of the city, appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city Council. They shall serve staggered terms of three (3) years each, commencing on January 1 and terminating December 31 of the appropriate years. Appointments to fill unscheduled vacancies shall be for the balance of the unexpired term. Members of the board shall serve without compensation. The board shall elect such officers, as it may deem necessary, from among its own members, for terms of one (1) year, with eligibility for reelection. It shall adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of its business, subject to approval by the city council.
B. Powers And Duties: The duties of the shade tree and beautification board shall include the following:
    1. Recommend changes in city ordinances, policies and practices, including the subdivision ordinance, the zoning ordinance and other city ordinances, that will encourage and enhance beautification of the city area;
    2. Adopt and periodically review rules, regulations and specifications of the city forester which designate the type, size, number and kind of street trees and park trees to be planted in the city. The policies shall describe the scope and type of landscaping that may be required under certain conditions and develop a review process to aid in implementation of the policies.
    3. Assist the city manager in pertinent public relations matters, including, but not limited to, recommendations for programs such as Arbor Day, cleanup, or home and business beautification contests; recognize those residents and/or businesses which have made a significant contribution to the beautification of the neighborhood or surrounding area.
    4. Promote community support of city parks and tree planting.
    5. Encourage the protection of trees in the city area which are rare, endangered or of historical significance by seeking such designation under the Heritage Trees Act, Utah Code Annotated section 63-11-57 et seq., as amended, or the historical preservation ordinance, title 10, chapter 13, article E of this code.
    6. Meet biannually, and as needed, to perform its duties. Hold biannual public meetings at which trees, landscaping and related subjects may be discussed by members of the shade tree and beautification board, officers and personnel of the city, and all others interested in the city tree programs; and keep official minutes of all such meetings.
    7. Have the authority to receive gifts or bequests from any person or any source, on behalf of and with the consent of the city council, for building and maintaining a civic arboretum, or for other programs sponsored by the shade tree and beautification board. Such gifts or bequests shall be received by the city treasurer and shall be earmarked for the purposes set out above.
    8. Assist the city forester in his various duties, as outlined in section 7-4-3 of this chapter; review, endorse, or modify rules, regulations and specifications developed by the city forester, together with rules for the regulation of shade trees and other matters related to the administration of this chapter.
    9. Make recommendations to the city manager regarding budget needs.
    10. Perform such other duties or responsibilities, consistent with the terms of this chapter, as may be assigned by the city council or city manager. (Ord. 2017-06-011, 6-15-2017)

7-4-3: CITY FORESTER:
A. Duties And Responsibilities: There is hereby created the position of a city forester with the following duties and responsibilities:
    1. The city forester shall be in charge of the community forestry program of the city. He shall have the responsibility for implementation of forestry operations and work priorities in the carrying out of such operations. He shall be directly responsible to the superintendent of parks within the leisure services department. All departments of the city shall confirm through the city forester that there has been compliance with the community forestry program whenever such department takes or authorizes any type of action which may involve a forestry operation, as defined in this chapter. A copy of the current community forestry program of the city shall be available to the public at the office of the city recorder.
    2. The city forester shall promulgate rules, regulations and specifications governing the planting, maintenance, fertilization, spraying, pruning and bracing of trees on city property to ensure proper planting, care and maintenance of said trees, together with the process to be followed before a tree may be removed. Such rules, regulations and specifications shall first be reviewed and endorsed by the shade tree and beautification board, then submitted to the city council with recommendation for adoption as the arboricultural regulations of the city. These arboricultural regulations may be modified, amended or extended from time to time upon recommendation of the shade tree and beautification board and approval of the city council. The city forester shall supervise the execution and enforcement of said rules, regulations and specifications as they pertain to street trees and park trees located on public property.
    3. The city forester or his designee shall authorize and inspect all work required in accordance with the provisions hereof. Work authorized and decisions made hereunder by the city forester shall be submitted to and reviewed by the shade tree and beautification board whenever a request is made for such review by either a member of the shade tree and beautification board or by the occupant or owner of the property affected by such work or decision.
B. Authority: The city forester shall have the authority and jurisdiction to regulate the planting, maintenance and removal of street and park trees and shrubs to ensure public safety; to alleviate interference by trees and shrubs with the provision of essential services; and to preserve the aesthetics of public places. Abutting property owners shall be contacted at least seventy-two (72) hours prior to the commencement of any work by the forester. Such contact shall be effected either by personal contact with the property owner or delivery of a notice to the residence in the manner provided by the rules and regulations prepared pursuant to subsection A2 of this section. This contact shall be achieved by the placement of a notice at the residence. If the property owner is advised by written notice instead of personal contact, the notice shall contain the nature of work intended by the forester and the time it will be carried out. (Ord. 2017-06-011, 6-15-2017)

7-4-4: TREE PRUNERS; LICENSE REQUIRED1:
It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business or occupation of pruning, treating or removing street or park trees within the city without first applying for and procuring a tree pruner’s license. The license fee shall be in such amount as established by resolution of the city council annually in advance and in addition to the requisite city business license; provided, however, that no such license shall be required of any public service company or city employee working in the pursuit of their public service endeavors. Before any license shall be issued, an applicant shall first pass a written examination and an in-the-field practical exercise administered by the city forester. The applicant shall also file evidence of possession of liability insurance in the minimum amounts of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for property damage and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for bodily injury, indemnifying the city or any person injured or damaged as the result of any endeavors herein described. A tree pruner’s license shall be condition precedent to the issuance of a city business license as required by title 3, chapter 1 of this code.
1See also title 3, chapter 1 of this code for general licensing provisions.
(Ord. 7-1-1993, 7-1-1993; amd. 2003 Code)

7-4-5: PLANTING:
A. Conformance: Street tree planting must conform to all guidelines contained in the community forestry program. No species other than those included in the community forestry program may be planted as street trees or park trees without written permission of the shade tree and beautification board, and trees may only be selected from the tree list that correspond with the specific proposed tree location as designated in the community forestry program.
B. Developments: In the case of all commercial development and/or commercial planned unit developments (of any size or type) within the city limits, industrial or residential development on selected streets (see “community forestry program”), or any development along or adjacent to any existing or master planned eighty foot (80') wide streets within the city, the developer shall be responsible for new street tree plantings prior to receipt of a certificate of occupancy, unless the shade tree and beautification board grants an exception based on unusual circumstances. Street trees so planted shall be no smaller than one and one-half inches (11/2") in diameter of trunk, one foot (1') above the ground, and shall conform to the community forestry program in species, size and spacing, and shall be growing in a twenty-four inch (24") box (or larger), or be balled and burlapped (B&B). The species of tree to be planted as a street tree under any overhead power line or other obstruction shall be approved by the parks superintendent and city forester prior to the planting of such trees. Persons planting trees shall abide by the arboricultural specifications adopted by the city forester. Existing residential, industrial and commercial developments will be encouraged to conform to the community forestry program. (Ord. 2017-06-011, 6-15-2017)

7-4-6: PRUNING FOR VISIBILITY:
Every owner of a tree located on private property but which overhangs any street or right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not severely obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet (8') above the surface of the street or sidewalk. Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased, dangerous, broken or decayed limbs that constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to enter upon private property to prune any tree or shrub on that property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a street light, or interferes with the visibility of any traffic control device or sign after giving the property owner that notice referred to in subsection 7-4-3B of this chapter. (Ord. 7-1-1993, 7-1-1993)

7-4-7: HAZARDOUS TREES REMOVED:
The city shall have the right to cause removal of any dead or diseased tree on private property within the city, when such tree constitutes a hazard to life and property, or harbors insects or diseases that constitute a potential threat to other trees. The city forester will notify in writing the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by said owners at their own expense within sixty (60) days after the date of service of notice. In the event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the city shall have the authority to enter upon said property to remove a hazardous tree and charge the cost of such removal to the owner. Prior to removal of a hazardous tree by the city, notice shall be given the property owner in the manner provided in subsection 7-4-3B of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-06-011, 6-15-2017)

7-4-8: REMOVAL OR ABUSE OF TREES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
No person shall remove, prune or otherwise seriously disturb a street tree or park tree without first receiving authorization from the city forester. Applications for such authority must be submitted in writing and shall be acted upon within ten (10) days after their receipt with an obligation of the city forester to advise the applicant of the grant or denial of a permit. A person receiving authorization shall abide by the arboricultural specifications. Permits may be conditional with any reasonable conditions affixed thereto. Where a street tree adjoins property occupied by a dwelling unit and forms a part of the landscaping for such residence, the private property owner may effect cosmetic pruning without the permit required by this section, provided the forester is notified in advance and given opportunity to acquaint the party who will do the pruning with the arboricultural specifications which must be fully complied with in all situations. No person shall: (A) damage, cut, carve or injure the bark of any tree; (B) attach any rope, wire or other contrivance to any street or park tree or plant; or (C) cause or permit any fire, heat, wire charged with electricity, or any harmful gaseous, liquid or solid substance to come into contact with any street or park tree or plant. (Ord. 2017-06-011, 6-15-2017)

7-4-9: NATURAL FOREST PROTECTION:
A. Intent: It is the intent of the city to protect, preserve and enhance the existing vegetation within any public greenbelt areas that are or may be established in floodways or along waterways in the city, by title 10, chapter 13, article B of this code, and the board shall extend its concerns to include all plant life indigenous to such greenbelt or otherwise occurring naturally without cultivation, to the extent it may reflect the goals and objectives of this chapter.
B. Landscape and Vegetation Plan: The landscape and vegetation plan required by subsection 10-13A-3A1g of this code, or that may be required under any other chapter of the zoning ordinance, shall be part of the permit process of other boards and shall show existing and proposed vegetation as it relates to proposed development. Such plans may be referred to the shade tree and beautification board for review and recommendation at the request of such other boards.
C. Undesirable Vegetation: Undesirable vegetation such as tamarisk, noxious weeds, briars and certain underbrush shall be discouraged in the preservation of natural vegetation areas. (Ord. 7-1-1993, 7-1-1993)

7-4-10: REVIEW BY CITY COUNCIL; APPEAL:
The function of the shade tree and beautification board is advisory only, and the city council shall have the right to review all of its conduct, acts and decisions. Any person may appeal a ruling or order of the shade tree and beautification board or city forester to the city council. The city council will conduct a hearing, and make a final decision in writing. Appeals from decisions of the shade tree and beautification board, or the city forester, must be made in writing within five (5) days of the ruling or order in question. The party appealing shall be notified of the appeal hearing at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance to enable their attendance. Following such notice of intent to appeal, no action on the problem shall be taken by the city forester pending the outcome of the appeal. The city council shall hear all parties wishing to be heard on the matter during the appeal proceedings, and shall make a decision. The city council shall notify in writing all parties concerned of decisions, and shall order the city forester to take such actions as are necessary to execute the decision. (Ord. 2017-06-011, 6-15-2017)

7-4-11: INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with city personnel, the shade tree and beautification board or any of its agents while engaging in the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of any street tree, park tree or trees on private grounds as authorized in this chapter. (Ord. 2017-06-011, 6-15-2017)

7-4-12: VIOLATIONS; REMEDIES:
A. Notice Of Violation: Upon a determination that a violation of the provisions of this chapter exists, the city forester, or his authorized representative, shall ascertain the name of the owner of property abutting the planting strip where the violation has occurred or exists, and he shall serve notice in writing upon the owner or occupant of such property, either personally or by mailing notice, registered mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner or occupant at the last known post office address as disclosed by the records of the county assessor, requiring such owner or occupant, as the case may be, to correct or remedy the violation within such time as the city forester, or his authorized representative, may designate, but in any event no less than ten (10) days from the date of service of such notice.
B. Licensed Companies; Revocation: In the event removal of a street, park or heritage tree is effected by a licensed tree care company, knowingly and without written permission as required by the arboricultural regulations of the city the city business license officer shall consider revocation of the company’s business license pursuant to section 3-1-19, if the violation is admitted or proven in a court of law. (Ord. 2017-06-011, 6-15-2017)

7-4-13: PENALTY:
Violations shall be prosecuted as a Class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1. The violator may not only be subject to a fine but shall make restitution to the city. Restitution shall be a payment to the city in an amount commensurate with the value of damage to the tree as measured by the International Society of Arboriculture Tree and Shrub Valuation Guidelines. The city shall then proceed to replace the tree or take such other remedial steps as may be best calculated to offset the loss occasioned by the violation. A current copy of the International Society of Arboriculture Tree and Shrub Valuation Guidelines, as amended from time to time, shall be retained for public use at all times in the office of the city recorder. (Ord. 7-1-1993, 7-1-1993; amd. 2003 Code)

CHAPTER 5 CEMETERIES


7-5-1:       Definitions
7-5-2:       Sexton Powers And Duties
7-5-3:       Location Of Cemeteries
7-5-4:       Conveyance; Descent And Inheritance
7-5-5:       Perpetual Care And Burial Rights; Costs
7-5-6:       Burial Permit
7-5-7:       Fees For Burial
7-5-8:       Burial Hours; Sundays And Holidays
7-5-9:       Restrictions On Burial
7-5-10:      Vaults
7-5-11:      Monuments; Grave Markers
7-5-12:      Double Depth Burials
7-5-13:      Regulations And Prohibited Uses
7-5-14:      Disinterments; Exhumations
7-5-15:      Memorials

7-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
BURIAL: The interment of human remains.
BURIAL VAULT: A structure used to hold a casket or container of cremated remains.
CREMATED REMAINS: The ashes of an incinerated deceased person.
DISINTERMENT/EXHUMATION: The removal of a burial vault and/or casket from a plot.
FUNERAL FLOWERS: Flowers placed on the grave at time of burial.
GRAVE: An excavation in the ground for purposes of burial.
MEMORIALS: Items placed on a grave as a remembrance. Temporary memorials include, but are not limited to, potted plants, flags, floral wreaths and flowers in vases. Semipermanent memorials include, but are not limited to, trees, shrubs and perennial flowers.
MONUMENT/GRAVE MARKER: A marker used to identify the person interred in a plot.
PLOT: An area of ground in which burial rights are deeded to an individual for the purposes of burial.
RESIDENT: Any member of a household whose primary place of residence can be shown to be established in the city of St. George, Utah.
VETERAN: A person recognized by the veterans administration as having veteran’s status. (Ord. 2000-02-002, 2-3-2000)

7-5-2: SEXTON POWERS AND DUTIES:
The sexton, subject to the direction of the city council and any department head placed over him by the city manager, has entire charge of the cemetery and is authorized to enforce the rules and regulations pertaining thereto. He may take such action as may be necessary, though not expressly set forth herein, in order to protect the property of grave and lot owners, and the cemetery, from injury, and to preserve the peace, economy and good order of the cemetery. It shall be the duty of the sexton to keep the cemetery plat and related records up to date, and to cooperate with the city treasurer in maintaining records of charges and payments made pursuant to this chapter. The sexton or a competent deputy shall attend every interment in a cemetery and shall register the names and ages of all persons interred therein, and the place of their interment. He shall open and close graves, maintain the cemetery, and perform such other duties as may be required elsewhere in this chapter or directed by the city council. (Ord. 2000-02-002, 2-3-2000)

7-5-3: LOCATION OF CEMETERIES:
Block 59, plat B and the west half of block 58, plat B of the city survey, is hereby reserved for a cemetery block, and shall be known as the city cemetery. Each lot contained therein shall contain six (6) plots. There will also be a cemetery known as the Tonaquint cemetery located north of Dixie Drive and west of the Tonaquint park. Purchasers of plots or burial spaces within a cemetery shall acquire the rights of burial in each plot in perpetuity, subject to the rules and regulations herein prescribed. Additional locations may be designated for cemetery use upon resolution of the city council, and “cemetery,” as used herein, shall include all such locations. (Ord. 2000-02-002, 2-3-2000)

7-5-4: CONVEYANCE; DESCENT AND INHERITANCE:
A. Deed: Plots and burial spaces in lots within a cemetery as described in section 7-5-3 of this chapter, as designated on a plat to be kept in the city offices, and staked under the supervision of the sexton, or any other tract of land that may hereafter be designated by the city for such purpose, shall be conveyed by deeds of right granting a license to use for burial purposes. Such deeds will be registered with the city in a book kept for that purpose and issued to the purchaser. Upon the death of the registered owner, the city shall act upon its best judgment in determining heirship and succession, unless an affidavit of heirship, together with the power appointing one of the heirs to represent all or a certified copy of a decree of distribution of the estate of the deceased purchaser, is first filed with the city recorder. The city shall have no liability for a failure to properly determine the legal succession of the rights in any cemetery space. The size of any lot or the number of lots to be sold to any person or family shall be in the sole discretion of the city, but no more than six (6) lots shall be sold to one individual or his agent unless it can be shown that they are intended for the immediate members of a single-family or unless otherwise approved by the city council. The right to lay, maintain and operate lines for water supply or drainage is expressly reserved to the city across any portion of the cemetery block.
B. Abandonment Through Nonuse: Any lot or burial space which has remained empty without burial use for a period in excess of sixty (60) years will be presumed to have been abandoned by the lot purchaser. Because the responsibility for maintenance has been upon the city for that period and in the interest of best utilization of cemetery space, such lots and burial spaces may be reclaimed and sold by the city in the manner provided in this section; provided, that the previous owner or someone holding the right of the previous owner, upon presentation of satisfactory evidence of an intent to use the space for a burial and to defray the cost of its future maintenance, shall be allowed to retain burial rights in the said plot or space. Evidence of an intent to maintain the space in the future may be shown by payment at that time of the perpetual care fee then required by section 7-5-5 of this chapter.
C. Reclaim Of Abandoned Lot By City: The sexton shall advise the city recorder of an apparent abandonment through nonuse of a lot or burial space, and the city recorder shall determine from the cemetery records when the original deed was issued and whether a sixty (60) year abandonment exists. If so, the city council may pass a resolution requiring that anyone claiming ownership meet the requirements of subsection A of this section, or that the original deed be voided and the property abandoned. The resolution shall be served upon anyone claiming ownership by publication for three (3) successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within Washington County, and a copy of the resolution shall be mailed within fourteen (14) days after such publication to the last known address of the owner of record or any heirs known to the city, if deceased, provided any such addressed be available. Upon the expiration of thirty (30) days after the last publication of the resolution, unless an owner has come forward and satisfied the requirements of subsection A of this section, all rights in the lot or space shall be terminated and thereafter be vested in the city. (Ord. 2000-02-002, 2-3-2000)

7-5-5: PERPETUAL CARE AND BURIAL RIGHTS; COSTS:
A. Perpetual Care Required: No burial rights in the cemetery shall be sold without perpetual care for the space to be used. Perpetual care shall consist of that maintenance necessitated by natural growth and ordinary wear, and it shall be provided at reasonable intervals within the budget limits of the cemetery. (Ord. 2000-05-002, 5-4-2000)
B. Costs: Costs shall be in such amounts as established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2000-05-002, 5-4-2000; amd. 2003 Code)
C. Resident Defined: For purposes of this section, a “resident” shall mean any member of a household whose primary place of residence can be shown to be established in the city. (Ord. 2000-05-002, 5-4-2000)
D. Transfers: Deeds of burial rights may not be transferred from the original purchaser to a new owner without approval by the city and issuance of a new deed. A transfer fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city council shall be paid for the processing and issuing of a new deed. If additional costs are payable because a transferee is a nonresident, the additional cost shall be computed and paid at the time of the transfer. (Ord. 2000-05-002, 5-4-2000; amd. Ord. 2002-07-003, 7-11-2002; 2003 Code)

7-5-6: BURIAL PERMIT:
No body shall be interred, or remains received, unless a burial report is received from a licensed mortician and signed by the funeral director, which shall be an acknowledgment of the mortuary’s obligation to pay for the burial, or unless the burial charges have been paid in advance to the city treasurer and receipt therefor is presented to the sexton as a permit for the burial. The burial report or receipt shall reflect the full name of the deceased, the date and place of birth, the date and place of death, and the name and address of the person responsible for disposal. (Ord. 2000-02-002, 2-3-2000)

7-5-7: FEES FOR BURIAL:
A. Collection: The city treasurer is hereby authorized and required to collect, with the assistance of the sexton, the required fees as set by resolution of the city council.
B. Other Services: For any other service rendered, the sexton shall collect a reasonable fee to be determined in advance.
C. Disinterment Including Vault: If it is requested that a disinterment shall include the vault, there shall be a surcharge in such amount as established by resolution of the city council in addition to the above disinterment fee. Notwithstanding such surcharge, the city does not guarantee in such event that the vault will be intact or undamaged. (Ord. 2000-02-002, 2-3-2000; amd. 2003 Code)

7-5-8: BURIAL HOURS; SUNDAYS AND HOLIDAYS:
No graveside service or interment will be allowed in the cemetery on Sunday or on any of the holidays officially observed by the city. On all other days, graveside services or interments will be allowed between the hours of ten o’clock (10:00) A.M. and four o’clock (4:00) P.M. All graveside services and interments must be arranged through the sexton forty-eight (48) hours in advance of the time set, and, if there is an intervening holiday or Sunday, arrangements must be made seventy-two (72) hours in advance. Any exception to the provisions of this section shall be by the approval of city council only and will result in the payment of additional fees. (Ord. 2000-02-002, 2-3-2000)

7-5-9: RESTRICTIONS ON BURIAL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to bury the body of a deceased person within the city limits, except in a cemetery as described in section 7-5-3 of this chapter. No grave in the cemetery shall be opened or filled, refilled or sodded, except by employees of the cemetery under the direction of the sexton. One interment only shall be allowed in a casket except for a parent with their infant child, for two (2) children who are buried at the same time, or for the addition of one cremated remains placed in the casket at the time of burial. Not more than one casket shall be allowed in a grave plot, except that two (2) cremation vaults may be allowed in a half plot. All parts of a burial or cremation vault shall be no less than two feet (2') below the surface of the ground. No cremation vault shall be placed in the same plot as a regular burial vault. (Ord. 2000-02-002, 2-3-2000)

7-5-10: VAULTS:
Before a casket is accepted for burial, it must be housed within a concrete vault having fixed top and side panel edge restraints incorporated into the construction and having a strength capable of uniformly withstanding a stress of seven and one-half (7 and 1/2) pounds per square inch. If a particular type or construction of a vault is rejected by the sexton, the mortician or party utilizing the vault shall bear the burden of proving compliance with the strength requirements of this section. Cremated remains must be placed in a cremation vault made of fiberglass, concrete or metal with a strength deemed adequate by the sexton. (Ord. 2000-02-002, 2-3-2000)

7-5-11: MONUMENTS; GRAVE MARKERS:
A. All graves shall be identified by a marker or monument placed at the head of the grave. No more than one monument or marker shall be permitted for each grave, except as provided in sections 7-5-9 and 7-5-12 of this chapter, or where a traditional military marker is appropriate in addition to another monument. Upright monuments shall be allowed only in designated areas; all other areas of a cemetery are limited to flat markers flush with the natural grade.
B. All monuments and markers shall comply with the cemetery monuments and grave markers standards.
C. In the event the owner of a plot or burial space or relatives of a deceased person buried in such plot do not place a monument or marker with the name of the deceased plainly inscribed thereon upon the grave within ninety (90) days after interment, the sexton shall have the right to do so with a minimal stone or cement marker at the expense of the person owning or burying in said lot. Where burial of the remains of more than one person or vault in a single plot is permitted by this chapter, either a joint combined monument or small individual markers may be used, provided they can be adequately accommodated within the limits of the plot, but the form and size of the monument or marker shall be within the discretionary approval of the sexton in any event. (Ord. 2013-03-005, 3-7-2013)

7-5-12: DOUBLE DEPTH BURIALS:
Double depth burials shall not be permitted in the Tonaquint Cemetery. Certain plots in the city cemetery shall be designated by the sexton as reserved for double depth burials where two (2) caskets, each with its own vault, shall be allowed in the same plot, one above the other. The plots in this section of the cemetery shall be of a greater width than a normal plot and may be identified by two (2) monuments or markers. The width of a double depth plot and the burial depths shall be in accordance with the policy adopted by the city from time to time pertaining to double depth burials. Such policy shall address the safety precautions necessary to be taken in the excavation of double depth graves where greater depths are involved, together with specialized safety equipment that may be necessary for such excavation. Burial vaults for double depth burials must be of the type built specifically for that purpose. (Ord. 2000-02-002, 2-3-2000)

7-5-13: REGULATIONS AND PROHIBITED USES:
A. Park Regulations Govern1: Insofar as they may be applicable, those regulations adopted by the city to govern operation of its parks shall apply to the cemetery. However, it shall be unlawful for any person to be in a cemetery during the nighttime hours of any day. A person will be considered to be “in a cemetery” if he or she is upon any portion of the property set aside as present or future cemetery property as designated in the appropriate records of the city and county.
B. Policies Adopted; Conflicting Provisions: The city council may also adopt policies, rules and regulations to govern operation of a cemetery. If adopted, such policies, rules and regulations will control over a less specific or conflicting provision of the park rules and regulations.
C. Patrons; Children: Cemetery patrons only are allowed in a cemetery. Children under twelve (12) years of age must be accompanied at all times on cemetery property by a parent or some supervising adult eighteen (18) years of age or older.
D. Recreational Activities; Animals: It shall be unlawful to engage in any active recreational activity such as, but not limited to, soccer, baseball and football, or to bring or allow any animal on cemetery property.
E. Burial Of Animals Or Nonhuman Items: It shall be unlawful to bury animals or other nonhuman items in a cemetery, unless the sexton is directed otherwise by the city council in a particular instance.
F. Motor Vehicles: No motor vehicle shall travel off clearly designated roadways in a cemetery for any reason without consent of the sexton, and where such consent is given, the owner or operator of the vehicle shall either repair any and all damage, including tire marks, which the sexton determines to have been caused by such vehicle, or they shall reimburse the city for the cost of such repair.
G. Sod Disturbance: In no event shall the sod of a cemetery be disturbed without prior approval of the sexton. (Ord. 2000-02-002, 2-3-2000)
H. Penalty: Violation of this section shall constitute a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2000-02-002, 2-3-2000; amd. 2003 Code)
1See chapter 3 of this title for park regulations.

7-5-14: DISINTERMENTS; EXHUMATIONS:
The scheduling of disinterments shall be at the discretion of the sexton. It shall also be at the discretion of the sexton to refuse to disinter any person that would endanger the health and safety of cemetery employees. Disinterments may be postponed without notice if the sexton deems it necessary in order to maintain the regular operations of a cemetery. (Ord. 2000-02-002, 2-3-2000)

7-5-15: MEMORIALS:
A. Semipermanent Memorials: No person shall have the right to place and/or plant trees, shrubs, flowers or other semipermanent memorial items on a plot without the approval of the sexton. Approval will be based on the following criteria: plant maintenance requirements, landscape value and hardiness; interference with other plots, plants and mowing operations; consistency with landscape design.
B. Temporary Memorials: Temporary memorials will be removed without notice by cemetery employees when they become withered, discolored, torn, broken or vandalized. Funeral flowers will be allowed to remain for three (3) business days, after which cemetery employees may remove them based on the above criteria. Other temporary memorial items such as glass containers, wires, sticks, iron rods, pegs, ceramic pots or other containers that may pose safety hazards will be removed by cemetery employees.
C. Tonaquint Cemetery: At the Tonaquint Cemetery, all temporary memorials must be placed in a raised adjustable receptacle that is either in the monument or in the concrete border that surrounds the monument. The adjustable receptacles must be of a type approved by the sexton. (Ord. 2000-02-002, 2-3-2000)

CHAPTER 6 AIRPORT1


7-6-1:       Reserved
7-6-2:       Airport Manager
7-6-3:       Definitions
7-6-4:       Permission To Use Airport Conditional
7-6-5:       Approval Of Aviation Operations
7-6-6:       Rules And Regulations
7-6-7:       Self-Services
7-6-8:       Revenue Producing Commercial Activities
7-6-9:       Fuel Flowage Fee
7-6-10:      Storage And Maintenance
7-6-11:      Structure Design
7-6-12:      Commercial Standards
7-6-13:      Penalty; Appeal
1See also title 10, chapter 10 of this code for airport vicinity zone provisions.

7-6-1: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2020-02-007 § 2 (Att.), 2-6-2020)

7-6-2: AIRPORT MANAGER:
The city council shall employ a qualified individual to direct and coordinate the operations and maintenance of the airport in order to ensure that it complies with all federal, state and city regulations. The airport manager shall report to the public works director and shall coordinate airport affairs with the Federal Aviation Administration, the Utah Division of Aeronautics and other applicable agencies to ensure that the ongoing needs of the airport are met. (Ord. 2020-02-007 § 2 (Att.), 2-6-2020)

7-6-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
ACCIDENT: A collision involving an aircraft or a vehicle, person, stationary object or other thing which results in property damage, personal injury or death; or an entry into or emerging from a moving aircraft or vehicle resulting in personal injury, property damage or death.
AERIAL APPLICATIONS: The business of making aerial applications of fire retardants, fertilizers, pesticides or other dusts or sprays.
AIRCRAFT: Any device used or intended to be used for flight in the air, including, but not limited to, airplanes, ultra lights, balloons and gliders of all types.
AIRPORT: All city owned or leased real or personal property comprising the St. George airport as now existing or as the same may hereafter be expanded and developed.
AIRPORT MANAGER: The duly appointed manager of the St. George airport or his designee.
COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY: The conduct of any aspect of a business or concession on the airport for revenue, whether intended to be profit producing or nonprofit.
CONTROLLED ACCESS AREA: All areas of the airport enclosed by fence or other barrier and to which vehicular access may be obtained only through card activated gates.
FAA: Federal Aviation Administration.
FIXED BASE OPERATOR: Any entity who has entered into a written agreement with the city to provide goods and services as required in the approved Minimum Standards for Commercial Aeronautical Activities.
FUEL HANDLING: The transportation, delivery, fueling and draining of fuel or fuel waste products.
FUEL STORAGE AREA: Any portion of the airport designated temporarily or permanently by the airport manager as areas in which gasoline or any type of fuel may be stored or loaded.
MOVEMENT AREA: The runways, taxiways and other areas of an airport which are used for taxiing or hover taxiing, air taxiing, takeoff and landing of aircraft, exclusive of loading ramps and aircraft parking areas.
OPERATIONAL AREA: Any place on the airport not leased or designated to anyone for exclusive occupancy.
PARK OR PARKING: The standing of an aircraft or vehicle, whether occupied or not.
PUBLIC AREA: Those areas normally used by the general public, including structures and facilities such as roadways, sidewalks and terminal buildings that are maintained and kept at the airport for use by the general public.
SPECIALIZED AVIATION SERVICE OPERATORS:
    1. Aircraft Maintenance Operator: A person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of providing FAA approved routine, normal and preventive maintenance of aircraft.
    2. Aircraft Radio, Instrument, Propeller And Accessories Operator: A person, firm or corporation engaged in FAA approved aircraft, radio, instrumentation or propeller business, including sales, service, repair, exchange and installation of new and/or used aircraft radio equipment, instruments or propellers and parts.
    3. Air Sales Operator: A person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of buying, selling and exchanging new or used aircraft.
    4. Air Taxi Operator: A person, firm or corporation engaged directly in air transportation of passengers and/or property subject to the provisions of part 135 of the Federal Aviation Regulations and holding any required certification from the state of Utah.
    5. Flight School Operator: A person, firm or corporation engaged in an FAA approved pilot flight training school, limited to dual and solo flight training in fixed and rotary wing aircraft and such related ground school instruction as is necessary to prepare a student pilot to take a written examination and flight check ride for a pilot’s license or appropriate aircraft rating from the FAA. (Ord. 2020-02-007 § 2 (Att.), 2-6-2020)

7-6-4: PERMISSION TO USE AIRPORT CONDITIONAL:
Any permission granted by the city, directly or indirectly, expressed or by implication, to enter upon or use the airport or any part thereof, including, but not limited to, operators, crew members and passengers, spectators, sightseers, pleasure and commercial vehicles, officers and employees of airlines, lessees and other persons occupying space at the airport, persons doing business with the airport, its lessees, sublessees and permittees, and all other persons whatsoever whether or not of the type indicated, is conditioned upon compliance with this chapter and any rules, regulations or procedures promulgated hereunder; entry upon or into the airport by any person shall be deemed to constitute an agreement by such person to comply with this chapter and such rules, regulations and procedures. The city reserves the right to deny any or all usage of the airport to any person or persons for any cause. (Ord. 2020-02-007 § 2 (Att.), 2-6-2020)

7-6-5: APPROVAL OF AVIATION OPERATIONS:
Any commercial activities or operations conducted at the airport shall require the approval of the city council. Any person wishing to commence activities or operations at the airport shall make application for city approval through the airport manager. All applications for commercial aeronautical activities shall state in writing how the applicant will comply with each requirement set forth in the Minimum Standards for Commercial Aeronautical Activities and other applicable provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2020-02-007 § 2 (Att.), 2-6-2020)

7-6-6: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The following rules will govern the conduct of all persons at the airport, whether engaged in aeronautical activities or otherwise:
A. Compliance With Federal, State, City And Other Regulations: 
    1. No person shall navigate, land aircraft upon, or conduct any aircraft operations on or from the airport other than in conformity with the federal, state, and city rules and regulations.
    2. No person shall drive on any street, parking lot, alleyway or driveway outside of the controlled access area any vehicle which is required under the laws of the state to be inspected and registered unless such vehicle has been inspected and registered and has attached thereto in proper position a valid and unexpired certificate of inspection as required by the laws of the state.
    3. All vehicles operated on airport property within the controlled access area shall be maintained in a safe operating condition in accordance with the fire code and the fire prevention association standards.
    4. Properties around the airport and affected by airport operations shall be subject to compliance with all FAA, UDOT and city standards upon receipt of notice from the city of the applicable standards and the necessity for its application.
B. Vehicle Operations: 
    1. Only official vehicles on duty may be driven into movement areas. Nonofficial vehicles, however, may be driven to T-hangars or to an aircraft for passenger/baggage loading within the controlled access areas when authorized by the airport manager. All vehicles within the controlled access area shall at all times be driven cautiously at a safe and reasonable speed not to exceed twenty (20) miles per hour.
    2. Upon completion of the passenger/baggage transfer, vehicles driven to an aircraft for that purpose shall be driven to a designated parking area. Tenants of T-hangars may park their motor vehicles in their own hangars when the aircraft is being flown. Service or delivery vehicles may park next to a tenant’s hangars long enough for delivery.
    3. Vehicle operators shall observe all applicable rules and regulations of the airport, including all directional signs and pavement markings and shall comply with the lawful orders, signals or directives of the airport manager. Blocking of any movement area by motor vehicles or aircraft is prohibited. In addition to other legal action, violators shall be subject to tow at the owner’s expense.
    4. Any goods, baggage, mail or supplies shall be secured when in transit.
    5. Only authorized vehicles or equipment shall be operated within the safety areas or crossing runways or taxiways. They shall be lighted with a rotating beacon or strobe light at all times when in these areas.
    6. All vehicles shall yield right-of-way to pedestrians, aircraft and emergency vehicles in motion. No vehicle shall proceed past aircraft until it is evident that the vehicle’s progress will not impede the aircraft’s movement.
C. Vehicle Parking: 
    1. Parking in designated public parking areas is open to all members of the public using the airport. Public parking is limited to a maximum of thirty (30) days and is authorized only in designated public parking areas. Requests to park a vehicle on the airport in excess of thirty (30) days must be made in writing to the airport manager. Fees set from time to time by the city council shall be charged for long-term parking. Parking is not authorized within the aircraft movement and tie down areas. Any vehicle parked in violation of these rules may be cited, impounded or towed to an appropriate area, at the airport manager’s discretion and the owner’s expense.
    2. No common carrier, vehicle for hire, taxicab or limousine shall load or unload passengers at the airport at any place not officially designated for such purposes. Standing of vehicles in zones not designated for parking is prohibited.
D. Safety Prohibitions: 
    1. All persons using the airport or the facilities of the airport in any way must exercise the utmost care to guard against fire and injuries to persons and property. The following are not authorized on the airport:
        a. Smoking within fifty feet (50') of any aircraft.
        b. Refueling, defueling or oil servicing aircraft while the engine is running or being warmed by application of heat or while an aircraft is in an enclosed space without authorization from the airport manager.
        c. Refueling during an electrical storm.
    2. The following is prohibited in aircraft storage hangars:
        a. Starting or taxiing an aircraft.
        b. Painting.
        c. Welding.
        d. Open flame tools or heaters.
        e. Flammable materials storage.
        f. Storage of nonaeronautic equipment or materials unless approved by the airport manager.
E. Accidents: Persons involved in an aircraft accident affecting airport operations or damaging city property shall make a full verbal report to the airport manager within one (1) hour after the accident, or if the airport manager is unavailable, then report shall be to the police department. The report must include names and addresses, time, place, cause, injuries and other information requested by the airport manager or police. When a written report of an accident is required by the FAA, a copy of such report shall be submitted to the airport manager. At accident scenes, aircraft owners or their pilots or agents will promptly remove disabled aircraft, parts and accident debris unless directed by the airport manager, the National Transportation Safety Board or the FAA to delay such action pending an accident investigation. Damage sustained to the airport facility, grounds or building will be assessed as a claim against the responsible party.
F. Nuisances: 
    1. Dismantled aircraft, aircraft parts, dismantled or inoperative vehicles, or any other unsafe, unkept, unsightly miscellaneous items or items in disrepair shall not be left for extended times in open view. Such items shall be stored in an enclosed building or within an enclosure surrounded by a solid sight obscuring fence or wall of not less than six feet (6') in height, and no material or merchandise shall be stored to a height of more than the height of the enclosing fence or wall to prevent contents from being scattered by wind or otherwise. If the airport manager determines that a violation has occurred, he shall notify the owner. If not corrected within thirty (30) days, he may remove such items and bill the owner or operator for associated costs. Conditions involving safety issues shall be corrected within twenty-four (24) hours.
    2. Any person, including the operators of an aircraft, causing overflowing or spilling of fuel, oil or grease on any apron shall be responsible for cleaning such areas and any damage thereto.
    3. At no time shall engines be “run up” when other aircraft, hangars, shops, buildings or persons are in the path of the propulsion stream. Any person operating any vehicle or aircraft (including fixed wing and rotor) shall be responsible for damage or cleanup caused by such operations (i.e., scattering of debris from prop blast or rotor downwash).
G. Access To Controlled Areas: The airport is secured with card activated automatic gates to control vehicle access. The airport manager is authorized to issue access gate cards under the guidelines set forth herein:
    1. Access cards may be issued to each of the following who have aircraft based at the airport:
        a. Pilots;
        b. Aircraft owners;
        c. FBO owners;
        d. Renters (businesses, hangar users, etc.);
        e. Airport property leaseholders.
    Additional cards may be issued for justifiable reasons. In general, access cards may be issued to individuals who have need for vehicular access on a regular basis to perform essential airport services.
    2. Access gate cards shall be used solely for the holder’s personal access to the airport and are nontransferable and unassignable. In the event cards for employees or agents of the holder are needed, separate applications shall be submitted for each such card. An employer shall accept full responsibility for any access cards issued to its employees or agents and must agree to obtain the return of such cards to the city upon termination of the employment or agency relationship.
    3. Card holders have the responsibility to see that only authorized personnel enter any gate he or she uses and must remain with any gate until it is secured. Unauthorized vehicles may not tailgate those with access cards through an opened gate. Any person entering security gates without an access card shall be in violation of the Airport Security Plan and these rules and regulations.
    4. No ramp access card shall be issued to an applicant who operates a vehicle of any type within a secure area or critical air operation areas of the airport without a policy of automobile liability insurance in force with a combined aggregate limit of no less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00). Such policy of insurance shall be provided to the city for its review upon request.
H. Aircraft Parking: 
    1. Aircraft will be parked in areas designated by the airport manager. Each aircraft owner or operator occupying a hangar or tie down is responsible for adequately securing his aircraft.
    2. Helicopter operations shall be limited to the officially designated helicopter parking area unless approved otherwise by the airport manager.
    3. The city assumes no responsibility for damages by a third party or theft to aircraft or vehicles operated or parked at the airport. (Ord. 2020-02-007 § 2 (Att.), 2-6-2020)

7-6-7: SELF-SERVICES:
A. Authorized: The owner of an aircraft located on the airport is permitted to fuel, wash, repair, paint and otherwise maintain his own aircraft, provided there is no attempt to perform such services for others; and further provided, that such right is conditioned upon compliance with this chapter and any additional rules, policies or regulations promulgated hereunder for the safety and preservation of airport facilities and protection of the public interest.
B. Permit Required: The owner of an aircraft located on the airport who desires to fuel his or her own aircraft must apply for and receive a “noncommercial fuel dispensing/handling permit” from the airport manager, and storage of such fuel shall be in an authorized fuel storage area. (Ord. 2020-02-007 § 2 (Att.), 2-6-2020)

7-6-8: REVENUE PRODUCING COMMERCIAL ACTIVITIES:
No person shall utilize the airport or any portion thereof for revenue-producing commercial activities or solicit business or funds for any business or activity except as permitted under the terms of an existing lease or, if such activity does not require a lease, by written permission of the airport manager. Failure to fully comply with Minimum Standards for Commercial Aeronautical Activities as adopted by the city council from time to time shall be a basis for revocation of the right to utilize the airport for these purposes. (Ord. 2020-02-007 § 2 (Att.), 2-6-2020)

7-6-9: FUEL FLOWAGE FEE:
A fuel flowage fee, in an amount approved by the city council, shall be assessed for the privilege of selling fuel at the airport and shall be paid to the city by each airport tenant selling fuel at the rate set by the city council for each gallon of fuel sold. Such fuel flowage fee shall be in addition to any fuel tax paid to the state. Tenants selling fuel at the airport shall keep records of gallonage and dates of sale; in addition, they shall make available for inspection at any reasonable time by authorized representatives of the city those fuel tax records prepared for the state in connection with their fuel dispensing activities. The fee provided herein shall be accompanied by a report showing the computation by which it is calculated, and it shall be payable by the fifteenth day of the month following the month for which fuel sales are reported. Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall provide a basis for the termination of a tenant’s privilege to sell fuel at the airport. (Ord. 2020-02-007 § 2 (Att.), 2-6-2020)

7-6-10: STORAGE AND MAINTENANCE:
Aircraft storage hangars shall be used for aircraft storage only unless there is prior written approval of the airport manager. Storage in connection with commercial activities performed in the hangars shall be with prior written approval of the airport manager. No uncovered trash containers shall be maintained in any area, and areas to be used for trash or garbage containers shall be only those areas designated by the airport manager. All hangars and other premises on the airport shall be maintained in a condition as to repair, cleanliness and general maintenance that is equal to the level of maintenance maintained by the city in comparable areas. Fuel and oil storage facilities must be approved by and in a location designated by the airport manager. Such storage shall comply with any regulations adopted pursuant to section 7-6-12, as well as applicable federal, state and local fire codes pertaining to fire safety, including, but not limited to, the building code, fire code, fire code standards and fire protection association standards. (Ord. 2020-02-007 § 2 (Att.), 2-6-2020)

7-6-11: STRUCTURE DESIGN:
In order to assure an aesthetic appearance and harmonious design of airport improvements, new construction and remodeling or repainting of existing structures shall: (A) use earth tone or similarly subdued shades of paint; and (B) construction on the airport shall have design and coloration reviewed and approved by the airport manager in order to assure compatibility with the approved building development standards. (Ord. 2020-02-007 § 2 (Att.), 2-6-2020)

7-6-12: COMMERCIAL STANDARDS:
In addition to compliance with those regulations set forth herein and regulations of the state division of aeronautics, and with the FAA, the city council may adopt such Minimum Standards for Commercial Aeronautical Activities at the airport as it may deem necessary from time to time to carry out the purposes of this chapter and serve the best interests of the city. Such standards shall be made available to all members of the public, both at the city recorder’s office and at the office of the airport manager. Failure to comply with such standards shall be considered a violation of this chapter, and the airport manager may deny the use and privileges of the airport to any such violator, subject to the appeal rights contained in section 7-6-13B. (Ord. 2020-02-007 § 2 (Att.), 2-6-2020)

7-6-13: PENALTY; APPEAL:
A. Penalty: Any person violating any provision in this chapter shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1. Each violation shall be a separate offense. After the second conviction for the same offense, the violation shall be a class B misdemeanor. The city may take enforcement action as set forth herein or it may initiate other legal action as it may deem appropriate.
B. Appeal: Any person who feels aggrieved by staff enforcement of this chapter, rules and regulations promulgated hereunder, or the Minimum Standards for Commercial Aeronautical Activities promulgated hereunder, may appeal to the city council in writing, setting forth the specific grievance in detail. An appeal shall be heard at the next meeting of the city council occurring more than ten (10) days after filing with the city recorder. The decision of the city council shall be final. The sole exception to the appeal process herein provided shall apply to criminal charges under state or city law and emergency or safety issues. (Ord. 2020-02-007 § 2 (Att.), 2-6-2020)

CHAPTER 7 SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY


7-7-1:       Purpose; Scope
7-7-2:       Definitions
7-7-3:       Orders, Rules and Regulations
7-7-4:       Master License Agreement Required
7-7-5:       Permit Required
7-7-6:       Permit Applications
7-7-7:       Compensation
7-7-8:       Other Requirements
7-7-9:       Enforcement and Remedies

7-7-1: PURPOSE; SCOPE:
A. The purpose of this chapter is to (1) regulate the use of public rights-of-way by wireless communication providers related to small wireless communication facilities to the extent allowed by law to promote and protect public health, safety, and welfare, (2) provide for an application process to allow wireless communication providers to obtain a permit to deploy small wireless facilities in public rights-of-way to control the public rights-of-way, (3) define reasonable and nondiscriminatory design standards for small wireless facilities to promote consistency of design, and (4) set fees for the actions authorized hereunder to compensate the city for the use of, and the use of its resources to manage, the public rights-of-way.
B. This chapter applies only to small wireless facilities located in public rights-of-way. This chapter does not apply in any manner to (1) wireless communication facilities that are not small wireless facilities, (2) uses of public rights-of-way that are not related to small wireless facilities, or (3) the activities of wireless communication providers on any land that is not a public right-of-way. (Ord. 2020-02-005 § 1, 2-2-2020)

7-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise defined herein, terms used herein have the same meaning as defined in Utah Code Annotated section 51-21-101, or its successor. In addition:
ADA: The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, 42 U.S.C. Sec. 12101 et seq., or successor statute.
CITY: The city of St. George, a Utah municipal corporation.
CITY ENGINEER: The city engineer, or authorized representative.
MACRO WIRELESS FACILITY: An antenna mounted on a tower or similar structure that is not a small wireless facility or a micro wireless facility.
MASTER LICENSE AGREEMENT: An agreement between a wireless provider and the city that sets forth the general terms and conditions pursuant to which the wireless provider may install and operate wireless facilities in the public way.
PERMITTEE: Any person who has been issued a permit and has agreed to fulfill the requirements of this chapter, on its own behalf or on behalf of a wireless provider.
PERSON: Means and includes any natural person, partnership, firm, association, public utility company, corporation, company, organization, or entity of any kind.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY: All public rights-of-way, pathways, walkways and sidewalks, public streets, public roads, public highways, public alleys, and public drainageways including the surface, subsurface and above surface space, now or hereafter existing as such owned by the city within the municipal boundaries of the city.
STRUCTURE: A utility pole or a wireless support structure.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: The transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user’s choosing (e.g., data, video, and voice) without change in the form or content of the information sent and received.
UCA: The Utah Code Annotated (2019). (Ord. 2020-02-005 § 1, 2-2-2020)

7-7-3: ORDERS, RULES AND REGULATIONS:
In addition to the requirements set forth in this chapter, the city may adopt such orders, rules and regulations which are reasonably necessary to accomplish the purposes of this chapter and are consistent herewith. (Ord. 2020-02-005 § 1, 2-2-2020)

7-7-4: MASTER LICENSE AGREEMENT REQUIRED:
A. Any wireless provider desiring to install, repair, maintain, remove and replace wireless facilities in the public way shall first enter into a master license agreement with the city, except to the extent exempted by federal or state law. A macro wireless facility is not permitted in the public way unless required by federal law.
B. The city may grant nonexclusive master license agreements on a nondiscriminatory basis, governing the installation, operation, use and maintenance of wireless facilities in the city’s public way in accordance with the provisions of this section.
C. The term of a master license agreement may be renewed if the wireless provider is in compliance with the master license agreement and all applicable laws, rules, and regulations, including this chapter.
D. This section shall only apply to wireless facilities. If a wireless provider has telecommunications systems that may be used for multiple purposes, such as a wireline backhaul facility or video services system, then such provider shall obtain a franchise agreement from city for each permitted purpose.
E. Before offering or providing any wireless services pursuant to the master license agreement, a wireless provider shall obtain all other regulatory approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses for the offering or providing of such services from the appropriate federal, state, and local authorities, if required, and, upon request of the city, shall submit to the city evidence of the same, such as a license from the FCC or certificate from the state public service commission.
F. The grant of a master license agreement will not excuse the wireless provider from obtaining (1) any permit or other authorization required to engage in or carry on any business within the city as required by the laws, rules, and regulations of the city, (2) any other permit, agreement or authorization required in connection with the use of property or facilities owned by third parties, or (3) any other permit or authorization required in connection with excavating or performing other work in or along the public way.
G. Except to the extent exempted by applicable law, any wireless provider acting without a master license agreement on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall request issuance of a master license agreement from the city within ninety (90) days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. If such request is made, the wireless provider may continue to provide services during the course of negotiations. If a timely request is not made, or if a master license agreement is not granted, the wireless provider shall remove its equipment from the public way within thirty (30) days of notice from the city.
H. A master license agreement shall not convey title, equitable or legal, in the public way. A master license agreement is the right to occupy the public way on a nonexclusive basis for the limited purposes and time period stated in the agreement.
I. A master license agreement granted pursuant to this chapter shall contain appropriate provisions for enforcement, compensation, and protection of the public, consistent with the other provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, defining events of default, procedures for accessing the bond/security fund, and rights of termination or revocation.
J. In the event a wireless provider continues to operate all or any of its wireless facilities after the term of the master license has expired, such wireless provider shall continue to comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter and the master license agreement, including, without limitation, all compensation provisions; provided, that any such continued operations shall in no way be construed as a renewal or other extension of the master license agreement, nor as a limitation on the remedies available to the city as a result of such continued operation after the term, including, but not limited to, damages and restitution. (Ord. 2020-02-005 § 1, 2-2-2020)

7-7-5: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Except as otherwise provided by applicable law, any wireless provider desiring to install a wireless facility in the public way shall first apply for and obtain a permit for such work. The city will not provide a permit to a wireless provider until the wireless provider and city have first entered into a master license agreement, and, if required, a franchise agreement. If a wireless provider authorizes another person to act as the permittee to perform any activity contemplated by this chapter, such wireless provider shall be responsible for such permittee in connection with the responsibilities of this chapter and the permit and shall be responsible under this chapter and pursuant to the conditions of the permit as if it were the permittee. (Ord. 2020-02-005 § 1, 2-2-2020)

7-7-6: PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
A. Application Fee: In order to offset the cost to the city to review applications, a wireless provider shall pay to city a nonrefundable application fee for a permit to work in the public way for the installation or modification of a wireless facility. The cost of such application is set forth on the city’s consolidated fee schedule, and shall be the following amounts:
    1. One hundred dollars ($100.00) for each small wireless facility to collocate a small wireless facility on an existing or replacement utility pole.
    2. Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each utility pole to install, modify, or replace a utility pole associated with a small wireless facility, where permitted under Utah Code Annotated section 54-21-204, or its successor.
    3. One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each utility pole to install, modify, or replace a utility pole associated with a small wireless facility, where not permitted under Utah Code Annotated section 54-21-204, or its successor.
B. Form Of Application: A wireless provider shall apply for a permit on a form provided by the city and shall designate the purpose of the permit and the location and type and location of the installation or modification.
C. Avoiding Redundant Submittals: The city engineer may allow a wireless provider to maintain on file with the engineering department any documentation that would otherwise be required for each individual application, such as basic wireless facility design documents and pole load analyses. The wireless provider must update any such information as necessary to keep it current. (Ord. 2020-02-005 § 1, 2-2-2020)

7-7-7: COMPENSATION:
A. Collocation Rate: A wireless provider shall pay to city an annual fee for each collocation on a city owned utility pole as set forth in Utah Code Annotated section 54-21-504, or its successor, so long as the wireless provider is not subject to the Municipal Telecommunications License Tax Act, Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-401 et seq.
B. Public Way Rate: In consideration for a wireless provider’s right to use or occupy the public way as described herein, a wireless provider shall pay to the city an annual amount equal to the greater of (1) three and one-half percent (3.5%) of such wireless provider’s gross revenues related to wireless provider’s use of the public way, or (2) two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per small wireless facility.
C. With the payment of each annual public way rate, a wireless provider shall include a report describing gross revenue upon which the rate is calculated and a description, of reasonable specificity, of the small wireless facilities which have generated the revenue upon which the rate is based. Such report shall include such information related to such payment as the city may reasonably request. The records of the wireless provider pertaining to the reports and payment required by this chapter, including but not limited to any records deemed necessary or useful by the city to calculate or confirm gross revenue, and all other records of the wireless provider reasonably required by city to assure compliance by the wireless provider with the terms of this chapter shall be open to inspection by the city and its duly authorized representatives upon reasonable notice at all reasonable business hours of the wireless provider.
D. Other Fees: A wireless provider shall pay all other applicable fees established by city, specifically including but not limited to permit fees and business license fees. (Ord. 2020-02-005 § 1, 2-2-2020)

7-7-8: OTHER REQUIREMENTS:
A. Design Standards: The design and location of the wireless facility and utility pole or support structure shall comply with all standards adopted by the city.
B. Structural Load Analysis: The application shall include an industry-standard pole load analysis indicating that the structure on which the wireless facilities will be mounted will safely support the load. If a small wireless facility cannot be safely installed on the respective structure, applicant shall either replace the structure with a compliant structure of the same type, or propose a new location.
C. Height: 
    1. The height of a structure with an attached wireless facility, including the wireless facility, shall be the minimum height needed for the operation of the wireless facility.
    2. In no event shall the maximum height of a new or modified utility pole with an attached wireless facility, including the wireless facility, exceed fifty feet (50') above the public way.
    3. Where wireless facility equipment is permitted on the outside of a utility pole, it shall be placed higher than eight feet (8') above the public way, unless otherwise permitted by city.
D. Decorative Poles: If necessary to collocate a wireless facility on a decorative pole, a wireless provider may replace a decorative pole, if the replacement pole reasonably conforms to the design aesthetics of the displaced decorative pole and meets the requirements of this section, including the design standards.
E. Undergrounding: The city may require a wireless facility to be placed underground as permitted by Utah Code Annotated section 54-21-207, or its successor.
F. Historic Districts And Design Districts: In order to maintain the character of a historic district and/or conservation district all wireless facilities and new structures in such a district must employ screening, concealment, camouflage, or other stealth techniques to minimize visual impacts, and comply with all requirements and obtain all approvals as required by law as permitted by Utah Code Annotated section 54-21-208, or its successor. Wireless facilities and new structures must be architecturally integrated with existing buildings, structures and landscaping, including considerations of height, color, style, placement, design and shape.
G. Insurance And Bonding: A wireless provider will be responsible for carrying and maintaining insurance and bonds as may be required in the master license agreement or otherwise by the city and in connection with obtaining a permit.
H. Indemnity: A wireless provider shall indemnify, save harmless, and defend city, its officers and employees, from and against all losses, claims, counterclaims, demands, actions, damages, costs, charges, and causes of action of every kind or character, including attorneys’ fees, arising out of or in connection with such provider’s wireless facilities or use of the public way, unless and to the extent caused by the city’s negligence.
I. Electrical Service: A wireless provider will be solely responsible for establishing electrical power services for its wireless facilities and for the payment of all electrical utility charges to the applicable electric service provider based upon applicable tariffs. A wireless provider shall obtain a building permit for installation of such electrical service as required by the city.
J. Residential Zones: A wireless provider may not install a new utility pole in a public way adjacent to a single-family lot, other multifamily residences, or undeveloped land that is designated for residential use by zoning or deed restrictions, if the curb to curb measurement of the street is sixty feet (60') wide or less as depicted on the official plat records or other measurement provided with the application, unless city has given prior written consent.
K. Inspections: All wireless facilities and wireless provider-owned structures shall be maintained by the wireless provider in a clean and good condition, free of graffiti, rusting, excessive dirt, and peeling paint. The city shall have the authority to conduct inspections of the wireless facilities and structures at any time to determine whether such facilities and structures comply with the requirements of this chapter.
L. Compliance With Law: All wireless facilities must at all times comply with all applicable federal, state, and local building codes and safety codes and regulations, including any requirement to obtain an excavation permit prior to any excavation. To the extent this chapter conflicts with other provisions of city ordinances, this chapter shall control. All wireless facilities and structures shall be constructed and installed to manufacturer’s specifications. A wireless provider shall obtain one (1) or more FCC licenses, as required by the FCC, to operate its wireless facilities.
M. Hazardous Materials: A wireless provider shall not possess, use, generate, release, discharge, store, dispose of, or transport any hazardous materials on, under, in, above, to, or from any public way except in compliance with all applicable environmental laws and preapproved by city. Wireless provider shall promptly reimburse city for any fines or penalties levied against city because of wireless provider’s failure to comply with environmental laws.
N. Tree Trimming: A wireless provider may trim trees overhanging the public way to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wireless facilities only with permission and under the direction of the city’s urban forester and at the wireless provider’s expense.
O. Additional Requirements: Wireless facilities will be subject to any additional requirements set forth in the applicable master license agreement and permit. A wireless provider shall notify the city no less than ten (10) days before performing any routine maintenance, the replacement of a small wireless facility with a small wireless facility that is substantially similar or smaller in size, or the installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of a micro wireless facility that is strung on a cable between existing utility poles. (Ord. 2020-02-005 § 1, 2-2-2020)

7-7-9: ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES:
A. Enforcement: The city is responsible for enforcing and administering this chapter, and the city or its designee is authorized to give any notice required by law or under any master license agreement or permit. Failure of city to require performance of any term in this chapter or the waiver by either party of breach hereof shall not prevent subsequent enforcement of that term and shall not be deemed a waiver of any subsequent breach.
B. Removal Of Wireless Facilities: 
    1. In the event (a) the use of a wireless facility is discontinued for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, (b) the term of the applicable master license agreement has expired, or (c) any wireless facility or structure has been installed in the public way without complying with the requirements of this chapter, and the respective wireless facilities have not been removed by the wireless provider within thirty (30) days of any such event, such wireless provider shall be deemed to have abandoned such wireless facility.
    2. If any wireless facility is deemed abandoned, the wireless provider shall remove its wireless facilities and structures within ninety (90) days of the city’s notice of such abandonment and shall repair and restore the public way to a similar or better condition than at the time of the installation. Failure to do so may result in the city’s removal of the facilities and structures at the wireless provider’s cost. The city shall have the right to inspect and approve the condition of the public way, wireless facilities, and structures prior to and after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of this chapter and any security required of a wireless provider shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by a provider with the terms and conditions of this section.
    3. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this chapter, and subject to city’s approval in its discretion, a wireless provider may abandon any underground facilities in place so long as it does not materially interfere with the use of the public way or with the use thereof by any public utility, cable operator or other person.
C. Default: If a wireless provider defaults under any provision of this chapter and such default is not cured within thirty (30) days following notice by city to wireless provider of its default, or such longer cure period as permitted by city, city shall maintain all its rights and remedies, at law and in equity, including the ability to charge fines, recover fees and costs, and remove the wireless facilities. Without limitation, city may:
    1. Fine the violating party one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day per violation until the violation is cured;
    2. Terminate or suspend any franchise, permits, or licenses held by the violating party; and
    3. Withhold issuing any new permits to the violating party.
    4. If the violation is not cured within one hundred eighty (180) days, or such longer cure period as may be permitted by city, city may remove and impound the wireless facilities until the violation has been cured. (Ord. 2020-02-005 § 1, 2-2-2020)

TITLE 8 UTILITIES AND PUBLIC SERVICES

Chapter
1            Water Use And Service
2            Backflow And Cross Connections
3            Electric Power
    3A           Electric Franchise
4            Pretreatment
5            No Fault Sewer And Water Claims
6            Storm Water Drainage Services
7            Suntran Services

CHAPTER 1 WATER USE AND SERVICE


8-1-1:       Waterworks System
8-1-2:       Rules And Regulations; Authority Of City Council
8-1-3:       Rates; Delinquency
8-1-4:       Water Record
8-1-5:       Assessments
8-1-6:       No Development Without Water
8-1-7:       Private Water Companies
8-1-8:       Right Of Entry On Premises of Water User
8-1-9:       Scarcity Of Water
8-1-10:      Water Flowing In Streets
8-1-11:      Injuring Fixtures Or Befouling Water
8-1-12:      Nonliability Of City

8-1-1: WATERWORKS SYSTEM:
The waterworks constructed under the direction of the city council to supply the city with water shall be designated and known as the “St. George city waterworks.” It shall be the property of the city, and shall be under the sole and exclusive control of the city council, who may, from time to time, direct the construction of such reservoirs, water tanks, water mains, service pipes and fire hydrants, as the necessities of the inhabitants of the city may require. (1962 Code § 3-2-7; amd. 2003 Code)

8-1-2: RULES AND REGULATIONS; AUTHORITY OF CITY COUNCIL:
The city council may enact ordinances, rules and regulations for the management and conduct of the city waterworks system. (1962 Code § 3-2-31; amd. 2003 Code)

8-1-3: RATES; DELINQUENCY:
A. Water Rates; Owner Of Premises Liable: The city shall not be required to furnish water for use in any house, tenement, apartment, building, place, premises or lot, whether such water is for the use of the owner or tenant, unless the application for water shall be made in writing, signed by the owner or a duly authorized agent, in which application the owner shall agree to pay for all water furnished such house, tenement, apartment, building, place, premises or lot according to the ordinances, rules and regulations enacted or adopted by the city. In case an application for furnishing water shall be made by a tenant of the owner, the city may require as a condition of granting the application for furnishing water that the application contain an agreement signed by the owner or duly authorized agent, to the effect that in consideration of granting the application, the owner will pay for all water furnished the tenant, or any other occupant of the place named in the application, in case the tenant or the occupant fails to pay for the water according to the ordinances, rules and regulations enacted or adopted by the city.
B. Failure To Pay Service; Termination: In case the owner, tenant or occupant of any premises, house, tenement, apartment, building, place or lot fails to pay for water furnished such owner, tenant or occupant, according to such ordinances, rules or regulations enacted or adopted, the city may cause the water to be shut off from such premises, house, tenement, apartment, building, place or lot. The city shall not be required to turn the same on again until all arrears for water furnished shall be paid in full. (2003 Code)

8-1-4: WATER RECORD:
The city recorder shall make in a book to be kept for that purpose a water record, showing the number of water shares to the use of which the several owners are entitled, and shall distinguish clearly between water shares which entitle the owner to the use of water from the east springs. (1962 Code § 3-2-23; amd. 2003 Code)

8-1-5: ASSESSMENTS:
A. Water Assessment Roll: 
    1. The city recorder shall by examination of the east city springs water abstract, present to the city council on or before the first Saturday in March of each year a water assessment roll.
    2. Upon receipt of the east city springs assessment roll, the city council, for the purpose of regulating and controlling the east city springs irrigation water, shall during the month of March, by resolution, levy a water assessment upon each and every share. Within two (2) weeks after the adjournment of the city council at which the assessment was made, the city recorder shall compute the assessment against each share. Upon receipt of the water assessment roll, the city treasurer shall proceed to collect the water assessment, and on or before July 1 of each year furnish to the holder of each of the shares or fraction thereof, by mail, postage prepaid, the number of shares of water assessed with the amount of assessment levied and when it becomes due.
    3. All assessments provided for under the provisions of this section shall be due at twelve o’clock (12:00) noon on July 15 in each year, and on August 4 following at twelve o’clock (12:00) noon, all unpaid assessments shall be delinquent. (1962 Code § 3-2-26; amd. 2003 Code)
B. Treasurer To Receive Assessments: The city treasurer shall keep a water assessment account. The city treasurer shall receipt monthly for all water assessments collected, specifying the amount and kinds paid. (1962 Code § 3-2-27; amd. 2003 Code)

8-1-6: NO DEVELOPMENT WITHOUT WATER:
A. It shall be unlawful for persons to develop property within the city in excess of one acre for residential, commercial or industrial purposes unless any and all water rights appurtenant to or used upon and in connection with said property, or produced and developed on said property, are first offered to the city for purchase of said water rights by the city at the fair market value. Any person seeking to develop property within the city as provided above shall furnish satisfactory evidence to the city that no transfer, sale, lease or disposal of water rights was consummated after June 1, 1987, contrary to the provisions hereof. No person shall sell, transfer, lease or assign water or water rights that are produced or developed on property within the city where such water will be used for the benefit of property that has not previously benefited therefrom, unless it is determined that future development of the property which has historically benefited from such water would not be feasible under any conditions. Determination of the transferability of water shall be made by the water services director in writing after a consideration of 1) the impact development of any such property will have upon the city’s ability to reasonably supply water to future occupants of the property; 2) the use to be made of water proposed to be transferred; 3) the most efficient utilization of water within the city; 4) the furtherance of conservation practices; and 5) all other relevant circumstances.
B. Any person not in agreement with the water services director’s decision affecting property in which that person has an interest may appeal the decision to the water and energy services board within fifteen (15) days after receipt of such determination by requesting a hearing and setting forth the basis for appeal. Within thirty (30) days after receipt of an appeal, the water and energy services board shall afford the property owner a public hearing, at which time said person may present evidence in opposition to that determination, and the water and energy services board may thereafter affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the water services director. (Ord. 5-2-1987, 5-21-1987; amd. Ord. 2003-02-002, 2-20-2003)
C. No plat shall be approved nor building permit issued in furtherance of the development of any property from which water rights have been transferred in violation hereof. Violation shall constitute an infraction, and upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code, and each day during which a violation exists may be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 5-2-1987, 5-21-1987; amd. 2003 Code)

8-1-7: PRIVATE WATER COMPANIES:
A. Any person or entity engaged in the distribution of water for culinary or irrigation purposes within the city shall obtain a permit therefor from the water services director. “Distribution” is defined to mean the delivery of water to three (3) or more customers for a charge in excess of the cost of the water. No permit shall be issued except to persons or entities engaged in the distribution of water prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified herein, or for proposed distribution that is determined by the director to not interfere with or impact the conservation and effective utilization of water resources through the city water system. Reasonable standards for making such determination shall be formulated by the director and adopted by the water and energy services board. Permits shall be issued after a submission of such information and data reasonably requested by the director and upon determination by the water and energy services board that the requested distribution is consistent with the standards adopted, the economy and best interests of the city, and the need to regulate water resources within the city. Issuance or denial of a permit shall be made by the board within thirty (30) days after the receipt by it of all requested information. Denial of a permit may be appealed in writing to the city council within fifteen (15) days after receipt of denial from the water and energy services board, and the city council shall afford the appellant a hearing and render a decision approving or reversing the decision of the board within thirty (30) days after receipt of such appeal.
B. Any permit issued by the city for private water distribution hereunder shall be upon those conditions set forth in sections 8-3A-4 through 8-3A-10 of this title, substituting “water” for “electric.” The fees payable for such a permit shall correspond to those fees set forth in section 8-3A-12 of this title. Failure of a person or entity to comply with the provisions hereof may result in the revocation of a permit and all rights thereunder upon written notice from the city and after the expiration of opportunity as provided in such notice for a hearing before the city council with regard to such violation, failure or default. (Ord. 5-2-1987, 5-21-1987)

8-1-8: RIGHT OF ENTRY ON PREMISES OF WATER USER:
All authorized persons connected with the city waterworks shall have the right to enter upon any premises furnished with water by the city to examine the apparatus, the amount of water used and the manner of use, and to make all necessary shutoffs for vacancy, delinquency or violation of the ordinances, rules or regulations concerning utilities enacted or adopted by the city. (1962 Code § 3-2-9; amd. 2003 Code)

8-1-9: SCARCITY OF WATER:
In the event of a scarcity of water, the mayor may, by proclamation, limit the use of water for any purpose other than domestic purposes to such extent as may be required for the public good in the judgment of the city council. (1962 Code § 3-2-11; amd. 2003 Code)

8-1-10: WATER FLOWING IN STREETS:
Any person who willfully or carelessly obstructs, or injures any street, alley, public place, or sidewalk within the city, by permitting flow or seepage of water or who willfully or carelessly permits water under his control to escape in any manner, so as to injure any street, alley, public place or sidewalk shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1962 Code § 3-2-22; amd. 2003 Code)

8-1-11: INJURING FIXTURES OR BEFOULING WATER:
A. Any person who shall use the water coming through the water mains without first paying, or shall without authority open any stopcock, valve or other fixtures attached to the system of water supply, or shall in any way injure, deface or impair any part or any appurtenance of the waterworks; or shall bathe in, or cast anything into any reservoir or tank, shall be deemed guilty of a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to connect to any known water line feeding water from any spring, well or stream to any system which is fed from the city culinary system.
C. It shall be unlawful for any plumber authorized to make connections in the city under this chapter to connect any private water system to any other system, which is directly connected with any pipes leading directly or indirectly from the city culinary system. (1962 Code § 3-2-29; amd. 2003 Code)

8-1-12: NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
The city shall not be held liable for damages to any water taker by reason of a stoppage or interruption of the water supply, caused by scarcity of water, accidents to canals, works or mains, alterations, additions, repairs or other unavoidable causes. (1962 Code § 3-2-30)

CHAPTER 2 BACKFLOW AND CROSS CONNECTIONS


8-2-1:       Definitions
8-2-2:       Enforcement Authority
8-2-3:       Protection Of Water Supply
8-2-4:       Backflow Prevention Devices Or Assemblies; When Required
8-2-5:       Testing And Inspection
8-2-6:       New Construction
8-2-7:       Installation Of Prevention Device Required
8-2-8:       Existing Equipment
8-2-9:       Repair And Maintenance Of Equipment
8-2-10:      Access For Inspection
8-2-11:      Certified Backflow Technician
8-2-12:      Notification Of Public
8-2-13:      Records Maintained
8-2-14:      Violations
8-2-15:      Emergency Discontinuance Of Service
8-2-16:      Penalty

8-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
BACK PRESSURE: A pressure, higher than the supply pressure, caused by a pump, elevated tank, boiler, or any other means that may cause backflow.
BACK SIPHONAGE: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source other than the intended source, caused by the reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system.
BACKFLOW: The reversal of the normal flow of water in a potable water distribution system as a result of cross connection.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE OR ASSEMBLY: A device, assembly or means designed to prevent backflow, which complies with the specifications of section 608 of the international plumbing code.
CHEMICAL: Any solid, gas, liquid, or other substance of whatever nature which is possible to introduce into the public drinking water system other than the intended potable water, including, but not limited to, nonpotable water, pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, soaps, detergents, and other similar substances.
CHEMICAL EQUIPMENT: Any equipment, device, or other contraption of whatever nature which is used or designed for the handling, storage, transportation, or application of chemicals, including, but not limited to, herbicide, pesticide, fertilizer, mobile wash, and other similar equipment.
CHEMICAL VEHICLE: Every vehicle of whatever nature used or designed for the handling, storage, transportation, or application of chemicals, including, but not limited to, herbicide, pesticide, fertilizer, mobile wash, and other similar vehicles.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any actual or potential connection between a potable water system and any other source or system through which it is possible to introduce into the public drinking water system any used water, industrial fluid, gas or substance other than the intended potable water. (Ord. 2006-10-003, 10-19-2006)

8-2-2: ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
The city of St. George water department shall have the authority to administer and enforce this chapter. (Ord. 2006-10-003, 10-19-2006)

8-2-3: PROTECTION OF WATER SUPPLY:
No person, business, or entity shall cause, create, or allow to exist, any actual or potential cross connection that affects or possibly may affect the city’s water supply system. No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the city, or any other water utility, unless the water supplying the premises is protected as required by state and city laws and regulations. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the occupied premises to effect installation and inspections as required herein, and to give notice to the supplier or water utility of any deficiencies of his water system in that regard. (Ord. 2006-10-003, 10-19-2006)

8-2-4: BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES OR ASSEMBLIES; WHEN REQUIRED:
A. Property Owners: It shall be the responsibility of the owner of property where water is consumed to purchase, install, test, inspect and maintain backflow prevention devices or assemblies wherever it will be possible for used, unclean, polluted or contaminated water, mixtures or substances to enter any portion of his potable water system, and to otherwise control cross connections.
B. Chemical Equipment And Vehicles: 
    1. Backflow Device Required: No person shall add water to any chemical equipment via a hose, pump or other equipment unless such hose, pump or other equipment is fitted with an effective and approved permanently affixed backflow prevention device or assembly to prevent backflow of chemicals or liquids containing chemicals into the city’s water supply system, streams, lakes, other sources of water or other areas.
    2. Exception: Notwithstanding the foregoing, a backflow prevention device or assembly is not required when:
        a. It is impossible to permanently affix a backflow prevention device to the hose, pump, or other equipment;
        b. The hose, pump or other equipment is not allowed to contact or fall below the flood rim of the handling, storage or application equipment to which water is being added; and
        c. No other possible means of establishing a back siphon or backflow exists.
    3. Chemical Vehicles: Every chemical vehicle to which water is or potentially may be added from the city’s water supply system shall be equipped with a permanently affixed and operational air gap backflow device. All water added to such vehicles from the city’s water supply system shall pass through the backflow device. (Ord. 2006-10-003, 10-19-2006)

8-2-5: TESTING AND INSPECTION:
A. Annual Testing Of Backflow Devices Or Assemblies: Each property owner or owner of chemical equipment or vehicles on which a backflow prevention device or assembly is required under this chapter shall have certified inspections and operational tests made at least once a year at the owner’s own expense. Where the city deems the hazard to be great, the city may require such inspections and tests at a more frequent interval as prescribed by the city. All such tests shall be made according to the standards set forth by the Utah State Department of Health, Bureau of Drinking Water and Sanitation and the International Plumbing Code. The city may require at any time proof of compliance with this section.
B. Inspection Of Chemical Vehicles: Every chemical vehicle on which a backflow prevention device or assembly is required under this chapter shall be submitted for inspection to the city of St. George water department before it is put into service and at least once every six (6) months thereafter. The city shall verify that each such vehicle is equipped with an approved backflow device. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any such vehicle to arrange for the inspections required by this section.
C. Condition For Issuance Of Business License: The issuance or renewal of a business license for any business employing chemical equipment or vehicles subject to the provisions of this chapter may be conditioned upon compliance with this section, and any failure to comply with this section shall be grounds for the suspension of a business license issued to any such business. (Ord. 2006-10-003, 10-19-2006)

8-2-6: NEW CONSTRUCTION:
The building official will review all plans for new construction to ensure that unprotected cross connections are not an integral part of the owner’s water system. If a cross connection cannot be eliminated, protection will be required by installation of an air gap or other approved backflow prevention device or assembly, in accordance with the plumbing code. Water vacating the drinking water supply must do so by means of an approved air gap or mechanical backflow prevention device or assembly as required by said code. The owner shall provide the building official with verification of a certified test of the backflow prevention device or assembly before a certificate of occupancy is issued. (Ord. 2006-10-003, 10-19-2006)

8-2-7: INSTALLATION OF PREVENTION DEVICE REQUIRED:
Whenever the city deems that a service connection’s water usage contributes a sufficient hazard to the water supply and a property owner has not made appropriate installation, the installation of an approved backflow prevention device or assembly shall be required on the lateral service line of the owner’s water system, at or near the property line, or immediately inside the building being served, but before the first branch line leading off the lateral service line in any event. The type of protective device or assembly required shall comply with local and state requirements. The water services department shall be provided by the owner with a certified test of such backflow prevention devices or assemblies within ten (10) working days after their initial installation in order to determine their adequacy. (Ord. 2006-10-003, 10-19-2006)

8-2-8: EXISTING EQUIPMENT:
All backflow prevention devices or assemblies existing as of November 1989, which do not meet the requirements hereof, shall nonetheless be required to comply with the requirements of this chapter, unless they are deemed by the building official or the water services department to be nonetheless adequate for the purposes intended, in which event compliance with any particular provision hereof may be waived in writing by the city. Such previously existing devices or assemblies shall be subject in any event to the periodic inspection and testing required by this chapter. Whenever an existing device or assembly is moved to another location, or requires more than minimum maintenance, or where it is determined to constitute a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by an approved backflow prevention device or assembly meeting the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2006-10-003, 10-19-2006)

8-2-9: REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE OF EQUIPMENT:
The maintenance, including necessary repairs, of all backflow prevention devices or assemblies and cross connection control devices required by this chapter shall be the responsibility of the owner of property, equipment, or vehicle where an assembly or device is installed, and failure to adequately maintain any required device or assembly shall be a violation hereof. All installations and repairs of such devices or assemblies shall be effected by a certified journeyman plumber or other agent of the owner, provided he is a certified backflow technician as provided in this chapter, in either case. (Ord. 2006-10-003, 10-19-2006)

8-2-10: ACCESS FOR INSPECTION:
All water systems, and all equipment and vehicles on which a backflow prevention device or assembly is required shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times by authorized representatives of the water services department in order to determine whether cross connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of this chapter, exist. In order to make such determination, the inspection shall include access to above ceiling areas, pits, paneled interior areas, or other locations where cross connections might exist. The owner and any occupant shall be responsible to provide a route of access across the property for inspection purposes that is free from litter, overgrowth, the threat of a vicious animal, or other hindrance that may be detrimental to the safety of the inspector or obstructive to his ease of access. (Ord. 2006-10-003, 10-19-2006)

8-2-11: CERTIFIED BACKFLOW TECHNICIAN:
All tests of backflow prevention devices or assemblies shall be conducted by a certified backflow technician who will be responsible for the competence and accuracy of all tests and reports. Such technician shall be responsible for the following:
A. Assure that acceptable testing equipment and procedures are used for the testing, repairing or overhauling of backflow prevention devices or assemblies.
B. Make report of such testing and/or repair within required times to the owner, the water services department and the backflow technician on a form approved for such use by the Utah Bureau of Drinking Water and Sanitation.
C. Include in all reports a list of any materials or replacement parts used.
D. Assure that replacement parts are equal in quality to original parts and that any testing, repair or replacement does not change the design or operational characteristics of the assembly.
E. Maintain his license in current condition and his testing equipment in proper operating condition.
F. Be equipped with, and competent to use, all necessary tools, gauges and other equipment necessary to properly test and maintain backflow prevention devices or assemblies.
G. Tag each double check valve, pressure vacuum breaker, reduced pressure backflow assembly, high hazard air gap, or other backflow prevention device or assembly showing the serial number, date tested, and by whom, together with the technician’s certification number. (Ord. 2006-10-003, 10-19-2006)

8-2-12: NOTIFICATION OF PUBLIC:
Although failure of a consumer to be aware of this chapter shall be no defense to violation hereof, the water services department may use reasonable means to notify its customers of the hazards of cross connections and the need for annual inspection of backflow prevention devices or assemblies. (Ord. 2006-10-003, 10-19-2006)

8-2-13: RECORDS MAINTAINED:
The city of St. George water department shall keep records of cross connection hazards and the condition of backflow prevention devices or assemblies, including those records required by state and federal agencies. It shall provide the tags required by this chapter, upon request by certified backflow technicians. (Ord. 2006-10-003, 10-19-2006)

8-2-14: VIOLATIONS:
A. Specified: A violation of this chapter exists if:
    1. Failure To Install: A backflow prevention assembly required by this chapter for control of cross connections is not installed, tested, or maintained, as required herein.
    2. Removal Or Bypass Of Assembly: It is found that a backflow prevention assembly has been removed or bypassed.
    3. Unprotected Cross Connection: An unprotected cross connection exists on the premises or equipment.
    4. Failure To Inspect: The periodic system inspection required herein has not been conducted.
    5. False Report Or Information: A false report or false information is provided to the city by or on behalf of the owner or consumer, with regard to the cross connection or backflow prevention assembly.
B. Notice Of Violation: The city shall provide written notification of any violation of this chapter to both the owner of the property or equipment on which the violation exists and the consumer, if different, and shall demand that corrective action be taken within twenty-four (24) hours of the delivery of such notification. The city, at the request of the owner or consumer, may authorize an extension of time for completion or any modification of the required corrective action upon good cause shown.
C. Discontinuance Of Water Service; Suspension of Business License: If the owner or consumer fails to take the required corrective action within twenty-four (24) hours of the delivery of a notice of violation of this chapter, the city in its own discretion may discontinue water service to the affected property and may suspend any business license issued to the owner and/or consumer.
D. Restoration Of Water Service; Reinstatement of Business License: Water service to the affected property will not be restored and no business license suspended under this section shall be reinstated until all outstanding fines and fees are paid, and all violations or defects are corrected and the city has inspected and approved the corrections.
E. Restitution: If contamination of the city’s water system occurs by means of a violation of this chapter, the owner of the property or equipment in violation, and/or the party responsible for such contamination must bear the cost of cleanup of the city’s water system. (Ord. 2006-10-003, 10-19-2006)

8-2-15: EMERGENCY DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the city may immediately discontinue water service to any property or number of properties without notice to the affected owners or consumers if the water services department determines that any violation of this chapter or other circumstances exist which may pose a significant health hazard. Such cessation of service shall continue until compliance is attained or the significant health hazard is removed. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city from seeking any remedy provided for under this chapter or other applicable law. (Ord. 2006-10-003, 10-19-2006)

8-2-16: PENALTY:
In addition to any penalty provided herein, any violation of this chapter shall be a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. Each violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense, and each day a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2006-10-003, 10-19-2006)

CHAPTER 3 ELECTRIC POWER


8-3-1:       Water Services And Energy Services Departments
8-3-2:       Water And Energy Services Board
8-3-3:       Water And Energy Systems Defined
8-3-4:       Rates, Deposits, Billings And Delinquency
8-3-5:       Application Required
8-3-6:       Meters
8-3-7:       Transformers And High Voltage Equipment
8-3-8:       Removal Of Unused Poles
8-3-9:       Liability
3A           Electric Franchise
    8-3A-1:      Company Defined
    8-3A-2:      Grant Of Authority
    8-3A-3:      Service Standards
    8-3A-4:      Company Liability; Indemnification
    8-3A-5:      Preferential Or Discriminatory Practices Prohibited
    8-3A-6:      Rates
    8-3A-7:      Records And Reports
    8-3A-8:      Posting Of Rates
    8-3A-9:      Billing Practices
    8-3A-10:     Term Of Franchise
    8-3A-11:     Procedure After Termination Or Revocation
    8-3A-12:     Payment To City
    8-3A-13:     Franchise Required
    8-3A-14:     Delivery Of System To City
    8-3A-15:     Forfeiture Of Franchise

8-3-1: WATER SERVICES AND ENERGY SERVICES DEPARTMENTS:
There is hereby created the city water services and energy services departments, which shall be managed by the water services director and energy services director, respectively, under direction of the city manager, in the same manner as all other city departments, with all authority and responsibility resting with the mayor and city council. The water and energy services board shall act as an advisory body to the mayor and city council with respect to policy related matters associated with this department. (Ord. 1982-8-1 eff. retroactive to 6-17-1982, 8-5-1982; amd. Ord. 2003-02-002, 2-20-2003; 2003 Code)

8-3-2: WATER AND ENERGY SERVICES BOARD:
A. Appointment: The city water and energy services board shall consist of five (5) members to be appointed by the mayor, with the approval of the city council, for the terms, at the salaries, and with the powers and duties hereinafter provided.
B. Term; Compensation: The present board members as constituted on the effective date hereof shall continue to serve for the terms to which they were previously appointed, except that each term shall be considered as ending on December 31 of the year in which the term would otherwise expire. One of the two (2) new members shall be appointed for an initial term ending December 31, 1989, and the other member shall be appointed for an initial term ending December 31, 1991. All appointments shall be for a term of five (5) years. Each member of the board shall be compensated for the performance of those duties required herein in an amount to be determined from time to time by the mayor and city council. In addition, members shall be reimbursed for expenses incurred in carrying out their duties, including reasonable travel and other expenses necessarily expended on behalf of the city while on board business outside of the city.
C. Qualifications; Organization: To be eligible for appointment to the water and energy services board, the candidate shall be a citizen of the United States, the state and a resident taxpayer of the city. The candidate must be of good character and possess qualifications necessary for the administration of affairs connected with the efficient management of the water and energy systems of the city. The appointed members of the board shall annually designate a chairperson and secretary and, at the request of the mayor and city council, may make recommendations regarding candidates to fill the position of power and water director. The board shall also make recommendations to the mayor and city council, through the city manager, regarding employment of additional personnel as may be necessary from time to time to carry out the duties of the water services and energy services departments. The board shall hold public meetings at least once a month at the city office building at an evening hour to be designated by it, and all members shall attend such meetings; provided, however, that three (3) members of the board shall constitute a quorum and may transact business of the board, provided any formal action or recommendation by the board shall require the unanimous vote of at least three (3) members. The city council shall afford business quarters suitable for meetings and other business of the board. Any member of the board who fails to discharge the duties of the office hereby created, by failing to attend meetings or otherwise, or for other sufficient cause, may be removed from office by the council and a new member appointed forthwith for the unexpired term. (Ord. 1982-8-1 eff. retroactive to 6-17-1982, 8-5-1982; amd. Ord. 2003-02-002, 2-20-2003; 2003 Code)
D. Powers And Duties Of Board: The water and energy services board shall be responsible to the city council for the following duties:
    1. To act as an advisory body to the city council and make recommendations to the city manager, mayor and city council concerning the water and energy systems. Board recommendations shall be in written form and submitted to the city manager for review and presentation to the mayor and city council for their consideration.
    2. The board shall have the following duties:
        a. To advise the city administration, the mayor and city council on long range planning for power generation and distribution, addressing future power needs and necessary physical facilities to meet those needs;
        b. To advise the city administration, the mayor and city council on long range planning for water needs and necessary physical facilities to meet those needs;
        c. To render advice on proposed capital expenditures;
        d. To make recommendations to the mayor and city council concerning electricity and water rates and charges;
        e. To review the monthly financial reports and operating reports of the water services and energy services departments and, where appropriate, provide advice and a recommendation to the city manager, the mayor and city council with respect to the same;
        f. To review the proposed budget for the water services and energy services departments and submit comments and recommendations to the city manager for review, modification and submittal to the mayor and city council for their consideration;
        g. To advise the city administration, the mayor and city council on other services or programs as developed or provided by national and state organizations, such as APPA, AWWA, UAMPS, etc. (Ord. 2001-01-001, 1-18-2001; amd. Ord. 2003-02-002, 2-20-2003; 2003 Code)

8-3-3: WATER AND ENERGY SYSTEMS DEFINED:
The utility systems of the city shall comprise and include the development, production, acquisition, transmission, distribution and sale of electrical energy, and other types of energy; and the development and operation of the culinary and irrigation waterworks, including distribution and sale of water therefrom. (Ord. 1982-8-1 eff. retroactive to 6-17-1982, 8-5-1982; amd. 2003 Code)

8-3-4: RATES, DEPOSITS, BILLINGS AND DELINQUENCY:
A. Rates: The schedule of rates to be charged the consumers of electrical energy and culinary water, as well as the rate paid to consumers under the city net metering policy, shall be calculated from time to time in accordance with the requirements of the utility systems and the best interests of the community. Those rates shall be approved by the mayor and city council.
B. Unified Billing: The finance department will be responsible for the preparation and collection of all utility bills. A system of unified billing shall be utilized whereby charges for electric, water, sewer, drainage and garbage services are combined and billed on a monthly basis. All owners or occupants of premises in the city shall pay for electric and water services on a metered basis as used and for sewer, drainage and garbage on a flat fee basis, utilizing the person or firm designated as official scavenger and garbage collector for the city to collect appropriate garbage and rubbish upon such premises. Such composite billing shall issue in recognition of the public health consideration that all city residents shall not only avail themselves of but provide support for said services provided by the city. Rates charged shall be uniform and equal except that differentiation may be made between residential, commercial and industrial classes of users.
C. Failure To Pay For Municipal Services: 
    1. If any person shall fail or refuse to pay or have paid on his behalf the charges for any of the available municipal services, the city shall shut off either water or electric service, or both, to the premises occupied by that person. Discontinuance of a service shall be in addition to any other remedy available to the city.
    2. Prior to termination of a service for nonpayment, the user of that service shall be given notice of shutoff at the address of the premises served or such alternate address as the user may have furnished for billing purposes. The notice shall inform the user of a right to appeal the shutoff whenever the user has a basis for contending that the billing is unjust or that there is not good cause for a shutoff. Upon request, a hearing before a three (3) person appeal board to be appointed by the city manager shall be held no sooner than four (4) days after receipt by the user of the notice and not less than twenty-four (24) hours before the cessation of any service. Request by the user for an appeal hearing shall be made within three (3) days after the receipt of notice as provided herein, or the right to appeal is considered to be waived.
    3. In the event of a determination by the appeal board that the billing is just or that no good cause exists why service should not be terminated, a service charge in such amount as established by resolution of the city council shall be added to the billing to cover the city’s expenses in connection with the appeal.
D. Reconnection Fee: In the event it shall become necessary to cease water and/or electric service to premises by reason of the occupant’s failure to pay for any service billed pursuant to subsection B of this section, reconnection shall not thereafter be made for the account of that user until a fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city council has been paid as a service fee for reconnection in addition to the amount of the delinquent bill.
E. Deposits: 
    1. Required: Where residential premises served by utilities are leased by the user, the tenant thereof shall be required to post a deposit in such amount as established by resolution of the city council, guaranteeing payment of charges when due before services will be provided; commercial accounts shall post a deposit at least as great as the cost of utility services for a six (6) week period. All deposits shall accrue interest at an interest rate as determined from time to time by the director of administrative services and approved by city council on any unused portion thereof, and interest earned shall be paid to the user upon return of the deposit. If a portion or all of a deposit is used to pay delinquent charges, the user, upon request, shall be required to add a further deposit equal to the amount so used. If after three (3) years it has not been necessary to use any part of a leased residential premises deposit, the city may return the deposit and accrued interest on that residential account and not require further deposit unless there is a subsequent delinquency in the payment of a bill. If after two (2) years it has not been necessary to use any part of a commercial deposit, the city may return the deposit and accrued interest on that commercial account and not require further deposit unless there is a change of owner or subsequent delinquency in the payment of a bill.
    2. New Account Where Preexisting Debt: Where application is made to open a new account which will benefit a user who still owes the city for utility service under an old account from which the user benefited, the application shall be rejected and service shall be refused until arrangements are made for payment of the prior indebtedness. It shall constitute an offense of strict liability for a user with outstanding indebtedness for utility service to knowingly permit an account to be opened in another name for utility service from which such user will benefit, and the user who engages in such a practice may be guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2016-01-003, 1-21-2016)

8-3-5: APPLICATION REQUIRED:
No culinary water or electric service shall be furnished to any house, lot, tenement, apartment, building, premises or place, whether such utility is for the use of an owner or a tenant, unless the application therefor shall be made in writing, signed by such user or his duly authorized agent, in which application the user shall agree to pay for all water and/or electricity furnished thereto according to city ordinances, rules and regulations. In the event there is a change in user, the city shall nonetheless hold the original user liable for charges incurred until the city is advised of the change and the new user makes appropriate application in writing to transfer the account and agree to pay for changes thereon. In case an application to furnish utilities shall be made by a tenant of the owner, as a condition of granting the same, the city may require the owner or his duly authorized agent to either cosign the application or sign a separate agreement which provides that in consideration of the granting of such application, the owner will pay for all water and electricity furnished such tenant, or other occupant of the place named in the application, in case the tenant or occupant shall fail to pay the same in accordance with the city’s ordinances, rules and regulations. (Ord. 1983-3-1, 3-3-1983; amd. 2003 Code)

8-3-6: METERS:
A. Right To Meter Premises: All consumers served or to be served with water or electric power shall give to the water services and energy services departments the right to maintain a meter or meters on the premises of the consumer, and it shall thereafter be the responsibility of the consumer and/or property owner to maintain adequate clearance around the meter to facilitate reading, maintenance, inspection or other required operations in connection therewith.
B. Meter Access: The consumer shall be required to provide access to the meter over his property without requiring employees to gain access to the meter through adjoining property of another. The consumer shall be responsible to provide a route of access to the meter free from litter and the threat of any vicious animal, overgrowth or other hindrance which may be detrimental to the safety of the employee or obstructive to his ease of access.
C. Penalty: It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain a condition contrary to the provisions of this section after due notice and time for compliance has been given. A continued noncompliance after receipt of notice shall constitute an infraction and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense hereunder.
D. Right To Terminate: It shall be the further right of the water services and energy services departments to disconnect the electric power or water serving the premises of a consumer who is in violation of the provisions of this section after the giving of notice as provided in subsection C of this section. Such disconnection shall be made in accordance with the provisions of subsection 8-3-4C2 of this chapter.
E. Tampering: It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper, alter, remove, turn on or otherwise disturb in any way an electric or water meter maintained by the city on public or private premises. (Ord. 5-2-1985; amd. 2003 Code)
F. Water Pressure Regulation: Although the city regulates water pressure in an effort to keep it uniformly under eighty (80) pounds per square inch, each residence using water in an area of the city where the maximum pressure without regulation by the city can exceed eighty (80) pounds per square inch shall have an approved pressure regulator on their incoming water line in tandem with an adequate strainer. The water services and energy services departments shall advise any property owner of the maximum water pressure in any local area upon request. In the event of failure of a city pressure regulator, the city shall have no liability for resultant damage to the property of a particular water user, and the failure of the user to install a pressure regulator when required by this subsection shall provide the city with a defense to any claim for damages arising out of the failure or malfunction of a city water pressure regulator. A water user required to install a pressure regulator hereunder shall have six (6) months after the effective date hereof within which to effect such installation. (Ord. 5-2-1985; amd. Ord. 5-4-1993, 5-20-1993; 2003 Code)

8-3-7: TRANSFORMERS AND HIGH VOLTAGE EQUIPMENT:
A. In order to assure uniformity of standards and quality in the interest of obtaining the most efficient transformation of electricity with attendant cost reductions and conservation of energy, all electrical contractors or similarly situated parties who are authorized to install electric transformers shall purchase and acquire the type, model and quality specified by the energy services department. That department shall determine the standards for such transformers in order to best accomplish the purposes intended hereby. Said department may acquire and keep on hand a supply of the specified transformers so as to make them readily available to all at a uniform price, such price to be as low as possible considering the initial acquisition cost and reasonable handling charges by the energy services department. Nothing herein shall preclude a contractor from acquiring a transformer from any other source, provided it fully meets the specifications set by the department.
B. Included with the transformers specified by the energy services department shall be all high voltage equipment (600 volts and above), elbows, neutral ground bushings, standoffs, dummy receptacles, and related items, to the extent reasonable for attaining the desired standards. The energy services department will provide such high voltage equipment in connection with transformers purchased from it and will provide all neutral grounding associated with high voltage of any transformers purchased from it. The contractor or purchasing party shall be solely responsible in any event for site preparation, pad, placement of the transformer, ground rod and all related secondary equipment that may be required by the energy services department.
C. Violation of this section shall be punishable as an infraction and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1. Each day that a transformer not conforming with this section is left in place shall be considered a separate violation of this section. (Ord. 1-7-1987, 7-2-1987; amd. 2003 Code)

8-3-8: REMOVAL OF UNUSED POLES:
For safety and aesthetic reasons, it shall be unlawful to leave standing either on public property or on a public easement across private property a wooden or metal pole intended for utility or sign purposes that has been abandoned and is no longer used. Nonuse of a pole for a period greater than six (6) months shall be considered as demonstration of an intent to abandon. Before any criminal action can be taken by the city under this section, reasonable effort shall be made to ascertain ownership of the pole, and written notice shall be given the owner, if known, requesting that the pole be removed within thirty (30) days, from the date of the letter. Where poles are not removed within that time, or ownership cannot be ascertained, the city shall have the option of removing the pole itself or bringing charges against the owner, if known. In the event the pole is removed by the city, the cost thereof may be assessed against the owner who shall be liable for the reasonable expense thereof. If the owner is an electrical customer of the city, and the cost of pole removal is not paid within a reasonable time, the cost thereof may be added to and made a part of the owner’s electrical billing. (Ord. 10-2-90, 10-4-1990)

8-3-9: LIABILITY:
The city shall not be liable for any loss, injury or damage resulting from the interruption, restoration or reduction of electrical services from any cause which could not have been avoided by the exercise of reasonable and prudent utility practices, including, but not limited to, failure of generation and distribution systems, inadequacy of energy supply, implementation of emergency plans, temporary disconnections for repairs and maintenance or failure to pay for service rendered. The city shall have liability for outages or stoppages resulting from gross negligence or willful misconduct in its operation of the electrical system. During an emergency declared by an appropriate authority, the city may curtail electric service. (Ord. 2-2-1993, 3-1-1993)

ARTICLE A. ELECTRIC FRANCHISE


8-3A-1:      Company Defined
8-3A-2:      Grant Of Authority
8-3A-3:      Service Standards
8-3A-4:      Company Liability; Indemnification
8-3A-5:      Preferential Or Discriminatory Practices Prohibited
8-3A-6:      Rates
8-3A-7:      Records And Reports
8-3A-8:      Posting Of Rates
8-3A-9:      Billing Practices
8-3A-10:     Term Of Franchise
8-3A-11:     Procedure After Termination Or Revocation
8-3A-12:     Payment To City
8-3A-13:     Franchise Required
8-3A-14:     Delivery Of System To City
8-3A-15:     Forfeiture Of Franchise

8-3A-1: COMPANY DEFINED:
For the purposes of this article, “company” is the grantee of rights under this franchise and shall include any entity who in the sole determination of the water and energy services board is considered to be a seller of electricity to consumers who are primarily not of a transient nature. (Ord. 1-2-1986; amd. Ord. 2003-02-002, 2-20-2003; 2003 Code)

8-3A-2: GRANT OF AUTHORITY:
The city shall grant to a company applying for a franchise the right and privilege to construct, erect, operate and maintain, in designated areas of the city, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, meters and other electric fixtures necessary or proper for the maintenance and operation within the city of an electric distribution system, provided the requirements, conditions and limitations of this article are fully met. Such grant of franchise shall be in the discretion of the city in any event. Any franchise granted hereunder shall not be exclusive, and the city reserves the right to grant a similar franchise to any person at any time. (Ord. 1-2-1986)

8-3A-3: SERVICE STANDARDS:
A company receiving a franchise shall maintain and operate its plant and system and render efficient service in accordance with the rules and regulations as are set forth in this article, including, but not limited to, the following:
A. Meter Accuracy: All electric service shall be supplied through meters which shall accurately measure the amount of electricity supplied to any consumer.
    1. Request For Meter Check: The company shall at any time when requested by a consumer make a test of the accuracy of any electric service meter.
    2. Result Of Meter Check: If, upon test, it is found that such meter overruns to the extent of five percent (5%) or more, the company shall pay the cost of such test and shall make refund of overcharges collected since the last known date of accuracy, but for not longer than twelve (12) months, on the basis of the inaccuracy found to exist at the time of the test. If the meter is found to be accurate or slow or less than five percent (5%) fast, the customer shall pay the reasonable cost of such testing.
    3. Compulsory Check: Every meter, whether complained of or otherwise, shall be removed from service at least once each seven (7) years and thoroughly tested for its accuracy. Any meter found inaccurate upon any test beyond a tolerance of five percent (5%) shall not be returned to service until properly adjusted.
B. Notice Of Interruption For Repairs: Whenever it is necessary to shut off or interrupt service for the purpose of making repairs, adjustments or installations, the company shall do so at such time as will cause the least amount of inconvenience to its customers, and unless such repairs are unforeseen and immediately necessary, it shall give reasonable notice thereof to the consumers.
C. Structures: All distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by the company within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of public ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of said public ways or places.
D. Restoration: In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway, landscaping or other surfacing, the company shall, at its own cost and expense and in the manner approved by the city, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway, landscape or surface so disturbed, in as good condition as before said work was commenced.
E. Placement Of Fixtures: The company shall not place poles, meters or other fixtures where the same will interfere with any city utility, water line or hydrant, telephone wire or conduit, or city line, wire or conduit, and all such poles, meters or other fixtures shall be placed at the outer edge of the sidewalk and inside the curb line, and if in a private drive, shall be placed in such manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on said drives, or the occupancy of adjoining yards or habitations. (Ord. 1-2-1986)
F. Compliance With City Ordinances And Policies: A franchised company shall, at all times, be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power by the city, and to such reasonable policies, regulations and ordinances promulgated by the city or the water and energy services board by ordinance, resolution or otherwise. (Ord. 1-2-1986; amd. Ord. 2003-02-002, 2-20-2003; 2003 Code)

8-3A-4: COMPANY LIABILITY; INDEMNIFICATION:
Any company receiving a franchise from the city shall agree to save the city harmless from all loss sustained by the city on account of any suit, judgment, execution, claim or demand whatsoever, resulting from negligence on the part of the company, in the construction, operation or maintenance of its electric system in the city. The city shall notify a franchised company within ten (10) days after the presentation of any claim or demand, either by suit or otherwise, made against the city on account of any negligence as aforesaid on the part of a franchised company. (Ord. 1-2-1986)

8-3A-5: PREFERENTIAL OR DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES PROHIBITED:
A company given a franchise shall not, as to rates, charges, service facilities, rules, regulations, or in any other respect, make or grant any preference or advantage to any person, nor subject any person to any prejudice or disadvantage; provided, that nothing in a franchise shall be deemed to prohibit the establishment of a graduated scale of charges and classified rate schedules to which any customer coming within such classification would be entitled. (Ord. 1-2-1986)

8-3A-6: RATES:
Rates charged by a company for service pursuant to a franchise granted hereunder shall be fair and reasonable and designed to meet all necessary costs of service, including a fair rate of return on the net valuation of its properties devoted thereto, under efficient and economical management. In no event shall rates charged by a company franchised hereunder exceed the corresponding residential or commercial rate charged by the city to customers of its own energy services department by more than fifteen percent (15%). A company accepting a franchise hereunder acknowledges that the city establishes just, reasonable and compensatory electric rates for its own system, and that the use of their rates as a base for determining a fair rate of return to a franchised company is an appropriate method for setting maximum rates. A company shall have no authority to charge and collect rates in excess of such limits, and rates so established shall not be changed or modified except as rates charged by the city for its own utility services may be changed or modified. In the event a franchised company receives refunds or rebates from the city or any other wholesale supplier of electricity, the company shall pass on to its customers such refunds or any savings resulting therefrom. (Ord. 1-2-1986; amd. 2003 Code)

8-3A-7: RECORDS AND REPORTS:
The city shall have access at all reasonable hours to all plans, contracts and engineering, accounting, financial, statistical, customer and service records relating to the property and the operation of any company franchised hereunder, and to all other records required to be kept hereunder, including meter checks and revenue, such access to be allowed to any authorized representative of the city energy services department. (Ord. 1-2-1986; amd. 2003 Code)

8-3A-8: POSTING OF RATES:
Where a company services an area made up of rental units, including, but not limited to, mobile home parks and apartments, the company shall post in a conspicuous place on the premises a current statement of the applicable rates charged by the company so that consumers on said premises may at all times be able to ascertain the rate then in effect. (Ord. 1-2-1986)

8-3A-9: BILLING PRACTICES:
Any company holding a franchise hereunder shall be required to read meters on a monthly basis and mail to each consumer a statement of the electrical usage by that consumer and the charge therefor within ten (10) days after the time of such reading. Records regarding a consumer’s meter reading and the charges therefor shall be provided to such consumer by the company upon reasonable request. (Ord. 1-2-1986)

8-3A-10: TERM OF FRANCHISE:
The franchise and rights granted pursuant to this article shall take effect and be in force from and after the passage of a resolution by the city council granting such franchise and upon filing of acceptance by the company of the franchise with the city recorder, and a franchise so granted shall continue in force and effect for a term of three (3) years thereafter. In the event acceptance by the company is not filed within thirty (30) days after passage of a resolution granting the franchise and service begun within sixty (60) days after the acceptance date, any franchise granted hereunder shall be null and void. (Ord. 1-2-1986)

8-3A-11: PROCEDURE AFTER TERMINATION OR REVOCATION:
Upon the revocation of a franchise by the city council, or at the end of a term of any franchise, the city shall have the right to determine whether the company shall continue to operate and maintain its plant and distribution system pending mutual agreement upon the future disposition and operation of the plant and distribution system. At such time the city, at its election, and upon the payment of an amount equivalent to the appraised value of the meters and items, other than the distribution system, which the owner would be required to install and own in any event, together with a sum equivalent to the net operating revenues from the company’s retail sales for a period of two (2) years, shall have the right to purchase and take over the property of the company in its entirety. Upon the exercise of this option by the city, the city shall serve an official notice upon the company to that effect, and the company shall immediately execute such instruments of conveyance to the city as shall be required to convey to the city title to the property free from lien and encumbrance. The city shall thereupon have a right to be substituted for the company as a party to any contract with a consumer and succeed to privileges and obligations thereof at its option. (Ord. 1-2-1986)

8-3A-12: PAYMENT TO CITY:
Any company granted a franchise hereunder shall pay to the city for the privilege of operating an electrical system under such franchise the initial sum of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00), together with a sum equivalent to two percent (2%) of the annual gross operating revenues taken in and received by it on all retail sales of electricity within the city. (Ord. 1-2-1986)

8-3A-13: FRANCHISE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind to engage in the sale, resale or supply of electricity to a consumer in the city without a franchise to do so; except where such electricity is provided on a temporary basis to consumers deemed to be transient, in the discretion of the water and energy services board. Such unlawful supplying of electric power shall be an infraction and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. Each day that electricity is so supplied shall be deemed a separate act of violation hereunder. (Ord. 8-21-1986; amd. Ord. 2003-02-002, 2-20-2003; 2003 Code)

8-3A-14: DELIVERY OF SYSTEM TO CITY:
Any company who now operates a private electric distribution system coming within the terms of this article who does not wish to obtain a franchise as provided may turn over and deliver such system to the city, provided the system meets city standards. A company wishing to turn over a system may request an inspection by the city in order to approve the system as meeting city standards or to point out deficiencies which must be corrected in order to meet those standards. Upon inspection and approval of the system by the city, the city shall be required to accept ownership of the private electric distribution system by appropriate bill of sale. (Ord. 8-21-1986)

8-3A-15: FORFEITURE OF FRANCHISE:
Any violation by a company of this article, or the failure to promptly perform any of the provisions thereof, shall be cause for the forfeiture of a franchise and all rights thereunder upon written notice to the company by the city and after the expiration of opportunity as provided in such notice for a hearing before the city council with regard to such violation, failure or default. (Ord. 1-21-1986)

CHAPTER 4 PRETREATMENT


8-4-1:       General Provisions
    8-4-1-1:     Purpose And Policy
    8-4-1-2:     Administration
    8-4-1-3:     Abbreviations
    8-4-1-4:     Definitions
8-4-2:       General Sewer Use Requirements
    8-4-2-1:     Prohibited Discharge Standards
    8-4-2-2:     National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
    8-4-2-3:     State Pretreatment Standards
    8-4-2-4:     Local Limits
    8-4-2-5:     Sgrwrf’s Right Of Revision
    8-4-2-6:     Dilution Prohibition
    8-4-2-7:     Wastewater System
8-4-3:       Pretreatment Of Wastewater
    8-4-3-1:     Pretreatment Facilities
    8-4-3-2:     Additional Pretreatment Measures
    8-4-3-3:     Accidental Discharge/Slug Discharge Control Plans
    8-4-3-4:     Hauled Wastewater
8-4-4:       Individual Wastewater Discharge Permits
    8-4-4-1:     Wastewater Analysis
    8-4-4-2:     Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Requirement
    8-4-4-3:     Individual Wastewater Discharge Permitting; Existing Connections
    8-4-4-4:     Individual Wastewater Discharge Permitting; New Connections
    8-4-4-5:     Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Application Contents
    8-4-4-6:     Application Signatories And Certifications
    8-4-4-7:     Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Decisions
8-4-5:       Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance
    8-4-5-1:     Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Duration
    8-4-5-2:     Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Contents
    8-4-5-3:     Permit Appeals
    8-4-5-4:     Permit Modification
    8-4-5-5:     Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Transfer
    8-4-5-6:     Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Revocation
    8-4-5-7:     Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Reissuance
    8-4-5-8:     Regulation Of Waste Received From Other Jurisdictions
8-4-6:       Reporting Requirements
    8-4-6-1:     Baseline Monitoring Reports
    8-4-6-2:     Compliance Schedule Progress Reports
    8-4-6-3:     Reports On Compliance With Categorical Pretreatment Standard Deadline
    8-4-6-4:     Periodic Compliance Reports
    8-4-6-5:     Reports Of Changed Conditions
    8-4-6-6:     Reports Of Potential Problems
    8-4-6-7:     Reports From Unpermitted Users
    8-4-6-8:     Notice Of Violation/Repeat Sampling And Reporting
    8-4-6-9:     Notification Of The Discharge Of Hazardous Waste
    8-4-6-10:    Analytical Requirements
    8-4-6-11:    Sample Collection
    8-4-6-12:    Date Of Receipt of Reports
    8-4-6-13:    Recordkeeping
    8-4-6-14:    Certification Statements
8-4-7:       Compliance Monitoring
    8-4-7-1:     Right Of Entry; Inspection And Sampling
    8-4-7-2:     Search Warrants
8-4-8:       Confidential Information
8-4-9:       Publication Of Users In Significant Noncompliance
8-4-10:      Administrative Enforcement Remedies
    8-4-10-1:    Notification Of Violation
    8-4-10-2:    Consent Orders
    8-4-10-3:    Show Cause Hearing
    8-4-10-4:    Compliance Orders
    8-4-10-5:    Cease And Desist Orders
    8-4-10-6:    Administrative Fines
    8-4-10-7:    Emergency Suspensions
    8-4-10-8:    Termination Of Discharge
8-4-11:      Judicial Enforcement Remedies
    8-4-11-1:    Injunctive Relief
    8-4-11-2:    Civil Penalties
    8-4-11-3:    Criminal Prosecution
    8-4-11-4:    Remedies Nonexclusive
8-4-12:      Supplemental Enforcement Action
    8-4-12-1:    Performance Bonds
    8-4-12-2:    Liability Insurance
    8-4-12-3:    Water Supply Severance
    8-4-12-4:    Public Nuisances
8-4-13:      Affirmative Defenses To Discharge Violations
    8-4-13-1:    Upset
    8-4-13-2:    Bypass
8-4-14:      Fats, Oils, Grease, And Soil (Fogs) Control
    8-4-14-1:    General
    8-4-14-2:    Definitions
    8-4-14-3:    Interceptor And Trap Installation Specifications
    8-4-14-4:    General Fogs Waste Discharge Limits And Requirements
    8-4-14-5:    Kitchen Best Management Practices (BMP) Requirements
    8-4-14-6:    Interceptor Operation And Maintenance Requirements
    8-4-14-7:    Grease Trap Operation And Maintenance Requirements
    8-4-14-8:    Notification Requirements
    8-4-14-9:    Recordkeeping Requirements
    8-4-14-10:   Inspections And Sampling
8-4-15:      Miscellaneous Provisions
    8-4-15-1:    Pretreatment Charges And Fees
    8-4-15-2:    Severability
8-4-16:      Effective Date

8-4-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:

8-4-1-1: PURPOSE AND POLICY:
This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works for the St. George regional water reclamation facility and enables the city of St. George to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 USC section 1251 et seq.), the General Pretreatment Regulations (title 40 of CFR part 403), and the UAC R317-8-8. This chapter shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment works. This chapter authorizes the issuance of individual wastewater discharge permits; authorizes monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. The objectives of this chapter are:
A. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will interfere with its operation or contaminate the resulting sludge;
B. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, the atmosphere, or otherwise be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works;
C. To ensure that the quality of the wastewater treatment plant sludge is maintained at a level which allows its use and disposal in compliance with applicable statutes and regulations found in 40 CFR part 503;
D. To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment, and the general public;
E. To promote reuse and recycling of wastewater and sludge from the publicly owned treatment works;
F. To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the publicly owned treatment works; and
G. To enable SGRWRF to comply with its Utah pollutant discharge elimination system permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-1-2: ADMINISTRATION:
Except as otherwise provided herein, the St. George wastewater division manager (hereinafter “manager”) shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the manager may be delegated by the manager to a duly authorized St. George regional water reclamation facility employee. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-1-3: ABBREVIATIONS:
The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the designated meanings:
+--------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| BMP    | Best management practice                                     |
+--------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| BMR    | Baseline monitoring report                                   |
+--------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| BOD    | Biochemical oxygen demand                                    |
+--------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| CFR    | Code of federal regulations                                  |
+--------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| COD    | Chemical oxygen demand                                       |
+--------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| DWQ    | State of Utah, Department of Environmental Quality, Division |
|        | of Water Quality                                             |
+--------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| EPA    | U.S. Environmental Protection Agency                         |
+--------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| FOG    | Fats, oils and grease                                        |
+--------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| FOGS   | Fats, oils, grease and soil                                  |
+--------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| gpd    | Gallons per day                                              |
+--------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| IU     | Industrial user                                              |
+--------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| mg/l   | Milligrams per liter                                         |
+--------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| POTW   | Publicly owned treatment works                               |
+--------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCRA   | Resource conservation and recovery act                       |
+--------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| SGRWRF | St. George regional water reclamation facility               |
+--------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| SIU    | Significant industrial user                                  |
+--------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| TSS    | Total suspended solids                                       |
+--------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| UPDES  | Utah pollutant discharge elimination system                  |
+--------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| USC    | United States code                                           |
+--------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
(Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-1-4: DEFINITIONS:
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated:
ACT OR THE ACT: The federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC section 1251 et seq., and any subsequent amendments thereto.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY: The state of Utah, Department of Environmental Quality, Division of Water Quality (DWQ), or its successor agency.
AUTHORIZED OR DULY AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER:
    A. If the user is a corporation:
        1. The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation; or
        2. The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility, and is authorized to sign documents on behalf of the corporation in accordance with corporate procedures, and where the manager has the duty to:
            (a) Make major capital investment recommendations;
            (b) Initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; or
            (c) Ensure that necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for individual wastewater discharge permit requirements.
    B. If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively.
    C. If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or its designee.
    D. The individuals described in subsections A through C of this definition, may designate a duly authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the manager.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES OR BMP: The schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in subsections 8-4-2-1A and B of this chapter. BMPs include, but are not limited to, treatment requirements, operating procedures and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage, leaks, sludge, waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. BMPs may be developed by the pretreatment program as a local limit to control discharges from SIU as needed.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND OR BOD: The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C), usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l).
BYPASS: The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a user’s treatment facility.
CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER OR CIU: An industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard.
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR CATEGORICAL STANDARD: Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA, in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the act (33 USC section 1317), that apply to a specific category of users, and that appear in 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405 – 471.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND OR COD: A measure of the oxygen required to oxidize all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water.
CITY: The city of St. George, state of Utah.
COLOR: The optical density at the visual wavelength of maximum absorption, relative to distilled water. One hundred percent (100%) transmittance is equivalent to zero (0.0) optical density.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE: The samples resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either flow or time, to minimize the effect or the variability of the individual samples. This sampling should be in accordance with 40 CFR part 403, appendix E, subpart I – Composite Method.
CONTROL AUTHORITY: The St. George regional water reclamation facility or SGRWRF.
DAILY MAXIMUM: The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a pollutant collected during a calendar day.
DAILY MAXIMUM LIMIT: The maximum allowable discharge limit of a pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of the day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY OR EPA: The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the regional water management division director, the regional administrator, or other duly authorized official of said agency.
EXISTING SOURCE: Any source of discharge that is not a “new source.”
GRAB SAMPLE: A sample that is taken from a waste stream, without regard to the flow in the waste stream, and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: Waste as defined in 40 CFR section 261.3, incorporated herein and made a part hereof.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE OR DISCHARGE: The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source which is regulated under section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the act (including septage waste discharged into the POTW).
INSTANTANEOUS LIMIT: The maximum or minimum concentration (or load) of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete, grab or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
INTERFERENCE: A discharge that alone, or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; therefore, it is a violation of SGRWRF’s UPDES permit, or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations, including, but not limited to (A) section 405 of the Act; (B) the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the RCRA; (C) any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; (D) the Clean Air Act; (E) the Toxic Substances Control Act; and (F) the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act.
LOCAL LIMIT: Specific discharge limits developed to protect the POTW in accordance with 40 CFR section 403.5 and enforced by SGRWRF upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in subsections 8-4-2-1A and B of this chapter. The technically based local limits and development documents are kept on file at the SGRWRF office and can be reviewed if requested.
MANAGER: The person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this chapter. “Manager” also means a duly authorized representative of the manager.
MEDICAL WASTE: Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.
MONTHLY AVERAGE: The sum of all “daily discharges” measured during a calendar month divided by the number of “daily discharges” measured during that month.
MONTHLY AVERAGE LIMIT: The highest allowable average of “daily discharges” over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all “daily discharges” measured during a calendar month, divided by the number of “daily discharges” measured during that month.
NEW SOURCE:
    A. Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act that will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section; provided, that:
        1. The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or
        2. The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or
        3. The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered.
    B. Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection A2 or A3 of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.
    C. Construction of a new source as defined herein has commenced if the owner or operator has:
        1. Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program:
            (a) Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or
            (b) Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
        2. Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this definition.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER: Water used for cooling that does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product.
PASS-THROUGH: A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the state in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of SGRWRF’s UPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, limited liability company, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities.
pH: A measure of the acidity or basicity of a solution, expressed in standard units.
POLLUTANT: Any pollutant, including, but not limited to, dredged spoils; solid waste; incinerator residue; filter backwash; sewage; garbage; sewage sludge; munitions; medical wastes; chemical wastes; biological materials; radioactive materials; heat; wrecked or discarded equipment; rock; sand; cellar dirt; municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes; and, certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).
PRETREATMENT: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties, in wastewater, prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by a) physical, chemical, or biological processes; b) process changes; or c) other means. Pretreatment cannot be obtained by diluting the concentration of the pollutants, unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT COORDINATOR: The person designated by SGRWRF to coordinate the SGRWRF pretreatment program, charged with certain duties and responsibilities under this chapter as directed and delegated by the manager. A technically skilled position, the pretreatment coordinator, or his or her designee, performs surveillance, administrative duties, and related work in monitoring compliance, and is a liaison with IUs of the SGRWRF.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS OR STANDARDS: Pretreatment standards shall mean any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the act, which applies to IUs, which includes, but is not limited to, prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS OR PROHIBITED DISCHARGES: Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in section 8-4-2-1 of this chapter.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS OR POTW: A treatment works, as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 USC section 1292), which is owned by the SGRWRF. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature, and any conveyances, which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. It also includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances if they convey wastewater to a POTW. The term also means the municipality as defined in section 502(4) of the Act, which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to, and the discharges from, such a treatment works.
SEPTIC TANK WASTE: Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
SEWAGE: Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.).
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU): Except as provided in subsection C of this definition, a significant industrial user is:
    A. An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
    B. An industrial user that:
        1. Discharges an average of twenty five thousand (25,000) gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater);
        2. Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent (5%) or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or
        3. Is designated as such by SGRWRF on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation, or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
    C. Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection B of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation, or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, SGRWRF may at any time, on its own initiative, or in response to a petition received from an industrial user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR section 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user.
SLUG LOAD OR SLUG DISCHARGE: Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration, which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 8-4-2-1 of this chapter. A slug discharge is any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass-through, or in any other way violates the POTW’s regulations, local limits or permit conditions.
STORMWATER: Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS, OR TSS, OR SUSPENDED SOLIDS: The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and that is removable by laboratory filtering.
UPSET: Any exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. Upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
USER, OR INDUSTRIAL USER, OR IU: A source of indirect discharge.
WASTEWATER: Liquid and water carried industrial waste and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT OR TREATMENT PLANT: The portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste.
WATERS OF THE STATE1: All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, irrigation systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface and underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon this state or any portion thereof. Waters of the state does not include bodies of water confined to, and retained within, the limits of private property, and which do not develop into or constitute a nuisance, or a public health hazard, or a menace to fish and wildlife. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)
1UCA section 19-5-102.

8-4-2: GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS:

8-4-2-1: PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS:
A. General Prohibitions: No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass-through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
B. Specific Prohibitions: No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
    1. Pollutants which will create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR section 261.21;
    2. Pollutants which will cause corrosive structural damage to the POTW, including, but not limited to, discharges with a pH lower than 5.0, unless the works is specifically designed to accommodate such discharges;
    3. Pollutants which will cause corrosive structural damage to the POTW, including, but not limited to, discharges with a pH greater than 12.0;
    4. Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference;
    5. Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference with the POTW;
    6. Any wastewater having a temperature greater than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) (60°C), or which will inhibit biological activity in the SGRWRF resulting in interference, but in no case in such quantities that cause the temperature at the SGRWRF headworks to exceed one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit (104°F) (40°C);
    7. Any petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through;
    8. Any petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, exceeding one hundred milligrams per liter (100 mg/l);
    9. Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause worker health and safety problems;
    10. Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the POTW, see section 8-4-3-4 of this chapter;
    11. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance, a hazard to life, or prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair;
    12. Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant’s effluent, thereby violating SGRWRF’s UPDES permit;
    13. Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
    14. Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the manager;
    15. Any sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes;
    16. Any discharge of medical waste that causes or contributes to pass-through or interference;
    17. Any wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant’s effluent to fail a toxicity test; or
    18. Any waste containing detergents, surface active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW.
C. Discharge: Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-2-2: NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS:
A. National categorical pretreatment standards, specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties which may be discharged to a POTW by existing or new industrial users in specific industrial subcategories, have been established by EPA in 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405 through 471 and are hereby incorporated.
B. Users must comply with categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405 through 471.
C. When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the manager shall impose an alternate limit in accordance with 40 CFR section 403.6(e). (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-2-3: STATE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS:
State of Utah pretreatment standards, established by the UAC section R317-8-8, are hereby incorporated. Any user subject to a state pretreatment standard is required to comply with the applicable standard. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-2-4: LOCAL LIMITS:
A. The manager is authorized to establish local limits pursuant to 40 CFR section 403.5(c).
B. Local limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. All limits set for metallic substances are for total metal unless indicated otherwise. The manager may impose mass limitations in addition to the concentration based limitations. The development documents for local limits are kept at SGRWRF offices and may be reviewed upon request.
C. The manager may develop best management practices (BMPs), by ordinance, or in individual wastewater discharge permits, to implement local limits and the requirements of section 8-4-2-1 of this chapter.
D. No user shall discharge pollutants in excess of the local limits established by the manager. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-2-5: SGRWRF’S RIGHT OF REVISION:
The SGRWRF reserves the right to establish, by ordinance, or in individual wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW consistent with the purpose of this chapter. In addition, the manager is authorized to temporarily or permanently revoke or suspend issuance of any type of permit at any time, in order to protect the POTW from pass-through or interference, or in order to maintain compliance with any UPDES permit requirement or pretreatment program requirement. The manager shall also have the right to deny new or increased contributions, or to set additional conditions on such contributions, to protect the POTW, including limits that may be more stringent than the approved local limits. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-2-6: DILUTION PROHIBITION:
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment, to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The manager may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in any other case when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-2-7: WASTEWATER SYSTEM:
A. Application For Wastewater Service: Any person desiring to secure, or required to secure, wastewater service, when such service is available from the city, shall apply to the water services director, or to such other person designated by the water services director, and shall pay the required fees before any wastewater connection is approved. By applying for a wastewater connection, such person agrees to be bound by this chapter and all applicable policies and regulations pertaining to the city POTW.
B. Mandatory Use Of Wastewater System: 
    1. Residential: 
        a. Residential Subdivisions: Residential subdivision developments are subject to city policy regarding use of, and connection to, the POTW, as well as this chapter.
        b. Residential Dwelling Unit: It is mandatory that any residential dwelling unit shall be connected to the wastewater system at the expense of the owner or occupant thereof.
            (1) The sole exception shall be for a single residential lot not within a platted subdivision where said lot is one acre or greater in size. In such case, a private wastewater disposal system may be utilized if a delay improvement agreement is approved and executed with the city, and easements are provided where required. Before commencement of construction of any private wastewater disposal system, the property owner or person seeking to install a private wastewater system shall submit plans, specifications, and other information deemed necessary to the Utah Department of Health, and obtain a written permit from it for installation thereof. The type, capacity, location, and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all requirements of the Utah Department of Health. The owner of a private wastewater disposal system shall at all times operate and maintain the same in a sanitary manner and at no expense to the city.
            (2) When, in the discretion of the wastewater manager, a private wastewater disposal system ceases to operate effectively or creates a sanitation hazard, direct connection to the public wastewater system may be required by the manager, in which case the private wastewater disposal system shall be closed, and its facilities disconnected and properly decommissioned.
    2. Commercial, Industrial, And Other Buildings: It is mandatory that all commercial, industrial, and other buildings with wastewater service be connected to the public wastewater system. Private wastewater disposal systems shall not be allowed.
    3. Enforcement: In addition to other available enforcement actions, the city may enforce the wastewater connection requirements imposed in this section by disconnecting or refusing to supply the culinary water servicing the premises until proper connection to the wastewater system has been made.
C. Ownership Of Connecting Lines: Unless provision is expressly made otherwise for ownership of laterals or lines by the owner of the adjacent property through a written agreement, all lines and laterals connecting the city POTW to a landowner or user’s premises shall be deemed to be the property of the landowner/user, and all operation and maintenance shall be at the landowner’s/user’s expense. The city shall not be liable for blockage or flow interference in laterals or connecting lines before they connect to the city wastewater line.
D. POTW Connections: Connection to, or extension of, the city wastewater main for use by a user shall be the sole responsibility of the user. Acceptance of any wastewater facility by the city for public use and maintenance shall not occur until such facility has been inspected and approved for compliance with all city, state, and federal requirements.
E. Inspection Of POTW Connections: Any connection to, extension of, or modification of, the wastewater system shall be under the direction of the water services director, and inspection of such shall be made by the appropriate inspector after installation in every case. No backfilling shall be done until the inspection is made, and the work accepted. In the event of an installation, repair, or alteration, where no building permit is required, there shall be no connection, directly or indirectly, with the wastewater system without notification to, and approval in advance from, the water services director or his designated representative, as well as the inspection after installation required above. A reasonable inspection fee shall be paid for any inspection made under this subsection.
F. Quality Of Installations And Maintenance: All wastewater mains, manholes, service laterals and other materials used in conjunction with the wastewater system shall be of such quality and specifications as required by the “city of St. George standard specifications for design and construction,” as last revised. It shall be unlawful for any person to connect any drain or service line to the POTW system unless such person is a contractor properly licensed by the state. After installation, all private service pipes, connections and other apparatus shall be maintained in good repair at the user’s expense. No person shall be allowed to dig into the street for purposes of installing, repairing or maintaining any service pipes, connections or other apparatus except under the direction of the water services director or his designated personnel who shall at all reasonable times have free access to drains and wastewater lines connecting with the wastewater system for the purpose of examination and inspection. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-3: PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER:

8-4-3-1: PRETREATMENT FACILITIES:
Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this chapter, and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in section 8-4-2-1 of this chapter, within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, or the manager, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user’s expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the manager for review, and shall be acceptable to the manager before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to SGRWRF under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-3-2: ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES:
A. Whenever deemed necessary, SGRWRF may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW, and determine the user’s compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
B. The manager may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property, and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow control facility to ensure equalization of flow. An individual wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
C. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors, such as described by the International Plumbing Code, shall be provided when, in the opinion of the manager, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of liquid waste, floatable grease, oil, or sand; except, such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of a type and capacity approved by the manager, and shall be located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection, and away from building entrances and exits. Such interceptors shall be cleaned, repaired, and maintained by the user at its expense.
D. Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
E. Sampling manholes shall be located in an area to allow for ease of cleaning, sampling and inspection by the user and SGRWRF. If located in a parking area, parking shall not be allowed on or over the sampling manhole. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-3-3: ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/SLUG DISCHARGE CONTROL PLANS:
The pretreatment coordinator shall evaluate whether each SIU needs an accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan, or other actions to control slug discharges. The pretreatment coordinator may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement, such a plan, or take such other action that may be necessary to control slug discharges. An accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:
A. Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges;
B. List and description of stored chemicals;
C. Procedures for immediately notifying the manager of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by section 8-4-6-6 of this chapter; and
D. Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-3-4: HAULED WASTEWATER:
A. Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the manager, and at such times as are established by the manager. Such waste shall not violate section 8-4-2 of this chapter or any other requirements established by SGRWRF. The manager may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain individual wastewater discharge permits.
B. The discharge of hauled industrial wastes as “industrial septage” requires prior approval and an individual wastewater discharge permit from the SGRWRF. The manager shall have authority to prohibit the disposal of such wastes, if disposal would interfere with the treatment plant operations or violate section 8-4-2 of this chapter. Waste haulers are subject to all other sections of this chapter.
C. Waste haulers must provide a waste tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the waste hauler, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-4: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS:

8-4-4-1: WASTEWATER ANALYSIS:
When requested by the pretreatment coordinator, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within thirty (30) days of the request. The pretreatment coordinator is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose, and periodically may require users to update this information. If the user changes or adds a process, the user automatically is required to update the information provided to the pretreatment coordinator thirty (30) days prior to the process being changed or added. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-4-2: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIREMENT:
A. No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining an individual wastewater discharge permit from the manager, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to section 8-4-4-3 of this chapter may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein, unless the manager has determined the SIU meets the requirements of section 8-4-1-4, subsection C of the definition of “significant industrial user (SIU)” of this chapter.
B. The manager may require other users to obtain individual wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
C. Any violation of the terms and conditions of an individual wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter, and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in sections 8-4-10 through 8-4-12 of this chapter. Obtaining an individual wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements, or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-4-3: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING; EXISTING CONNECTIONS:
Any user required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date hereof, and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within ninety (90) days after said date, apply to the pretreatment coordinator for an individual wastewater discharge permit in accordance with section 8-4-4-5 of this chapter, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after one hundred eighty (180) days of the effective date hereof, except in accordance with an individual wastewater discharge permit issued by the manager. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-4-4: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING; NEW CONNECTIONS:
Any user required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW, shall obtain such permit prior to beginning or recommencing such discharge. An application for an individual wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with section 8-4-4-5 of this chapter, shall be filed at least ninety (90) days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-4-5: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION CONTENTS:
A. All users required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit shall submit a permit application. All permittees that will be continuing to discharge are required to complete an application sixty (60) days prior to the permit expiring. The SGRWRF may require users to submit all or some of the following information as part of a permit application:
    1. Identifying Information: 
        a. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner,
        b. Contact information for the authorized representative and the duly authorized representative for the facility, and
        c. The description of activities, facilities, and plant production processes on the premises.
    2. Environmental Permits: A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility.
    3. Description Of Operations: 
        a. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production (including each product produced by type, amount, processes, and rate of production), and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram, which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes;
        b. Types of wastes generated, and a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;
        c. Number and type of employees, proposed hours of operation, and actual hours of operation;
        d. Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); and
        e. Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge.
    4. Time And Duration: Time and duration of discharges.
    5. Location: The location for monitoring all wastes covered by the permit.
    6. Flow Measurement: Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in subsection 8-4-2-2C of this chapter (40 CFR section 403.6(e)).
    7. Measurement Of Pollutants:: 
        a. The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process and any new categorically regulated processes for existing sources;
        b. The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the pretreatment coordinator, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process;
        c. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported;
        d. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 8-4-6-10 of this chapter. Where the standard requires compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation as required by the pretreatment coordinator, or the applicable standards to determine compliance with the standard; and
        e. Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 8-4-6-11 of this chapter.
    8. Other Information: Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the pretreatment coordinator to evaluate the permit application.
B. Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision.
C. Based on information provided by the permittee as required in subsection A of this section, the SGRWRF will determine, within thirty (30) days: 1) if additional information is needed; 2) if a permit is not necessary; or 3) if a permit will be required to be issued before the IU discharge is allowed to the POTW.
D. Should any of the information requested or supplied be considered by the user to be of a confidential nature, the user should request confidential status of specific information in accordance with section 8-4-8 of this chapter. Information regarding sampling and analysis of the discharge is not considered confidential information. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-4-6: APPLICATION SIGNATORIES AND CERTIFICATIONS:
A. All wastewater discharge permit applications, user reports, and certification statements shall be signed by an authorized representative of the user, and contain the certification statement required in subsection 8-4-6-14A of this chapter.
B. If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer accurate, because for any reason a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for environmental matters of the company, a new written authorization must be submitted to the pretreatment coordinator, satisfying the requirements of this section, prior to or together with any reports being signed by an authorized representative. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-4-7: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DECISIONS:
The pretreatment coordinator will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete permit application, the manager will determine whether to issue an individual wastewater discharge permit. The manager may approve, conditionally approve, or deny any application for an individual wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-5: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE:

8-4-5-1: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DURATION:
An individual wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years from the effective date of the permit. An individual wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five (5) years, at the discretion of the manager. Each individual wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific effective date and expiration date. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-5-2: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT CONTENTS:
An individual wastewater discharge permit shall include conditions deemed reasonably necessary by the manager to prevent pass-through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant’s effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW.
A. Individual wastewater discharge permits must contain:
    1. A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit issuance date, effective date, and expiration date.
    2. A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to, and approval from, the SGRWRF, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit.
    3. Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on applicable pretreatment standards in part 403 of the Code of Federal Regulations, categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, state and local law.
    4. Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants (or best management practice) to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type, based on federal, state, and local law.
    5. A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, and local law.
    6. Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the manager to be necessary.
    7. Requirements to report to the manager any slug discharge.
    8. Requirements to notify the manager of changes to the industrial user’s discharge thirty (30) days prior to the change. The manager shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the change prior to the user making the change at the facility that may impact the discharge at the facility to the POTW.
B. Individual wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions:
    1. Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
    2. Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW;
    3. Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans, or other special conditions, including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges;
    4. Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
    5. The schedule of user charges and fees, for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
    6. Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment, including flow measurement devices;
    7. A statement that compliance with the individual wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, and local standards, including those which become effective during the term of the individual wastewater discharge permit; and
    8. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the manager to ensure compliance with this chapter, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-5-3: PERMIT APPEALS:
An interested person or entity, including the industrial user, may petition the SGRWRF to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within fifteen (15) days of the issuance date.
A. Failure to submit a timely petition for review is a waiver of the administrative appeal.
B. In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge provision objected to, the reason for the objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit.
C. The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit is not stayed pending the appeal.
D. If the SGRWRF fails to act within fifteen (15) days of a petition for reconsideration, it is deemed denied. Denials and decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit, shall be considered final administrative action for purposes of judicial review.
E. Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the 5th judicial district court in and for Washington County, state of Utah. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-5-4: PERMIT MODIFICATION:
The manager may modify an individual wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
A. To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements;
B. To address significant alterations or additions to the user’s operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character, since the time of the individual wastewater discharge permit issuance;
C. A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; or
D. Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the POTW, related personnel, receiving waters, or sludge, as follows:
    1. Violation of any terms or conditions of the individual wastewater discharge permit;
    2. Misrepresentations or intentional or unintentional failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
    3. Revision of, or a grant of variance from, categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR section 403.13;
    4. To correct typographical or other errors in the individual wastewater discharge permit; or
    5. To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-5-5: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT TRANSFER:
Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner and/or operator only if the permittee gives at least thirty (30) days’ advanced notice to the manager, and the manager approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. Failure to provide advance notice of such transfer to, and approval from, the manager, renders the wastewater discharge permit void on the date of facility transfer. The notice to the manager must include a written certification by the new owner and/or operator which:
A. States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility’s operations and processes;
B. Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur;
C. Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit; and
D. Acknowledges the conditions of the permit will not change. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-5-6: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REVOCATION:
A. The manager may revoke an individual wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
    1. Failure to notify the manager of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
    2. Failure to provide prior notification to the manager of changed conditions pursuant to section 8-4-6-5 of this chapter;
    3. Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application;
    4. Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
    5. Falsifying certification statements;
    6. Tampering with monitoring equipment;
    7. Refusing to allow the manager and/or his or her designee timely access to the facility premises and/or records;
    8. Failure to meet effluent limitations;
    9. Failure to pay fines;
    10. Failure to pay sewer charges;
    11. Failure to meet compliance schedules;
    12. Failure to complete a wastewater survey, or the wastewater discharge permit application or reapplication;
    13. Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility;
    14. Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter; or
    15. Upon request by the permittee due to a change in ownership, or the business is moving, or going out of business.
B. Individual wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All individual wastewater discharge permits issued to a user are void upon the issuance of a new individual wastewater discharge permit to that user.
C. Noncompliant industrial users will be notified of the proposed termination of their wastewater permit, and will be offered the opportunity to show cause under these standards why the proposed action should not be taken. However, notwithstanding this or any other provision of this chapter, the manager may in his or her sole discretion, immediately revoke any discharge permit where the discharge reasonably appears to present an imminent danger to the health or welfare of persons. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-5-7: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REISSUANCE:
A user with an expiring individual wastewater discharge permit shall apply for individual wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with section 8-4-4-5 of this chapter, a minimum of sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the user’s existing individual wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-5-8: REGULATION OF WASTE RECEIVED FROM OTHER JURISDICTIONS:
A. If another municipality, or user located within another municipality, contributes wastewater to the POTW, the manager shall enter into an intermunicipal agreement with the contributing municipality.
B. Prior to entering into an agreement required by subsection A of this section, the manager shall request the following information from the contributing municipality:
    1. A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the POTW by the contributing municipality;
    2. An inventory of all users located within the contributing municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and
    3. Such other information as the manager may deem necessary.
C. An intermunicipal agreement, as required by subsection A of this section, shall contain the following terms and conditions:
    1. A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this chapter and local limits, including required baseline monitoring reports (BMRs) which are at least as stringent as those set out in section 8-4-2-4 of this chapter. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the city’s ordinance or local limits;
    2. A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised user inventory on at least an annual basis;
    3. A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation activities, including individual wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection, sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by: (a) the contributing municipality; (b) the manager; and (c) jointly by the contributing municipality and the manager;
    4. A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the manager with access to all information that the contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities;
    5. Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing municipality’s wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW;
    6. Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality’s discharge;
    7. A provision ensuring the manager or his or her designee access to the facilities of users located within the contributing municipality’s jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the manager; and
    8. A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the intermunicipal agreement. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-6: REPORTING REQUIREMENTS:

8-4-6-1: BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS:
A. Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR section 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical industrial users currently discharging to, or scheduled to discharge to, the POTW shall submit to the pretreatment coordinator a report which contains the information listed in subsection B of this section. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the pretreatment coordinator a report which contains the information listed in subsection B of this section. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
B. Users described above shall submit the following information:
    1. Permit Application Information: All information required in section 8-4-4-5 of this chapter.
    2. Measurement Of Pollutants: 
        a. The user shall provide the information required in subsections 8-4-4-5A7a through e of this chapter;
        b. The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile the data necessary to comply with the requirements of this subsection;
        c. Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment facility exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment, the user should measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR section 403.6(e), to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR section 403.6(e), this adjusted limit shall be submitted to the control authority, along with supporting data;
        d. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with sections 8-4-6-10 and 8-4-6-11 of this chapter;
        e. The pretreatment coordinator may allow the submission of a baseline report which utilizes only historical data if the data provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures; and
        f. The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling, and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW.
    3. Compliance Certification: A statement, reviewed by the user’s authorized representative as defined in section 8-4-1-4 of this chapter, and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operations and maintenance (O and M), and/or additional pretreatment, is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
    4. Compliance Schedule: After it is determined that additional pretreatment and/or O and M will be required, user must submit a compliance schedule within thirty (30) days. The compliance schedule shall specify the shortest time line for the user to provide such additional pretreatment and/or O and M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in section 8-4-6-2 of this chapter.
    5. Signature And Report Certification: All baseline monitoring reports must be certified in accordance with subsection 8-4-6-14A of this chapter, and signed by an authorized representative as defined in section 8-4-1-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-6-2: COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE PROGRESS REPORTS:
The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by subsection 8-4-6-1B4 of this chapter:
A. The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation);
B. The user shall submit a progress report to the pretreatment coordinator no later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and
C. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the pretreatment coordinator. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-6-3: REPORTS ON COMPLIANCE WITH CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD DEADLINE:
Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the pretreatment coordinator a report containing the information described in subsections 8-4-4-5A6 and A7 and 8-4-6-1B2 of this chapter. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR section 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user’s long term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards, expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user’s actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 8-4-6-14 of this chapter. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with sections 8-4-6-10 and 8-4-6-11 of this chapter. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-6-4: PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS:
A. All significant industrial users, at a frequency determined by the pretreatment coordinator, must submit reports, no less than twice per year (June and December), indicating the nature, concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards, and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice (BMP), or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation required by the pretreatment coordinator or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user.
B. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection 8-4-6-14A of this chapter.
C. All wastewater samples must be representative of the user’s discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
D. If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more frequently than required by the pretreatment coordinator, using the procedures prescribed in section 8-4-6-11 of this chapter, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-6-5: REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS:
A. Each user must notify the pretreatment coordinator of any significant changes to the user’s operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least thirty (30) days before the change, including changes that may affect slug discharges to the POTW. Significant changes shall be considered to be changes beyond the typical operating range of the user, or changes that would have significant impact on POTW operations.
    1. The pretreatment coordinator may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 8-4-4-5 of this chapter.
    2. The manager may issue an individual wastewater discharge permit under section 8-4-5-7 of this chapter, or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 8-4-5-4 of this chapter, in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.
B. The manager may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the change based on the effect the change may have on the POTW and/or the pretreatment program. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-6-6: REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS:
A. In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, a slug discharge, or slug load, that might cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately notify either in person or via a phone conversation with the pretreatment coordinator of the incident. A phone message does not satisfy this notification requirement. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user.
B. Within five (5) days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the manager, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge, and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which might be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter.
C. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees of the notification procedures in the event of a discharge described in subsection A of this section. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who could cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
D. Significant industrial users are required to notify the pretreatment coordinator immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-6-7: REPORTS FROM UNPERMITTED USERS:
All users not required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports as required by the pretreatment coordinator. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-6-8: NOTICE OF VIOLATION/REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING:
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user shall notify the pretreatment coordinator within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis, and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the pretreatment coordinator within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. Resampling by the industrial user is not required if: (A) SGRWRF performs scheduled sampling at the facility at least once a month; (B) if SGRWRF performs sampling at the facility, between the time when the initial sampling was conducted, and the time when the user receives the results of the initial sampling; or (C) if SGRWRF has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user, then SGRWRF will perform the repeat sampling and analysis, unless it notifies the user of the violation and requires the user to perform the repeat sampling and analysis. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-6-9: NOTIFICATION OF THE DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE:
A. Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than one hundred (100) kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information: (1) an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes; (2) an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during that calendar month; and (3) an estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months. All notifications must take place no later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under section 8-4-6-5 of this chapter. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of sections 8-4-6-1, 8-4-6-3, and 8-4-6-4 of this chapter.
B. Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection A of this section, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR sections 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than fifteen (15) kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR sections 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a onetime notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification.
C. In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA, identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user shall notify the manager, the EPA regional waste management waste division director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such regulations.
D. In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated.
E. This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal, state, or local law. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-6-10: ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application, report, permit or other requirement by this chapter, shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR part 136 and amendments thereto, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed by using validated analytical methods, or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures approved by the pretreatment coordinator.
B. All laboratory samples collected for this chapter shall be analyzed by a laboratory that is either certified by the Utah Bureau of Laboratory Improvements or approved by the manager. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-6-11: SAMPLE COLLECTION:
Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based on data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report, based on data that is representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period.
A. Except as indicated in subsections B and C of this section, the user must collect wastewater samples using twenty-four (24) hour flow proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the pretreatment coordinator. Where time proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by SGRWRF, the samples must be representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a twenty-four (24) hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: (1) for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides, the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; and (2) for volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters, unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies, may be authorized by SGRWRF, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous limits.
B. Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds, must be obtained using grab collection techniques.
C. For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and ninety (90) day compliance reports required in sections 8-4-6-1 and 8-4-6-3 of this chapter, a minimum of four (4) grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist. For facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the pretreatment coordinator may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by section 8-4-6-4 of this chapter, the industrial user is required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-6-12: DATE OF RECEIPT OF REPORTS:
Written reports are deemed submitted on the date postmarked. For reports, which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States postal service, the date the report is received shall govern. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-6-13: RECORDKEEPING:
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter, any additional records obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements, and documentation associated with BMPs established under subsection 8-4-2-4C of this chapter. Records shall include: a) the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; b) the dates analyses were performed; c) who performed the analyses; d) the analytical techniques or methods used; and e) the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or SGRWRF, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the pretreatment coordinator. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-6-14: CERTIFICATION STATEMENTS:
A. Certification Of Permit Applications, User Reports And Initial Monitoring Waiver: The following certification statement, signed by an authorized representative as defined in section 8-4-1-4 of this chapter, shall be submitted by: 1) users submitting permit applications under section 8-4-4-6 of this chapter; 2) users submitting baseline monitoring reports under subsection 8-4-6-1B5 of this chapter; 3) users submitting reports on compliance with the categorical pretreatment standard deadlines under section 8-4-6-3 of this chapter; and 4) users submitting periodic compliance reports required by subsections 8-4-6-4A through D of this chapter:I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.
(Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-7: COMPLIANCE MONITORING:

8-4-7-1: RIGHT OF ENTRY; INSPECTION AND SAMPLING:
The manager or his or her designee shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this chapter, and any individual wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the manager or his or her designee ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and/or the performance of any additional duties. Inspections and monitoring shall be conducted as frequently as determined by the SGRWRF and may be announced or unannounced.
A. Where a user has security measures in force that require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards, so, upon presentation of suitable identification, the manager shall be permitted to enter without delay for the purpose of performing his or her duties.
B. The manager shall have the right to set up on the user’s property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user’s operations.
C. The manager may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated at least annually, or as required per the manufacturer’s recommendations and specifications to ensure their accuracy.
D. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be removed promptly by the user at the verbal or written request of the manager and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such obstruction and providing safe and easy access shall be borne by the user.
E. Unreasonable delays in allowing the manager or his or her designee access to the user’s premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
F. The location of the monitoring facility shall provide ample room in or near the monitoring facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples and analysis. Whether constructed on public or private property, the monitoring facility should be provided in accordance with the SGRWRF’s requirements, and all applicable local construction standard and specifications. Such facilities shall be constructed and maintained in a manner that enables the manager to perform independent monitoring activities.
G. All significant industrial users will be inspected at least annually including review of facilities and reports.
H. SGRWRF may use a camera to photograph areas of the facility as necessary for carrying out the duties of the industrial pretreatment program including, but not limited to, documentation of the user’s compliance status and for reinforcement of written reports. The user shall be allowed to review copies of the photographs for confidentiality claims. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-7-2: SEARCH WARRANTS:
If the manager or his or her designee has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of SGRWRF designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, the manager may seek issuance of a search warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-8: CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION:
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, individual wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the manager inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the manager, that the release of specific information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that specific information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall be redacted and not made available for inspection by the public. Regardless of any such assertion of confidentiality, all information, unredacted, shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the UPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person or entity furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics, and other effluent data, as defined at 40 CFR section 2.302, shall not be recognized as confidential information and shall be available to the public without restriction. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-9: PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE:
The manager shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions served by POTW, a list of the users which, at any time during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term “significant noncompliance” shall be applicable to all significant industrial users (or any other industrial user that violates subsection C, D or H of this section) and shall mean:
A. “Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits,” defined here as those in which sixty six percent (66%) or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter taken during a six (6) month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits as defined in section 8-4-2 of this chapter;
B. “Technical review criteria (TRC) violations,” defined here as those in which thirty-three percent (33%) or more of wastewater measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by section 8-4-2 of this chapter multiplied by the applicable TRC criteria (TRC equals 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and TRC equals 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
C. Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by section 8-4-2 of this chapter (daily maximum, long term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the manager determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public;
D. Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the manager’s exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
E. Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
F. Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
G. Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
H. Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best management practices, which the manager determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-10: ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES:

8-4-10-1: NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION:
When the manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the manager may serve upon that user a written notice of violation, personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested). Within fifteen (15) days of receipt of such notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, including specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the manager. Submission of such a plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the manager to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, before or without issuing a notice of violation. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-10-2: CONSENT ORDERS:
The manager may enter into consent orders, assurances of compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents shall include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to sections 8-4-10-4 and 8-4-10-5 of this chapter and shall be judicially enforceable. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-10-3: SHOW CAUSE HEARING:
The manager may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the manager and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the show cause hearing, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user as defined in section 8-4-1-4 of this chapter. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-10-4: COMPLIANCE ORDERS:
When the manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the manager may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-10-5: CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS:
When the manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user’s past violations are likely to recur, the manager may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to:
A. Immediately comply with all requirements; and
B. Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-10-6: ADMINISTRATIVE FINES:
A. When the manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the manager may fine such user an amount not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly or other long term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation.
B. Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after sixty (60) calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of ten percent (10%) of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of one point five percent (1.5%) per month. A lien against the user’s real and/or personal property shall be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties.
C. Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the manager to reconsider the fine, along with full payment of the fine amount, within thirty (30) days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the manager may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the user’s appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereon, shall be returned to the user. The manager may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine.
D. Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-10-7: EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS:
The manager may immediately suspend a user’s discharge whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present, or cause, an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The manager may also immediately suspend a user’s discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension of a permit and/or discharge to the POTW.
A. Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user’s failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the manager may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to persons or the environment. The manager may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated, to the satisfaction of the manager, that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in section 8-4-10-8 of this chapter are initiated against the user.
B. A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution, and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence. The written statement shall be submitted to the manager prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under section 8-4-10-3 or 8-4-10-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-10-8: TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE:
A. Violations Subject To Discharge Termination: In addition to the provisions in section 8-4-5-6 of this chapter, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination:
    1. Violation of individual wastewater discharge permit conditions;
    2. Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;
    3. Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;
    4. Refusal of access to the user’s premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
    5. Violation of the pretreatment standards in section 8-4-2 of this chapter.
B. Notice Of Discharge Termination: User will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under section 8-4-10-3 of this chapter why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the manager shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-11: JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES:

8-4-11-1: INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
When the manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the manager may petition the Washington County 5th district court through the city attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the individual wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement, imposed by this chapter on activities of the user. The manager may also seek such other and further relief in law or equity, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-11-2: CIVIL PENALTIES:
A. A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, shall be liable to the city for a maximum civil penalty of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation.
B. The SGRWRF may recover reasonable attorney fees, court costs, interest, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any other actual damages incurred by the city.
C. In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained by the user from the user’s violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires.
D. Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-11-3: CRIMINAL PROSECUTION:
The SGRWRF will refer to the state of Utah criminal violations of any pretreatment standards or permit conditions. The attorney general’s office for Utah will offer the city of St. George, wherein the violation occurred, the option to prosecute the violator. Should the local entity decline, the state or EPA, at their discretion, may initiate appropriate criminal action. The SGRWRF will assist the attorney general’s office or EPA any way it can with appropriate support for the action. The penalties set forth herein are in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state or federal law.
A. A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than one year, or both.
B. A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of not more than twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than one year, or both.
C. A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this chapter, individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a third degree felony, and be subject to a penalty of not more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than five (5) years, or both.
D. In the event of a second or subsequent conviction, a user shall be punished by a fine of not more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than five (5) years, or both. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-11-4: REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE:
The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The SGRWRF may take any, all, or any combination of these actions, against a noncompliant user, simultaneously or otherwise. Enforcement of pretreatment violations generally will be in accordance with the SGRWRF’s enforcement response plan. However, SGRWRF may take other action against a user when the circumstances warrant. Further, SGRWRF is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against a noncompliant user. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-12: SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION:

8-4-12-1: PERFORMANCE BONDS:
The manager may decline to issue or reissue an individual wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter, a previous individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the city of St. George, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the manager to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-12-2: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
The manager may decline to issue or reissue an individual wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter, a previous individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge, including, but not limited to, liability insurance. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-12-3: WATER SUPPLY SEVERANCE:
Whenever a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed. Service will recommence, at the user’s expense, only after the user has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-12-4: PUBLIC NUISANCES:
Whenever a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, it hereby is declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the manager. Any person or entity creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the city of St. George ordinance (title 4, chapter 2 of this code) governing such nuisances, including, but not limited to, reimbursing the city for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-13: AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS:

8-4-13-1: UPSET:
A. For the purposes of this section, “upset” means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. Upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
B. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards, if the requirements of subsection C of this section, are met.
C. A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that:
    1. An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset;
    2. The facility at the time was being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner, and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and
    3. The user has submitted the following information to the manager within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset, and, if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five (5) days:
        a. A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance;
        b. The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times, or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and
        c. Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
D. In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
E. Users shall have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards.
F. Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility, and until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other situations, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-13-2: BYPASS:
A. Definitions: For the purposes of this section:
    BYPASS: The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a user’s treatment facility.
    SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE: Substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
B. Bypass For Maintenance: A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of subsections C and D of this section.
C. Bypass Notifications: 
    1. If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the manager, at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass.
    2. A user shall submit oral notice to the manager of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within twenty-four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain: a) a description of the bypass; b) its cause; c) the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times; d) if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and e) steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The manager, in his or her sole discretion, may waive the written report on a case by case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty-four (24) hours, and the facts merit the waiver.
D. Bypass: 
    1. Bypass is prohibited, and the manager may take an enforcement action against a user, unless:
        a. Bypass was unavoidable in order to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage;
        b. There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
        c. The user submitted notices as required under subsection C of this section.
    2. The manager may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the manager determines that it will meet the three (3) conditions listed in subsection D1 of this section.
    3. Bypass shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards, if the requirements of this subsection D are met. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-14: FATS, OILS, GREASE, AND SOIL (FOGS) CONTROL:

8-4-14-1: GENERAL:
This section 8-4-14 is applicable to commercial and industrial users that have the potential to discharge deleterious wastewaters containing elevated levels of fat, oils, grease and/or soil to the POTW. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-14-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions are supplemental to others in this chapter and applicable to this section 8-4-14:
COMMERCIAL USER: Any business or public or private entity, except for significant industrial users (SIU), who causes or permits the contribution or discharge of wastewater into the POTW; and who may be regulated, where necessary, to comply with this chapter.
COMMON INTERCEPTOR: One or more interceptors receiving deleterious wastewater from more than one establishment.
FOG: Fats, oil and grease of vegetable and animal origin.
FOGS: Fats, oil, grease (of vegetable and animal origin), petroleum oils (or crude oil origin), and soil (sand, dirt, etc.).
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT (FSE): Any building, vehicle, place, or structure, or any room or division in a building, vehicle, place, or structure, where: (A) food is prepared, served, or sold for immediate consumption on or in the vicinity of the premises; (B) called for or taken out by customers; or (C) prepared prior to being delivered to another location for consumption.
GREASE INTERCEPTOR: A structure or device designed for the purpose of removing and preventing fats, oils, and grease from entering the sanitary sewer collection system. These devices are belowground units in outside areas with a minimum capacity of one thousand (1,000) gallons.
GREASE TRAP: A device designed for the purpose of removing and preventing fats, oils, and grease from entering the sanitary sewer collection system. These devices are typically compact, under the sink units located near food preparation areas. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-14-3: INTERCEPTOR AND TRAP INSTALLATION SPECIFICATIONS:
A. Grease and sand/oil interceptors, as described by the international plumbing code (IPC), shall be required of any commercial user when the SGRWRF determines they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing FOGS in excessive amounts, except such interceptors shall not be required for residential dwelling units.
B. Any commercial user utilizing a three (3) compartment sink shall be required to have either a grease interceptor or grease trap installed at its own expense and shall be required to comply with maintaining the device as outlined in the St. George city pretreatment operating plan.
C. All construction plans for interceptors shall be submitted to SGRWRF for review and approval prior to installation. All interceptors shall be of a type, construction, and capacity approved by SGRWRF.
D. All interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers which are gas and water tight.
E. All newly constructed commercial structures, strip malls, multi-tenant planned occupied buildings, or planned unoccupied buildings, shall install independent six inch (6") wastewater discharge lines stubbed out within each designated future food establishment unit. If a new source commercial structure, strip mall, or multi-tenant building has planned occupancy by one or more businesses that do not generate FOG, and therefore do not need a grease interceptor, and the owner of the structure does not facilitate the installation of independent six inch (6") wastewater discharge line and install a common interceptor, then no future food establishments shall be permitted, unless facilities are retrofitted for independent lines.
F. All newly constructed “stand alone” commercial structures, strip malls, multi-tenant planned occupied buildings, where a three (3) compartment sink will be utilized, will be required to install a grease interceptor.
G. All existing commercial or industrial businesses shall have one year to install an interceptor upon notification by SGRWRF, where required by SGRWRF standards.
H. Interceptors for businesses that have closed shall be dewatered and cleaned by the owner of said establishment. A representative of SGRWRF may inspect and verify this process has been completed to the satisfaction of SGRWRF.
I. Grease traps are only allowed in place of grease interceptors when in the opinion of the manager it is physically impossible to install a grease interceptor outside of the building or business. As such, a variance request from the owner or lessee of the property must be made to SGRWRF with a certification letter from a duly licensed Utah plumber or engineer. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-14-4: GENERAL FOGS WASTE DISCHARGE LIMITS AND REQUIREMENTS:
It shall be unlawful to discharge within SGRWRF jurisdiction, any sanitary wastewater, commercial and industrial waste, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions of this chapter. The following are general requirements and prohibitions applicable to this section:
A. The discharge of any substance into the sewer system that exceeds or violates general or specific prohibitions listed in section 8-4-2-1 of this chapter is prohibited.
B. The discharge into the sewer system of FOGS that may accumulate and/or cause or contribute to blockages in the sewer system, or at the sewer system lateral, except as provided herein, is prohibited.
C. Installation and use of food grinders in new and/or remodeled FSEs are not recommended.
D. Emulsifiers, enzymes, or degreasers shall not be added as sewer aids to any plumbing that leads to any interceptor directly or indirectly.
E. The disposal of cooking oil (yellow grease) into the sewer system is prohibited. All waste cooking oils shall be collected, stored, and labeled properly in receptacles such as barrels or drums for recycling or other acceptable methods of disposal.
F. The discharge of wastewater with temperatures in excess of one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) to any FOGS control device, including interceptors and traps, is prohibited.
G. The discharge of waste from toilets, urinals, washbasins, and other fixtures containing fecal materials into sewer lines intended for interceptor service, is prohibited.
H. The discharge to the sewer system of any waste including FOGS and solid materials, that were otherwise removed from an interceptor or other FOGS control device, is prohibited. Wastes removed from interceptors must be hauled off and properly disposed of periodically in compliance with operation and maintenance requirements.
I. Operation of an interceptor with FOGS and solids (floating plus settled) accumulation, exceeding twenty five percent (25%) of the design hydraulic depth of the interceptor, is prohibited.
J. Commercial users, during regular business hours, shall provide to the pretreatment coordinator or his or her designee immediate and safe access to the users’ premises, FOGS handling facilities, and BMP facilities.
K. The pretreatment coordinator may require visual monitoring at the expense of the commercial user to observe conditions of the user’s sewer lateral and lines downstream. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-14-5: KITCHEN BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP) REQUIREMENTS:
All food service establishments (FSEs) shall be required, at a minimum, to implement and comply with the following kitchen BMPs, whenever applicable:
A. Strainers: Drain screens (strainers) shall be installed on all drainage pipes in food preparation areas.
B. Waste Cooking Oil: All waste cooking oil shall be collected and stored properly in recycling receptacles such as barrels or drums. Such recycling receptacles shall be maintained properly to ensure they do not leak.
C. Disposal Of Garbage And Food Waste: All garbage and food waste shall be disposed of directly into trash bins or containers, and not in sinks, drainage pipes, or the sewer system. Food waste should be disposed of in lined trash bins.
D. Employee Training: Employees of FSEs shall be trained twice each calendar year in the following areas:
    1. How to “dry wipe/scrape” pots, pans, dishware, and work areas before washing to remove FOG.
    2. How to properly dispose of garbage, food waste, and solids in lined plastic bags prior to disposal in trash bins or containers, to prevent leaking and odors.
    3. The location and use of absorbent products to clean under fryer baskets and other locations where FOG may be spilled or accumulated.
    4. How to properly dispose of cooking oil from fry equipment into a FOG receptacle such as a barrel or drum without spilling.
    5. Training shall be documented, and employee signatures recorded, indicating each employee’s attendance and understanding of the practices reviewed. Training records shall be available for review at any reasonable time by the pretreatment coordinator, or designee.
E. Exhaust Filter Maintenance: Exhaust filters shall be maintained in good operating condition utilizing frequent cleaning practices. Wastewater generated from cleaning exhaust filters shall be disposed properly.
F. Signs: Kitchen BMP and “NO GREASE” signs, posters, or similar information, in appropriate language(s), shall be prominently displayed in the food preparation and dishwashing areas at all times.
G. Drips And Spills: Absorbent materials shall be placed under fryers and other areas where FOG typically or frequently drips or spills.
H. Spill Prevention: Covered devices shall be used in transporting FOG to prevent spills.
I. FOG Containers: FOG containers shall be emptied before they are full to avoid accidental or incidental spills.
J. Spill Kits: “Spill kits” (e.g., absorbent materials) shall be provided and readily available in the event of a spill. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-14-6: INTERCEPTOR OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
All existing and newly constructed interceptors shall be operated in accordance with the manufacturer’s specifications. The maintenance frequency for all commercial users with interceptors shall be determined by the following:
A. Where installed, an interceptor shall be fully maintained by the user, at its sole expense, in a continuous and efficient manner, and at all times subject to SGRWRF inspection and approval.
B. Interceptors shall be maintained in efficient operating condition by the periodic removal of the full contents of the interceptor. Interceptors shall be fully emptied and cleaned at a frequency such that the combined floating and settled FOGS accumulation does not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the design hydraulic depth of the interceptor. This is to ensure that the minimum hydraulic retention time, and required available volume, is maintained to effectively intercept and retain FOGS.
C. If an interceptor at any time is observed by the pretreatment coordinator or his or her designee to contain floating and settled FOGS accumulation in excess of twenty-five percent (25%), the user shall be required to have the interceptor serviced as soon as possible, but no later than ten (10) days from the date the notice of violation was given, such that all FOGS, sludge, and other materials, are completely removed from the interceptor.
D. The owner of the property on which a common interceptor, and/or the facilities discharging to a common interceptor, are located shall be primarily responsible for the maintenance, upkeep, and repair of the interceptor.
E. No commercial user shall increase the use of water or in any other manner attempt to dilute a discharge as a way of achieving compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-14-7: GREASE TRAP OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Where installed, a grease trap shall be fully maintained by the user, at its sole expense, in a continuous and efficient manner, and at all times subject to SGRWRF inspection and approval.
B. An FSE may use, or be required to install, grease traps, in lieu of installation of a grease interceptor, when, in the opinion of the manager: 1) installation of an interceptor cannot physically be accomplished; 2) there is not adequate slope for gravity flow between kitchen plumbing fixtures and a proposed grease interceptor and/or between the grease interceptor and the private collection lines or the public sewer; or 3) no alternative pretreatment can be installed. Sizing of grease traps shall be performed by a professional engineer or plumber registered in the state of Utah, but shall conform to SGRWRF design standards and construction specifications as a minimum.
C. Grease traps shall be operated in accordance with the manufacturer’s specifications.
D. Grease traps shall be maintained in efficient operating condition by removing accumulated grease on an as needed basis, or the frequency specified by the manufacturer, but no less than weekly.
E. Grease traps shall be fully emptied of all food residues, and any FOG waste, during the cleaning and scraping process.
F. Grease traps shall be inspected periodically, but in no event less than once a month, to check for leaking seams and pipes, and for effective operation of the baffles and flow regulating device. Grease traps and their baffles shall be maintained free of all caked on FOG and waste. Removable baffles shall be removed and cleaned during the maintenance process.
G. Automatic dishwashers and/or food grinder units shall not be connected to, or discharged to, any grease trap.
H. No FSE shall increase the use of water or in any other manner attempt to dilute a discharge as a way of achieving compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-14-8: NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS:
A commercial and industrial user shall comply with the following notification requirements:
A. Notification Of Spills And/or Sanitary Sewer Overflows (SSO): 
    1. In the event a user is unable to comply with the FOGS control requirements due to a breakdown of equipment, accidents, or human error, or the user has reasonable belief that its discharge will violate this chapter, the user or its representative shall immediately notify the pretreatment coordinator by telephone.
    2. If the material discharged has the potential to cause, or results in, sewer blockage or SSO, the user shall immediately notify the SGRWRF and the pretreatment coordinator by telephone at: (435) 634-5849.
    3. Confirmation of this notification shall be made in writing to the pretreatment coordinator no later than five (5) working days from the date of the incident, to the following address: Pretreatment Coordinator, SGRWRF – 3780 S. 1550 W., St. George, UT 84790. The written notification shall state the date of the incident, the reasons for the discharge or spill, what steps were taken to immediately correct the problem, and what steps are being taken to prevent a recurrence.
    4. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability that may be incurred as a result of damage or otherwise arising out of a violation of this chapter, or other applicable law.
B. Notification Of Potential Increased FOGS Discharges: Commercial users shall notify the pretreatment coordinator in writing at least sixty (60) days prior to any facility expansion, and/or remodeling or process modifications that may result in new or substantially increased FOGS discharges, or a change in the nature of the discharge. The user shall submit any information requested by the pretreatment coordinator for evaluation of the effect of such expansion and/or remodeling or process modifications on the user’s FOGS discharge to the sewer system. The written notification shall state the FSE name, name and the title of the user’s contact person or person most knowledgeable concerning the facility expansion and/or remodeling or process modifications, address and telephone number of the user, date of the proposed facility expansion and/or remodeling or process modifications, and the reasons for the same. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-14-9: RECORDKEEPING REQUIREMENTS:
The following records shall be maintained for no less than three (3) years, and the commercial user shall make them available to the pretreatment coordinator, or designee:
A. A record or logbook of interceptor or trap cleaning and maintenance practices and activities. The record or logbook shall include:
    1. Dates cleaned;
    2. Name of waste hauler;
    3. Any observations concerning the effectiveness of the interceptor or trap in controlling FOGS; and
    4. Any other maintenance performed on the trap or interceptor;
B. A record or logbook of FSE kitchen BMPs being implemented including employee training;
C. Any other information deemed appropriate by the pretreatment coordinator to ensure compliance with this chapter; and
D. Records of any spills and/or cleaning of the lateral or sewer system. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-14-10: INSPECTIONS AND SAMPLING:
Commercial users are inspected on a regular basis by SGRWRF to determine if the businesses are in compliance with this chapter. The purpose of inspections is as follows:
A. To verify if users are complying with this chapter;
B. To collect and analyze samples and compare results to established discharge limitations;
C. To provide evidence in support of enforcement actions;
D. To verify correction of problems; and
E. To maintain records of user discharge constituents. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-15: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:

8-4-15-1: PRETREATMENT CHARGES AND FEES:
The SGRWRF may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating SGRWRF’s pretreatment program, which may include:
A. Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing such applications;
B. Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures, including the cost of collection and analyzing a user’s discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports and certification statements submitted by users;
C. Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction;
D. Fees for filing appeals;
E. Fees to recover administrative and legal costs not included in subsection B of this section associated with any enforcement activity taken by the manager to address IU noncompliance; and
F. Other fees as SGRWRF may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the SGRWRF. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-15-2: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

8-4-16: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect immediately following its passage, approval, and publication, as provided by law. (Ord. 2016-11-005, 11-10-2016)

CHAPTER 5 NO FAULT SEWER AND WATER CLAIMS


8-5-1:       Authority
8-5-2:       Application For Reimbursement
8-5-3:       Criteria For Payment
8-5-4:       Maximum Payment
8-5-5:       Payment Does Not Imply Liability

8-5-1: AUTHORITY:
The risk manager is authorized to pay claims arising under this chapter under the supervision of the claims committee from the self-insured retention fund for the purpose of compensating loss sustained by the owner or occupier of property as the result of a break or backup in a city owned and maintained water main or sewer line, regardless of fault, within the restrictions, limitations and other provisions of this chapter. Property owned or occupied by the United States or any of its departments or agencies, the state, county, school district, or other governmental agency, shall be excluded from the effect of this chapter. (Ord. 1-1-1991, 1-3-1991; amd. 2003 Code)

8-5-2: APPLICATION FOR REIMBURSEMENT:
Applications for reimbursement shall be submitted to the risk manager within ninety (90) days after the incident occurs. He/she shall cause investigation to be made by the appropriate department and forward a report to the city attorney for determination under the criteria of this chapter. All payment authorized by the city attorney shall be made solely from the source provided in section 8-5-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 1-1-1991, 1-3-1991; amd. 2003 Code)

8-5-3: CRITERIA FOR PAYMENT:
A. Established: The determination as to whether to make payment for loss under this chapter shall be based on the following criteria:
    1. Whether an eligible applicant suffered an otherwise uninsured property loss, caused by break, obstruction or backup of a city owned water main or sewer line, under circumstances where the applicant acted responsibly to avoid the loss; and
    2. If so, whether the extent of the loss has been adequately substantiated.
B. Denial: The following shall result in the denial of an application:
    1. Application not timely submitted;
    2. Loss fully covered by private insurance;
    3. Applicant ineligible under the terms of this chapter;
    4. Loss caused by an irresponsible act of the applicant, applicant’s agent, or member of applicant’s business or household;
    5. Loss or eligibility unsubstantiated.
C. Reduction: The following shall result in reduction of payment:
    1. Loss partially covered by private insurance;
    2. Loss exceeds payment limits of this chapter;
    3. Verification of loss inadequate or incomplete;
    4. Applicant did not cause the problem but failed to act responsibly to minimize the loss. (Ord. 1-1-1991, 1-3-1991)

8-5-4: MAXIMUM PAYMENT:
No payment under this chapter shall exceed the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). (Ord. 1-1-1991, 1-3-1991)

8-5-5: PAYMENT DOES NOT IMPLY LIABILITY:
A. Any payment made under this chapter shall not be construed as an admission of, nor does it imply, any negligence or responsibility on the part of the city for such damage. Any payment made under this chapter is strictly voluntary on the part of the city.
B. This chapter shall not in any way supersede, change or abrogate the state government immunity act, Utah Code Annotated section 63-30-1 et seq., as amended, or its successor, and its application to the city, or establish in any person a right to sue the city under this chapter.
C. Any payment under this chapter and accepted shall constitute a full and complete release of any and all claims against the city, its officers, employees and agents arising from the incident. (Ord. 1-1-1991, 1-3-1991)

CHAPTER 6 STORM WATER DRAINAGE SERVICES


8-6-1:       Need, Purposes And Objectives
8-6-2:       Definitions
8-6-3:       Method Of Determining Service Fee Rates
8-6-4:       Billing And Collection
8-6-5:       Appeal

8-6-1: NEED, PURPOSES AND OBJECTIVES:
A. Need To Protect: The city council recognizes the potential hazards of storm water from existing conditions, future growth and urban development. Stormwater runoff causes property damage and erosion, and carries concentration of nutrients, chemicals, heavy metals, oil and toxic materials into receiving waters and ground waters. It reduces citizens’ access to emergency services which imposes hazards to both life and property. The city is subject to environmental protection regulations for water quality and NPDES permit requirements through the federal clean water act.
B. Purposes And Objectives: Because of the potential hazards mentioned, the objectives of the fee established by this chapter are to:
    1. Ensure there is an adequate stormwater drainage system for handling stormwater runoff.
    2. Provide fair, equitable and nondiscriminatory rates for using the storm water drainage system. Usage charges will generate revenues for operating, improving and maintaining the stormwater drainage systems.
    3. Establish a policy that usage rates for this service should be set after considering:
        a. The intensity of development of land parcels;
        b. The types of development on land parcels;
        c. The cost of constructing, maintaining, operating, repairing and improving the storm drainage system;
        d. The quantity and quality of the runoff generated;
        e. Public health, safety and welfare;
        f. Any other factors that ought to be considered.
    4. Provide for compliance with city and NPDES water qualitystandards. (Ord. 2001-03-003, 3-15-2001)

8-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, and words shall mean:
CITY: City of St. George, a municipal corporation of the state of Utah.
COUNCIL: City council of the city of St. George.
CUSTOMER OR PERSON: Any individual; public or private corporation and its officers; partnership; association; firm; trustee; executor of an estate; the state or its departments; institutions, bureaus, agencies; counties; city; political subdivision; or any other governmental or legal entity recognized by law.
DEVELOPED PARCEL: Any parcel whose surface has been altered by grading, filling or construction of any improvement.
DIRECTOR: The director of the department of public works or his designee.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms in a dwelling, designed for or occupied by one family for living or sleeping purposes and having kitchen facilities for the use of not more than one family.
EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT (ERU): Two thousand (2,000) square feet of impervious surface area.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: A parcel’s hard surface area that causes water to run off its surface in greater quantities or faster than natural conditions. Some examples of impervious surfaces are rooftops, concrete or asphalt paving, walkways, patios, driveways, parking lots or storage areas.
MITIGATION: Stormwater control facilities located on a parcel, which either hold runoff for a short period of time before releasing it to the storm water drainage system, or hold water until it evaporates or infiltrates into the ground.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM WATER REGULATIONS: The provisions of the federal Clean Water Act for the control of stormwater discharges.
PARCEL: The smallest, separately segregated unit of land having an owner. A parcel has boundaries and surface area, and is documented with a property number by Washington County (“county”).
RESIDENTIAL PARCEL: Any parcel of land paying a residential electrical rate, or in the case of those who do not receive electricity from the city system, any parcel of land which is billed the residential rate for either garbage collection or sewer fees.
STORMWATER: Water produced by storm, surface drainage, snow and ice melt, spring flows, groundwater and other water handled by the stormwater drainage system.
STORMWATER DRAINAGE FEE OR FEE: The fee created by this chapter, which generates revenue to operate, maintain, regulate and improve stormwater facilities and programs within St. George City.
STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM: All manmade storm water facilities and conveyances, and natural storm water drainage within the city’s limits that store, control, treat and/or convey storm water.
UNDEVELOPED PARCEL: Any parcel that has not been altered by grading, filling or construction. (Ord. 2003-05-001, 5-1-2003)

8-6-3: METHOD OF DETERMINING SERVICE FEE RATES:
A. Established: There will be storm drainage service fees charged on each parcel of real property within the city, except government owned streets and storm water facilities. Service fees will be charged as follows:
    1. Fees: The fees to be charged for an ERU shall be calculated from time to time in accordance with the requirements of the utility systems and the best interests of the community. Those fees shall be approved by the mayor and city council and listed in the city fee schedule.
    2. Residential Parcels: Each dwelling unit on a residential parcel shall constitute one (1) ERU.
    3. Common Areas: Common areas for residential development shall have no assessed charges.
    4. Undeveloped Parcels: Undeveloped parcels shall have no charges assessed.
    5. Other Parcels: Charges for all parcels, other than residential, shall be computed by multiplying the total ERUs for a parcel by the monthly fee. Total ERUs are calculated by dividing total square feet of impervious surface by two thousand (2,000) (one (1) ERU), rounded to the nearest whole number.
B. Credit For On-Parcel Mitigation: Nonresidential parcels with mitigating storm water facilities that meet the city’s design and maintenance standards are eligible for a service charge credit. The parcel’s owner or agent must make application for this credit to the director. A fifty percent (50%) reduction in the natural (undeveloped) one hundred (100) year peak storm water discharge shall qualify a parcel for a fifty percent (50%) reduction in the total ERU. This credit may be granted in addition to any other available credit.
C. Credit For Storm Water Management Program Achievements: Nonresidential parcels are eligible for a service charge credit if they contribute to the city’s storm water management program. A fifty percent (50%) reduction in the total ERUs may be granted to qualifying parcels. Qualifying contributions must involve ongoing participation in the achievement of program goals associated with established best management practices. The parcel’s owner or agent must make application for this credit to the director. This credit may be granted in addition to any other available credit. (Ord. 2019-02-001 § 2, 2-7-2019)

8-6-4: BILLING AND COLLECTION:
A. Enterprise Fund: This chapter creates the storm water drainage enterprise fund. All revenues received from storm drainage service charges shall be placed in the enterprise fund as a designated fund, to be left separate and apart from all other city funds. The collection, accounting and expenditure of all storm water drainage funds shall be in accordance with the city’s existing fiscal policy.
B. Billing: The department of finance shall bill property owners for storm water drainage services under the city’s unified procedures as set forth in subsection 8-3-4B of this title. Billing amounts shall be included as a separate line item on utility bills. All billing and collection shall be in conformance with subsection 8-3-4B of this title. (Ord. 2001-03-003, 3-15-2001)

8-6-5: APPEAL:
A. Authority: Any nonresidential customer who disagrees with the storm drainage fee charge for his or her parcels may apply to the director for a service charge adjustment. The adjustment request must state the grounds for adjustment and must be filed in writing with the director. The director shall review the request and basis for service charges to determine whether an adjustment shall be made in the calculation or application of the fee. The director may approve an adjustment; however, in all cases, the director’s decision shall be final, unless appealed as provided by city ordinance.
B. Credit: If an appeal of charges is successful, credit will be applied to all charges from the time of the appealed billing, and will be reflected on the next billing thirty (30) days after appeal is granted.
C. Judicial Review Nonexistent: Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to grant a right to judicial review, which does not otherwise exist in law. (Ord. 2001-03-003, 3-15-2001)

CHAPTER 7 SUNTRAN SERVICES


8-7-1:       Paratransit Eligibility
8-7-2:       Paratransit Eligibility Appeals

8-7-1: PARATRANSIT ELIGIBILITY:
Paratransit service is available for people with physical, cognitive or visual disabilities who are functionally unable to independently use the fixed route bus service either all of the time, temporarily, or only under certain circumstances. Disability alone does not determine paratransit eligibility.
A. Evaluation Procedure: The individual requesting paratransit services must complete a city approved form, submit it to SunTran and appear in person for a scheduled evaluation.
    1. The applicant must complete the evaluation.
    2. The applicant must provide verification of disability if requested.
    3. The applicant must state why they cannot use the fixed route bus service.
    4. The functional evaluation assesses the physical abilities of the applicant and their physical ability to use the bus system. The assessment will consist of activities such as boarding and riding a fixed route bus, negotiating various inclines, surfaces, curbs, curb cuts, and crossing streets. Skills evaluated include balance, strength, coordination, and range of motion.
    5. The cognitive ability assessment is assessed by evaluating bus travel skills, community safety skills, and general orientation. It assesses the applicant’s ability to use the proper money, how to know what bus to get on, where to get off the bus, how to let the driver know what they need if they become confused or disoriented or other cognitive issues that may make it so the applicant cannot ride the fixed route bus.
B. Categories Of Eligibility: People classified by the city as eligible for paratransit service are assigned an eligibility category that is consistent with their ability to use the fixed route bus. The categories are:
    1. Unconditional: If the applicant is determined to be unable to independently use the fixed route bus, even with training. A rider might receive unconditional eligibility but still be transported through a “seamless” transfer (the paratransit service waits for the fixed route bus) to a fixed route bus.
    2. Temporary: If the applicant is unable to use the fixed route bus for a limited period of time then the applicant may use the paratransit service during that time.
    3. Transitional: If the applicant is determined to be able to learn to use the fixed route bus with training, applicant may use the paratransit service while learning to use the fixed route bus.
    4. Conditional: If the applicant can use the fixed route bus sometimes, but may require paratransit service in special circumstances when the interaction of the applicant’s disability and the environment or a special circumstance creates a barrier for safe, independent use of the fixed route bus for a particular trip. Examples of conditional eligibility include people with extreme fatigue after dialysis, or a bus stop which requires a person who is blind to negotiate a dangerous pedestrian area, like a large open parking lot with no reference points.
C. Ineligible: If the applicant has the physical and cognitive ability to use the fixed route bus or fails to comply with the requirements provided in this chapter, the applicant shall be classified as ineligible and the applicant’s application shall be denied.
D. Visitors: SunTran shall provide paratransit service to visitors. A “visitor” is defined as an individual with disabilities who does not reside in jurisdiction(s) served by SunTran. SunTran shall treat visitors as eligible for paratransit service for those visitors who present documentation that they are ADA paratransit eligible. SunTran shall make the service to a visitor required by this section available for any combination of twenty-one (21) calendar days during any three hundred sixty-five (365) day period beginning with the visitor’s first use of the service during such three hundred sixty-five (365) day period. In no case shall SunTran require a visitor to apply for or receive eligibility certification from SunTran before receiving the service required by this section.
E. Documentation: The applicant shall be given documentation stating the applicant’s name, SunTran’s name, address, and the telephone number for the paratransit coordinator, the expiration date for eligibility, and any conditions or limitations on the applicant’s eligibility including the use of a personal care attendant.
F. Recertification: Recertification may be required on an annual basis, or sooner if deemed appropriate by SunTran at its sole discretion.
G. Suspension: Service to an applicant may be suspended if there is a pattern or practice of missing scheduled trips or applicant creates other problems for other paratransit users. SunTran shall give notice to the individual identifying the basis for the suspension. The individual may protest the decision by meeting with the director or a designee to provide information and arguments on why there should be no suspension. SunTran will provide a written notice of the decision and the reason for the decision. (Ord. 2015-09-007, 9-3-2015)

8-7-2: PARATRANSIT ELIGIBILITY APPEALS:
A. Created: In order to hear and decide appeals of decisions or determinations made by the SunTran staff relative to the application and interpretation of the eligibility of the applicant for paratransit services, there is hereby created the paratransit eligibility appeal process. Appeals shall be heard by a hearing officer. A hearing officer shall be appointed by the mayor with approval of the city council.
B. Right Of Appeal: A paratransit applicant has a right to appeal the denial of a request for paratransit service if the applicant believes the staff decision or determination is unjust or that there is not good cause for denying the service. The appeal must be made in writing and must be given to the SunTran Office within sixty (60) days after the notice of denial was given to the applicant. Failure to file a timely appeal shall be considered a waiver of the right to appeal. A hearing before the hearing officer shall be held after the appeal is received by city. If a decision is not given within thirty (30) days, the applicant will be allowed to receive paratransit service until a hearing is held and decision entered.
C. Hearing: The hearing shall be open to the public but may be closed by the hearing officer, at the request of the applicant, due to the confidential nature of the information being presented. The applicant shall have the right to present new information or arguments about why applicant believes the eligibility determination should be overturned. A SunTran representative shall present the information considered to determine the applicant’s eligibility for paratransit services. The applicant shall have the right to present any additional information or argument. The hearing officer may ask questions at any time during the hearing process and may ask for additional information. The hearing officer may reschedule or continue the hearing to give the parties time to provide the additional information if the hearing officer determines that it is appropriate. The hearing officer shall consider all information presented and render a decision on the appeal.
D. Decision: The decision shall be given in writing to the parties within thirty (30) days of the hearing. If the decision is that the applicant is ineligible, the determination shall state the reasons for the finding. An applicant adversely affected by the decision may appeal the decision of the hearing officer to the city manager. The city manager shall follow the same procedures as the hearing officer. The decision of the city manager is final. The applicant may file a petition in the District Court for a review of the decision which review shall be a review of the record. The District Court shall presume the city manager’s decision is valid and shall review the record to determine whether or not the decision was arbitrary, capricious or illegal. (Ord. 2017-05-007, 5-4-2017)

TITLE 9 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION

Chapter
1            Building Code And Regulations
2            Public Improvements; Specifications
3            Impact Fees
    3A           Capital Facilities Plan
    3B           Fees
    3C           Endangered Species Act Impact Fees
4            Plumbing Code
5            Electrical Code
6            Abatement Of Dangerous Buildings Code
7            Fuel Gas Code
8            Mechanical Code
9            Fire Code
10           Residential Code
11           Horizontal Control Network
12           Fencing along Red Cliffs Desert Reserve
13           Signs And Displays
14           Storm Water Management

CHAPTER 1 BUILDING CODE AND REGULATIONS


9-1-1:       Building Code Adopted
9-1-2:       Building Permit; Fee
9-1-3:       Certificates Of Occupancy
9-1-4:       Board Of Appeals

9-1-1: BUILDING CODE ADOPTED:
A. Adopted: The International Building Code is hereby adopted, including all appendix chapters, with the exception of appendix B, entitled “board of appeals,” as published by the International Code Council, as the code of the city for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses in the city and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such International Building Code, 2000 edition, with the exception of appendix B, entitled “board of appeals,” published by the International Code Council, on file in the office of the city recorder, and as adopted and amended by the state, together with amendments thereto in the future made by the state, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section. (Ord. 2005-11-004, 11-17-2005)
B. Revisions: The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 8101.1 Insert: City of St. George.
Table R301.2(1) Insert: Ground Snow Load – 21 lbs.
Roof Snow Load – 15 lbs.
Wind Speed (mph) – 90.
Seismic Design Category – soils/engineering.
Weathering – moderate.
Frost Line Depth – 12 inches.
Termite – moderate to heavy.
Decay – none/slight.
Design Temperature dry bulb 2.5% 102o, wet bulb 2.5% 70o.
Flood Hazards – (a) August 19, 1987 and (b) January 7, 1998. (Ord. 2002-02-010, 2-7-2002; amd. 2003 Code)

9-1-2: BUILDING PERMIT; FEE:
A. Permit Required: 
    1. It shall be unlawful to erect, construct, alter or reconstruct any building or structure for business, commercial and industrial purposes within the city without first securing a permit from the city council or their duly appointed and legal agent.
    2. It shall be unlawful to put to use any land or existing structures within the city for any industrial purpose, without first securing a permit to do so from the city council or their duly appointed agent. (1962 Code § 4-1-2)
B. Fee For Permit: Any person may apply to the city council for a building permit by furnishing information required by the designated building official and paying in advance a permit fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city council. (1962 Code § 4-1-3; amd. 2003 Code)

9-1-3: CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY:
A. Required: No vacant land shall be occupied or used and no building or structure hereafter erected, altered or moved shall be occupied until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the chief building official or an inspector from his office. Any building under construction at the time the ordinance codified herein is passed which has not had final inspection shall be considered to be within the purview of this section. The certificate of occupancy shall show that the building or premises or part thereof and the proposed use thereof are in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and any other codes adopted pursuant hereto.
B. Transfer Of Water And Electric Service To User: When water or electric service furnished to a building or structure is taken out of the name of a contractor or builder or application is made in the name of the user who will occupy the building or structure, water or electric service shall not be supplied to such permanent user unless the certificate of occupancy required by this section has been issued.
C. Inspection; Issuance: The certificate of occupancy provided for herein shall be issued only after final inspection by the office of the chief building official and determination that the extent and kind of use to be made of the building or premises conforms to the provisions of this chapter and any codes adopted hereunder, unless, in the discretion of the chief building official, it is determined that a conditional certificate of occupancy for all or any portion of a building is appropriate under rules and regulations adopted from time to time by the city. However, issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of any noncompliance subsequently found to exist, and nothing herein gives authority to the chief building official to waive or cancel any of the building code requirements otherwise in force.
D. Violation; Penalty: It shall be unlawful for a contractor or builder of a dwelling unit to occupy or to turn over or deliver the unit to anyone for the purpose of occupancy until the certificate of occupancy has been issued. Violation shall be a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 6-2-1993, 6-17-1993; amd. 2003 Code)

9-1-4: BOARD OF APPEALS:
A. Created: In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of the International Building Code and applicable Utah state law, as adopted by section 9-1-1 of this chapter, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals.
B. Application: The application for appeal shall be filed on a form obtained from the building official within twenty (20) days after notice of the decision or determination from which an appeal is sought is given to the applicant.
C. Membership Of Board; Appointment; Vacancies; Compensation: The board of appeals shall consist of five (5) members, each to be appointed by the mayor with consent of the city council for a term of three (3) years; provided, that the terms of the members of the first board so appointed shall be such that the term of one member shall expire in the first year, and the terms of two (2) members shall expire in each of the next two (2) years. Vacancies occurring other than through the expiration of terms shall be filled by appointment by the city council for the remaining balance of term for the vacant seat. Members may be removed after public hearing by a majority vote of the city council. Members shall be selected without respect to political affiliations and shall serve without compensation, except for reasonable expenses.
D. Alternate Members: The mayor with consent of the city council may appoint one alternate member for each of the required professions or disciplines, listed in subsection E of this section, who shall be called by the board chairperson to hear appeals during the absence or disqualification of a member. Alternate members shall possess the qualifications required for board membership and shall be appointed for three (3) years, or until a successor has been appointed.
E. Qualifications: The board of appeals shall consist of members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction and not employees of the jurisdiction. The board of appeals shall consist of one individual from each of the following professions or disciplines:
    1. Registered design professional with architectural experience or a builder or superintendent of building construction with at least ten (10) years’ experience, five (5) of which shall have been in responsible charge of work.
    2. Registered design professional with structural engineering experience.
    3. Registered design professional with mechanical and plumbing engineering experience or a mechanical contractor with at least ten (10) years’ experience, five (5) of which shall have been in responsible charge of work.
    4. Registered design professional with electrical engineering experience or an electrical contractor with at least ten (10) years’ experience, five (5) of which shall have been in responsible charge of work.
    5. Registered design professional with fire protection engineering experience or a fire protection contractor with at least ten (10) years’ experience, five (5) of which shall have been in responsible charge of work.
F. Rules And Procedures: The board is authorized to establish policies and procedures necessary to carry out its duties.
G. Chairperson: The board shall annually select one of its members to serve as chairperson.
H. Disqualification Of Member: A member shall not hear an appeal in which that member has a personal, professional or financial interest.
I. Notice Of Meeting: The board shall meet upon notice from the chairperson, within ten (10) days of the filing of an appeal or at stated periodic meetings.
J. Postponed Hearing: When five (5) members are not present to hear an appeal, either the appellant or the appellant’s representative shall have the right to request a postponement of the hearing.
K. Board Decision: The board shall modify or reverse the decision of the building official by a concurring vote of two-thirds (2/3) of its members. The decision of the board shall be in writing. Copies shall be furnished to the appellant and to the building official.
L. Administration: The building official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the board. (Ord. 2006-05-003, 5-4-2006)

CHAPTER 2 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS; SPECIFICATIONS


9-2-1:       Specifications For Design Procedures And Construction Standards
9-2-2:       Definitions
9-2-3:       Installation Of Public Improvements
9-2-4:       Reimbursement For Oversizing Public Improvements
9-2-5:       Financing System Improvements
9-2-6:       Impact Fee Assessment And Collection
9-2-7:       Credit For System Improvements
9-2-8:       Reimbursement For System Improvements
9-2-9:       Limits On Reimbursement

9-2-1: SPECIFICATIONS FOR DESIGN PROCEDURES AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
A. Adopted By Reference: That certain document entitled standard specifications for design and construction, July 2000, for the city, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the city recorder, is hereby adopted as the design and construction specifications for the city for the regulation and control of all design procedures and construction standards for public improvements in the city. At least three (3) copies of the ordinance hereby adopted by reference are on file in the office of the city recorder for use and examination by the public.
B. Penalty: Any person violating, causing or permitting violation of any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1980-7-1, 8-13-1980; amd. 2003 Code)

9-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the words set out in this section shall have the following meanings:
CAPITAL FACILITIES PLAN1: The capital facilities plan adopted by the St. George city council and as amended by the city council from time to time.
CITY: St. George City, a Utah municipal corporation.
DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY: Any construction or expansion of a building, structure or use, any change in use of a building or structure, or any change in the use of land that creates additional demand and need for public facilities and public improvements.
DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL: Any written authorization from the city that authorizes the commencement of development activity.
IMPACT FEE2: A payment of money imposed upon development activity as a condition of development approval.
PROJECT IMPROVEMENTS:
    A. Site improvements and facilities that are:
        1. Planned and designed to provide service for development resulting from a development activity; and
        2. Necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of development resulting from a development activity.
    B. “Project improvements” does not mean system improvements.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS: Those improvements installed which are intended to extend, expand or improve the water, power, storm drainage, sewer, roads and/or parks systems and facilities.
SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS:
    A. Means:
        1. Existing public facilities that are designed to provide services to service areas within the community at large; and
        2. Future public facilities identified in and included as part of the capital facilities plan that are intended to provide services to service areas within the community at large.
    B. “System improvements” does not mean project improvements. (Ord. 10-1-1998, 10-1-1998)
1See also section 9-3A-1 of this title for plan adoption.
2See also chapter 3 of this title for impact fees.

9-2-3: INSTALLATION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
Subject to city ordinances and where authorized and approved by the city, developers may construct and install public improvements for new developments located within the city. No development activity shall be approved or commenced unless all project and system improvements are provided to and within the development activity proposed, unless expressly exempted from a particular requirement by the city council. (Ord. 10-1-1998, 10-1-1998)

9-2-4: REIMBURSEMENT FOR OVERSIZING PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
Where public improvements are installed which are intended to extend, expand or improve the city’s public improvements beyond the public improvements required to service or benefit the subdivision or development activity proposed by the developer, the city, in its discretion, may enter into a written reimbursement agreement with the developer who installs the public improvements. The amount and source of the reimbursement to the developer shall be determined pursuant to a reimbursement schedule adopted by the city council after receiving recommendations from the city engineer. The reimbursement amount for the oversized portion of the public improvements shall not exceed the actual, reasonable costs incurred in installing the oversized portion of the public improvements. (Ord. 10-1-1998, 10-1-1998)

9-2-5: FINANCING SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS:
Any system improvements required, shall be paid by the city, or by a credit against the impact fees to be paid by the developer. Nothing in this chapter, however, shall require the city to make system improvements except as set forth in the capital facilities plan and unless and until the city council has determined to do so. Any developer seeking to commence development activity prior to the terms set forth for installation under the capital facilities plan and prior to the city’s commitment to participate in a project or to provide the required system improvements may construct all of the project and system improvements and may, with the approval and at the discretion of the city council, enter into a written system improvements reimbursement agreement with the city for the repayment of the actual, reasonable costs of the system improvements installed by receiving credits toward development impact fees or reimbursement from current or future impact fees as determined by the city council. (Ord. 10-1-1998, 10-1-1998)

9-2-6: IMPACT FEE ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION:
The city will assess and collect adopted impact fees on all development activity on lands within the service areas to which the fees pertain. The city will collect adopted impact fees prior to the issuance of building permits on buildings and structures located within the project. In the event any law or decision hereafter prohibits, modifies, limits or eliminates impact fees, the city will have no obligation to assess or collect any impact fee other than those properly adopted and authorized under the then existing law and/or applicable court decisions. (Ord. 10-1-1998, 10-1-1998)

9-2-7: CREDIT FOR SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS:
In consideration for the construction and installation by the developer of system improvements which are required by the city as a condition of approving the development activity, the city council may, in its sole discretion, grant the developer a credit against applicable impact fees assessed on development within developer’s project as determined by the city after receiving the recommendations of the city engineer. No credits will be granted for project improvements. (Ord. 10-1-1998, 10-1-1998)

9-2-8: REIMBURSEMENT FOR SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Pursuant to a written system improvements reimbursement agreement, reimbursement for system improvements from impact fees may, in city’s sole discretion, be made to the developer by the city on such basis and at such times as determined by the city, but not more often than quarterly, for the actual, reasonable costs incurred by the developer in installing and constructing the system improvements. Such reimbursement shall be made as set forth in the agreement between the developer and the city. No interest shall be paid on any reimbursement amounts. The city will not have any obligation to make any reimbursement to the developer for system improvements until the designated impact fees are actually received by the city. Nothing herein shall require the city to reimburse the developer any amounts, at any time, until the date the city would have installed the system improvements under the capital facilities plan in existence on the date of the reimbursement agreement. Developer will be obligated to hold city and its officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from all claims and liability for any impact fees which for any reason are not collected; provided, that the city has made a good faith effort to collect such impact fees. No reimbursement for system improvements will be due or paid until the system improvements have been fully installed, inspected and accepted by the city. Reimbursements will not be made by the city to the developer until developer has conveyed all required system improvements to the city by deed, bill of sale, or other instrument satisfactory to the city. The city may charge an administrative fee for the actual and reasonable costs incurred by the city in administering the reimbursement agreement for system improvements and collections/disbursements thereunder. The city is free to use all impact fees collected as it deems fit, in accordance with applicable laws governing impact fees, and may, but need not, designate portions of individual impact fees to be used for reimbursement and portions for use in providing other system improvements identified in the capital facilities plan.
B. The city’s obligation to reimburse developers for system improvements from impact fees will expire on the date set forth in the reimbursement agreement or whenever developer’s actual, reasonable costs, as approved by the city, are paid in full; whichever occurs first, unless extended in writing by the city council. (Ord. 10-1-1998, 10-1-1998)

9-2-9: LIMITS ON REIMBURSEMENT:
Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter to the contrary, reimbursements will not be made by the city for exactions required by the city or for public improvements provided voluntarily by the developer or provided in exchange for other negotiated considerations granted to the developer or the development by the city. Unless otherwise specified in the reimbursement agreement, the city’s obligation to make reimbursements shall terminate upon the expiration of ten (10) years from the date of the reimbursement agreement or the date the improvements would have been installed under the capital facilities plan in place on the date of the reimbursement agreement, whichever is sooner. The city shall in all cases be immune and not liable for any payments to developer if the reimbursement agreement is determined to be unenforceable. The reimbursement agreement shall not confer benefit upon any third party, by assignment or otherwise, and shall be in a form approved by the city council. Responsibility to pay for all public improvements to service or benefit the subdivision or development activity proposed by the developer shall rest entirely with the developer. (Ord. 10-1-1998, 10-1-1998)

CHAPTER 3 IMPACT FEES


3A           Capital Facilities Plan
    9-3A-1:      Adoption Of Plan
3B           Fees
    9-3B-1:      Service Area
    9-3B-2:      Schedule Adopted
    9-3B-3:      Adjustments
3C           Endangered Species Act Impact Fees
    9-3C-1:      Established
    9-3C-2:      Collection And Disbursement
    9-3C-3:      Interlocal Agreement

ARTICLE A. CAPITAL FACILITIES PLAN


9-3A-1:      Adoption Of Plan

9-3A-1: ADOPTION OF PLAN:
The capital facilities plan of the city is hereby adopted as shown in the city parks master plan dated 1994, the impact fee study for the city dated August 31, 1994, by David M. Griffith & Associates, LTD, facility plan for phase II expansion of the St. George regional water reclamation facility dated February 1997, by Montgomery Watson, the city traffic and transportation and master study dated July 1995, by Parson Brinckerhoff, evaluation of a traffic congestion mitigation fee dated March 24, 1997, by Meyer, Mohaddes Associates, Inc., the city general plan dated June 1995, the city master road plan, estimated costs for proposed major storm drainage facilities and drainage study dated 1997, the transmission planning study for Washington County 138kV and 69kV systems, volume I study results dated August 1993, by UAMPS, the St. George work plan 1992 through 1997 dated August 24, 1993, by Intermountain Consumer Professional Engineers, Inc., the culinary water resources study dated June 1993, by Horrocks Caroilo Engineers, the transportation improvement plan, June 1997, wastewater system capital improvement program, June 1997, and the wastewater rate studies dated December 1996, by Black & Veatch. (Ord. 6-4-1997, 6-19-1997)

ARTICLE B. FEES


9-3B-1:      Service Area
9-3B-2:      Schedule Adopted
9-3B-3:      Adjustments

9-3B-1: SERVICE AREA:
The city hereby establishes one service area consisting of the entire geographical area of the city. (Ord. 6-3-1997, 6-19-1997)

9-3B-2: SCHEDULE ADOPTED:
Based upon the analyses set forth in the ordinance codified herein and any amendments, the type of development activity, and the improvements involved, the city hereby adopts the schedule of impact fees on file in the city office. (Ord. 6-3-1997, 6-19-1997; amd. Ord. 2002-06-005, 6-20-2002; 2003 Code)

9-3B-3: ADJUSTMENTS:
A. The city council may adjust the impact fees set forth herein upon a showing of unusual circumstances and to ensure fairness in the allocation and imposition of impact fees upon new development. Such adjustment shall be made only upon specific written request to the city council by persons subject to payment of such fees and after the consideration of such matter by the city council at a regular meeting of the city council.
B. The city council may adjust the amount of impact fees to be paid on any specific development based upon certified and reliable data and studies submitted by the developer evidencing that the impact fee imposed is unfair or not reasonably related to the impacts caused by such new development. (Ord. 6-3-1997, 6-19-1997)

ARTICLE C. ENDANGERED SPECIES ACT IMPACT FEES


9-3C-1:      Established
9-3C-2:      Collection And Disbursement
9-3C-3:      Interlocal Agreement

9-3C-1: ESTABLISHED:
A. There is hereby established a subdivision endangered species impact fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city council, payable at the time application is made for final plat approval. This fee shall apply to any new project being subdivided that has not received preliminary plat approval prior to January 1, 1994.
B. There is further established an endangered species act impact fee of a percentage as established by resolution of the city council of the total value of construction for which a permit is requested, payable at the time application is made for issuance of a building permit on all new residential, commercial and industrial construction. This shall not apply to building permits for remodeling, add-ons of existing structures or outbuildings. (Ord. 12-1-1993, 12-9-1993; amd. 2003 Code)

9-3C-2: COLLECTION AND DISBURSEMENT:
The city treasurer is hereby directed to collect and deposit these funds in a separate account designated the “endangered species conservation fund” and to disburse the funds accumulated therein quarterly to Washington County on or before the fifteenth day of the month following a calendar quarter, together with an appropriate report showing the number of subdivision final plats issued and their acreages, and the number of applicable building permits and their construction values. (Ord. 12-1-1993, 12-9-1993)

9-3C-3: INTERLOCAL AGREEMENT:
This article is in furtherance of the city’s obligations under the interlocal agreement executed between the city and Washington County, a copy of which is attached to the ordinance codified as exhibit A and incorporated by reference herein. The agreement is on file in the city office. (Ord. 12-1-1993, 12-9-1993; amd. 2003 Code)

CHAPTER 4 PLUMBING CODE


9-4-1:       Plumbing Code Adopted

9-4-1: PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED:
A. Adopted: That certain document, being marked and designated as the International Plumbing Code, as adopted by the state, including appendix chapters, as published by the International Code Council, which is on file in the office of the city recorder, be and is hereby adopted as the code of the city for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems in the city and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such International Plumbing Code, published by the International Code Council, on file in the office of the city recorder, and as adopted and amended by the state, together with amendments thereto in the future made by the state, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section.
B. Revisions: The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1. Insert: City of St. George.
Section 108.4. Insert: Class B misdemeanor. Insert: one thousand. Insert: six months.
Section 108.5. Insert: one hundred. Insert: five hundred. (Ord. 2002-02-007, 2-7-2002; amd. 2003 Code)

CHAPTER 5 ELECTRICAL CODE


9-5-1:       Electrical Code Adopted
9-5-2:       Permit Required; Fee
9-5-3:       Penalty

9-5-1: ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED:
The national electrical code, as promulgated by the National Fire Protection Association, as adopted and amended by the state, together with amendments thereto in the future made by the state, is hereby adopted and incorporated into this code. (Ord. 2000-01-004, 1-20-2000; amd. 2003 Code)

9-5-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any electrical work in the city without having first obtained a permit to do so and paying such fees in the amount as established by resolution of the city council. (1962 Code § 4-3-2; amd. 2003 Code)

9-5-3: PENALTY:
In addition to the material contained in the national electrical code, any violation of the requirements of said code shall be unlawful and constitute a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2000-01-004, 1-20-2000; amd. 2003 Code)

CHAPTER 6 ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS CODE


9-6-1:       Abatement Of Dangerous Buildings Code Adopted
9-6-2:       Penalty

9-6-1: ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS CODE ADOPTED:
The uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings as promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials, as adopted and amended by the state, together with amendments thereto in the future made by the state, is hereby adopted and incorporated into this code. (Ord. 2-5-1999, 2-18-1999; amd. 2003 Code)

9-6-2: PENALTY:
In addition to the material contained in the uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings, any violation of the requirements of said code shall be unlawful and constitute a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2-5-1999, 2-18-1999; amd. 2003 Code)

CHAPTER 7 FUEL GAS CODE


9-7-1:       Fuel Gas Code Adopted

9-7-1: FUEL GAS CODE ADOPTED:
A. Adopted: The International Fuel Gas Code, including appendix chapters, as published by the International Code Council, which is on file in the office of the city recorder, is hereby adopted as the fuel gas code for the city, for the control of building and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of such international fuel gas code, published by the International Code Council, on file in the office of the city recorder, and as adopted and amended by the state, together with amendments thereto in the future made by the state, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in subsection B of this section.
B. Revisions: The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1. Insert: City of St. George.
Section 106.5.2. Insert: No fees. (Ord. 2002-02-011, 2-7-2002; amd. 2003 Code)

CHAPTER 8 MECHANICAL CODE


9-8-1:       Mechanical Code Adopted

9-8-1: MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED:
A. Adopted: The International Mechanical Code, including appendix chapters, as published by the International Code Council, which is on file in the office of city recorder, is hereby adopted as the code of the city for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems the city and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such International Mechanical Code, published by the International Code Council, on file in the office of the city recorder, and as adopted and amended by the state, together with amendments thereto in the future made by the state, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section.
B. Revisions: The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1. Insert: City of St. George.
Section 106.5.2. Fee schedule deleted.
Section 106.5.3. Fee refunds deleted.
Section 108.4. Insert: Class B misdemeanor. Insert: one thousand. Insert: six months.
Section 108.5. Insert: one hundred. Insert: five hundred. (Ord. 2002-02-006, 2-7-2002; amd. 2003 Code)

CHAPTER 9 FIRE CODE


9-9-1:       Fire Code Adopted
9-9-2:       Authority To Prohibit The Use Of Any Ignition Source

9-9-1: FIRE CODE ADOPTED:
A. Adopted: The International Fire Code, including appendix chapters A through F, as published by the International Code Council, which is on file in the office of the city recorder, is hereby adopted as the code of the city for regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises in the city, and providing for the issuance of permits for hazardous uses or operations; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of the International Fire Code, published by the International Code Council, and as adopted and amended by the state, together with amendments thereto in the future made by the state, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section.
B. Revisions: The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1. Insert: City of St. George.
Section 109.4. Insert: Class B misdemeanor, $1,000.00, one year.
Section 111.4. Insert: $1,000.00 in two locations. (Ord. 2016-11-004, 11-3-2016)

9-9-2: AUTHORITY TO PROHIBIT THE USE OF ANY IGNITION SOURCE:
A. Definitions: 
    FIRE CHIEF: The person appointed by the city council or the person he has authorized to act on his behalf.
    FIREWORKS: Shall have the same meaning as found in title 53, chapter 7 of the Utah code.
    HAZARDOUS ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS: Any combination of extreme dryness or lack of moisture, windy conditions and the presence of dry weeds or other vegetation.
    IGNITION SOURCE: Fireworks, lighters, matches, smoking materials, welding, cutting, grinding and similar means used to ignite fire or which may cause a fire.
B. Authority Of Local Fire Official To Issue Orders: As authorized by state law, the fire chief is hereby authorized to issue orders prohibiting open burning, open fires, or the use of any ignition source in any area of the city that is mountainous, brush covered, or forest covered if he has determined a hazardous environmental condition necessitates such an order. The order shall be in writing and shall be distributed as provided herein.
C. Areas Affected: The fire chief shall determine what areas are subject to the prohibition and the extent of the prohibition and shall identify the same in a written order. The order may also include a map outlining affected areas.
D. Public Notice: Copies of the written order shall be posted in at least three (3) public places within the city and on the city website.
E. Penalty: Any person who violates an order of the fire chief issued pursuant to this section is guilty of a class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 2016-11-004, 11-3-2016)

CHAPTER 10 RESIDENTIAL CODE


9-10-1:      Residential Code Adopted

9-10-1: RESIDENTIAL CODE ADOPTED:
A. Adopted: The International Residential Code, including appendix chapters, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the code of the city for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses not more than three (3) stories in height in the city and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such International Residential Code published by the International Code Council, on file in the office of the city recorder, and as adopted and amended by the state, together with amendments thereto in the fixture made by the state, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section.
B. Revisions: The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 8101.1 Insert: City of St. George.
Table R.301.2(1) Insert: Ground Snow Load 21 lbs.
Roof Snow Load – 15 lbs.
Wind Speed (mph) – 90.
Seismic Design Category – soils/engineering.
Weathering – moderate.
Frost Line Depth – 12 inches.
Termite – moderate to heavy.
Decay – none/slight.
Design Temperatures – winter dry bulb 2.5% 102o, summer wet bulb 2.5% 70o.
Flood Hazards – a) August 19, 1987 and b) January 7, 1998. (Ord. 2002-02-008, 2-7-2002; amd. 2003 Code)

CHAPTER 11 HORIZONTAL CONTROL NETWORK


9-11-1:      Applicability Of Horizontal Control Network (HCN)
9-11-2:      Copies On File
9-11-3:      Minimum Requirements

9-11-1: APPLICABILITY OF HORIZONTAL CONTROL NETWORK (HCN):
All plats, maps and other documents submitted to the city describing legal boundaries of lands within the corporate limits of the city, including, but not limited to, subdivisions, townhome or condominium developments, annexations, road or right-of-way dedications, commercial developments, lot splits, lot line adjustments and zone changes, shall be tied to the HCN and shall meet the requirements of section 9-11-3 of this chapter, except were the entire easement or right-of-way can be described by existing property lines. (Ord. 2-1-1997, 2-6-1997)

9-11-2: COPIES ON FILE:
Updated copies of the control diagram, with coordinates, station descriptions and other documents pertaining to the HCN shall be maintained in the office of the city surveyor, and a copy of each document shall be available for review and copying, upon request, for a fee to be established by the city from time to time. (Ord. 2-1-1997, 2-6-1997)

9-11-3: MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
All plats, maps and other documents specified in section 9-11-1 of this chapter shall contain and meet the following minimum requirements:
A. Survey ties shall consist of the grid azimuth (or grid bearings), ground bearings, and grid and ground distances from established HCN stations to monumented corners of the lands being platted or surveyed. These ties are to be shown as straight lines. Ties should be established by means of a closed traverse which includes at least two (2) HCN stations and two (2) monumented corners of the land being platted, surveyed or described, one of which is to be the point of beginning. In the event of a discrepancy between adjacent surveys, additional information may be required from the certifying surveyors; (Ord. 2-1-1997, 2-6-1997)
B. Coordinates of the two (2) monumented corners, as described above, in addition to those of the HCN stations from which the survey ties originate, are to be shown by tabulation or other means on the plat or map. These grid coordinates are to be designated “east” and “north.” Scaled drawing line lengths should represent ground distances; (Ord. 2-1-1997, 2-6-1997; amd. 2003 Code)
C. A grid azimuth (or grid bearing) shall be used as a basis of bearing for the survey and shall be clearly noted on the plat or map. Grid azimuths, grid bearings and grid distances shall be shown in square brackets (e.g., [N 0° 00' 00" E], [1,000']) and labeled as such;
D. Ground distances are to be used in descriptions and for calculating areas. Ground distances shall not be used to transfer state plane coordinates. All distances used for transfer of coordinates must be state plane grid distances;
E. When a record description or portion thereof is retraced with a state plane description, there shall be included an explanation of the equivalent of the record description and the description based on a grid azimuth. The statement: “The following description is the mathematical equivalent of the record description with all bearings correctly converted to the description terms of the Utah state plane – rectangular coordinate system,” should be inserted. Since all property descriptions must relate back through a chain of title to the original government patent for the property, the use of state plane information in descriptions must be done in such a way that the title chain is not broken;
F. The city will not accept descriptions based upon a monument which has not been tied to the HCN or has been displaced. It will be necessary to tie in or reestablish the monument through a procedure approved by the city;
G. Where a land surveyor deems it advantageous to establish a new HCN station, the work will be accepted subject to review and approval of the city surveyor. When accepted, the new station will become a component of the HCN. New stations shall be marked by a substantial immutable and easily discernible monument, adequately referenced to monuments or objects. A sketch shall be drafted showing the station, reference monuments and/or objects, and other pertinent information to aid in the recovery of the station, including bearing, distance and description of reference monuments and objects. The licensed land surveyor responsible for establishment of the station shall execute a certificate, which may be included on the aforementioned sketch or on an attached document, regarding the procedures used, the accuracy obtained and the correctness of the work. The position of new HCN stations shall be determined by ties to at least two (2) established HCN stations, the ties being executed to an accuracy of not less than one part in one hundred thousand parts (1 part in 100,000 parts). There shall be a statement on the plat or document indicating the adjustment procedure used and the accuracy obtained.
H. All plats, maps and other documents are to be submitted as hard copy (paper, Mylar or other media as appropriate) and on three and one-half inch (3 1/2") computer disks in an industry standard format (i.e., .DXF, .DWG, ASCII) or other appropriate form approved by the city. (Ord. 2-1-1997, 2-6-1997; amd. 2003 Code)

CHAPTER 12 FENCING ALONG RED CLIFFS DESERT RESERVE


9-12-1:      Approval Required
9-12-2:      Penalty

9-12-1: APPROVAL REQUIRED:
No final subdivision plat approval or permit for any structure or excavation on any property proposed for development which borders the red cliffs desert reserve shall be issued unless the Washington County administration of the reserve has first issued a written approval for a fencing/containment plan along the border of the reserve. It shall be unlawful for any person to excavate or erect a structure in violation of this chapter or to fail to comply with an approved fencing/containment plan stipulated by Washington County. (Ord. 7-3-1999, 7-8-1999)

9-12-2: PENALTY:
A violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 7-3-1999, 7-8-1999; amd. 2003 Code)

CHAPTER 13 SIGNS AND DISPLAYS


9-13-1:      Purpose And Interpretation
9-13-2:      Definitions
9-13-3:      Application Of Regulations And Enforcement
9-13-4:      Specific Regulations For Zones
9-13-5:      Design Standards For Commercial Signs
9-13-6:      Downtown Historic District
9-13-7:      General Regulations
9-13-8:      Maintenance Of Legal Nonconforming Signs
9-13-9:      Nonconforming Signs
9-13-10:     Prohibited Signs
9-13-11:     Variances And Appeals; Sign Review Board
9-13-12:     Safety And Nonliability Of City
9-13-13:     Penalty

9-13-1: PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION:
A. It is determined to be in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city to regulate advertising in order to eliminate potential hazards to motorists and pedestrians; encourage signs which, by their good design, are integrated with and harmonious to the buildings and sites which they occupy; encourage sign legibility through the elimination of excessive and confusing sign displays, thus reducing driver inattention; preserve and improve the appearance of the city as a place in which to live and to work and create an attraction to nonresidents to come to visit or trade; allow each individual business to clearly identify itself and the goods and services which they offer; safeguard and enhance property values; protect public and private investment in buildings and open space; and supplement other regulations of the city.
B. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, the sign requirements contained herein are declared to be the maximum allowable for the purpose set forth. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon signs and the location thereof, or requires or imposes conditions other than those required or imposed by laws, ordinances or restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall control. (Ord. 2015-09-001, 9-3-2015)

9-13-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
ALTERATIONS: As applied to a sign, means change or rearrangement in the structural part of its design, whether by extending on a side, increasing in area, width or height, or moving from one location or position to another.
AWNING: A roofed structure constructed of fabric or metal placed so as to extend outward from the building providing a protective shield for doors, windows and other openings with supports extending back to the building, supported entirely by the building.
BUILDING, FRONT LINE OF: The line of that face of the building or structure nearest the front line of the lot. This face includes sun parlors, bay windows, covered and/or uncovered porches, whether enclosed or unenclosed, but does not include uncovered steps less than four feet (4') above grade and eaves overhanging less than two feet (2').
BUILDING LINE: A vertical surface intersecting the ground along a line at which the front of the building occupies the lot on which it is constructed.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: The appropriate officers employed by the city are authorized to enforce this chapter, but the city council of St. George, by resolution or ordinance, may from time to time entrust such administration, in whole or in part, to any other officer of city government without amendment to this chapter.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGN (EMS): Any sign, or portion thereof, that displays electronic images, graphics or pictures, with or without textual information. Such a sign has the capability of being changed or altered by electronic means on a fixed display screen composed of a series of lights, including light emitting diodes (LEDs), fiber optics, plasma displays, light bulbs, or other illumination devices within the display area where the message is displayed. EMS includes computer programmable, microprocessor controlled electronic or digital displays.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGN VIEW AREA: The view area for any EMS shall be measured as follows: beginning from the outside edge of the sign face, measure one hundred fifty feet (150') to each side, then measure at a ninety degree (90°) angle three hundred feet (300') in the direction that the sign is facing, and ninety degree (90°) angle until the two (2) lines intersect.
FACE OF SIGN: The entire area of a sign upon, against or through which any copy, electronic images, graphics or pictures, with or without textual information is placed.
LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting on two (2) intersecting or intercepting streets, where the interior angle of intersection or interception does not exceed one hundred thirty-five degrees (135°).
MARQUEE: A sign designed and constructed for the purpose of changing the message regularly by movable letters or electric means.
MONUMENT SIGN: A sign whose base is approximately seventy-five percent (75%) of the width of the sign and is permanently set on the ground and has an opaque pedestal as part of the sign foundation which conceals any pole support. Upon approval of the community development director, and where pole supports are not visible, the opaque pedestal may be omitted. (See exhibit B attached to ordinance 2005-12-003.)
NONCONFORMING SIGN OR SIGN STRUCTURE: A sign or sign structure or portion thereof lawfully existing at the time this chapter or amendment thereto, became effective, which does not conform to all height, area and yard regulations prescribed in the zone in which it is located, or other regulations of this chapter.
POINT OF THE BEGINNING OR ENDING OF PAVEMENT WIDENING: Ending of pavement widening is that point when the pavement of an interstate highway acceleration or entrance lane fully narrows to the normal width of the main travel lanes. Beginning of pavement widening is that point when the pavement of an interstate highway deceleration or exit lane begins to widen from the normal width of the main travel lanes.
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT: A project developed by the owner by subdividing the land and building residential homes that has been approved by the city through the plat process and the subdivision recorded with the county recorder’s office. All phases of the project shall be considered one (1) residential development. A residential development does not include lots sold by the developer to someone else to build the home. The term is to apply to the project as a whole and not to specific individual lots or residences. Multifamily unit developments which have been approved by the city but may not require the recording of a plat are also considered residential developments.
SIGN: Means and includes every advertising message, announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration, insignia, surface, object, device, medium, conveyance or space erected or maintained in view of the observer thereof for identification, advertisement or promotion of the interests of any person, entity, product or service. The definition of “sign” shall also include the sign structure, supports, lighting system and any attachments, ornaments or other features used to draw the attention of observers. This does not include any flag, badge or ensign of any government or governmental agency erected for and used to identify said government or governmental agency.
SIGN, A-FRAME: A temporary and/or movable sign constructed with two (2) sides attached at the top so as to allow the sign to stand in an upright position.
SIGN, ANIMATED: A sign which involves motion or rotation of any part by mechanical or artificial means or displays flashing or intermittent lights, time, temperature and electronic type message center.
SIGN AREA: The area of a sign that is used for display purposes, excluding the minimum frame and supports. In computing sign area, only one side of a back to back or double faced sign covering the same subject shall be computed when the signs are parallel or diverge from a common edge by an angle of not more than forty-five degrees (45°). In relation to signs that do not have a frame or separate background, sign area shall be computed on the basis of the least rectangle, triangle or circle large enough to frame the display.
SIGN, ELECTRONIC DISPLAY SCREEN: Any sign or portion of a sign that displays an electronic image or video, which may or may not include text. This definition includes television screens, plasma screens, digital screens, flat screens, LED screens, video boards, and holographic displays.
SIGN, ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER: Any sign or portion of a sign, that uses changing lights to form a sign message or messages in text form wherein the sequence of messages and the rate of change is electronically programmed.
SIGN, FOR SALE: A temporary sign placed on a lot offering that specific property for sale, lease or rent, and limited to twelve (12) square feet in sign area. The on premises sign may advertise a model home or open house.
SIGN, FREESTANDING: A sign supported by a fixed permanent frame or support in the ground.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED: A sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs or outlines illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as a part of the sign proper.
SIGN, LIGHTED: A sign made legible in the absence of daylight by devices which reflect or project light upon it.
SIGN, LOW PROFILE: On premises or identification signs having a maximum height of six feet (6'), incorporated into some form of landscape design scheme or planter box.
SIGN, OFF PREMISES: An advertising sign which directs attention to a use, product, commodity or service not related to the premises.
SIGN, PROJECTING: A sign attached to a building or other structure and extending in whole or in part more than twenty four inches (24") beyond any wall of the building or structure.
SIGN, PROPERTY: A sign related to the property upon which it is located and offering such property for sale or lease, or advertising contemplated improvements, or announcing the name of the builder, owner, designer or developer of the project, or warning against trespassing.
SIGN, ROOF: A sign erected partly or wholly on or over the roof of a building, including ground supported signs that rest on or overlap a roof twelve inches (12") or more. (Ord. 2015-09-001, 9-3-2015)

9-13-3: APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. Compliance Required: Except as provided in this chapter, no sign shall be erected, raised, moved, extended, enlarged or altered, or have the text of the sign changed, except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the zone in which it is located.
B. Construction Standards: All signs hereinafter erected in the city shall comply with current standards of the national electrical code, all provisions of this chapter and other applicable ordinances of the city. All component parts shall be equal to Underwriters Laboratories labeled products.
C. Enforcement: The code enforcement officer shall be vested with the duty of enforcing the zoning ordinance and in performance of such duty, he shall be empowered and directed to:
    1. Issue Permits: Issue permits to construct, alter or repair signs which conform to the provisions of this chapter.
    2. Determine Conformance: Ascertain that all signs, construction and all reconstruction or modification of existing signs are built or constructed in conformance to the zoning ordinances and building restrictions and building code with reference thereto.
    3. Issue Citations And Complaints: Issue citations and/or complaints against violators of this chapter.
D. Inspections: The code enforcement officer shall make an initial inspection upon the completion of construction, erection, reerection or remodeling of any sign for which a permit has been issued and an inspection request is made.
E. Sign Classification: Every sign erected or proposed to be erected within the city shall be classified by the code enforcement officer in accordance with the definitions of signs contained in section 9-13-2 of this chapter. Any sign which does not clearly fall within one of the classifications shall be designated to the classification that it most nearly approximates in the opinion of the code enforcement officer in view of its design, location and purpose.
F. Legal Action: The code enforcement officer shall be empowered to institute appropriate action or proceedings in any case where any sign is erected, constructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or in any case where any sign is used in violation of any city ordinance, including, but not limited to, the zoning ordinance, to accomplish the following purpose: 1) to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use; and 2) to restrain, correct or abate such violation.
    1. Issue Notice Of Violation: The code enforcement officer will cause a notice of violation to be issued to the person having charge or control or benefit of any sign found by him to be unsafe or dangerous or in violation of the zoning ordinances of the city.
    2. Abate And Remove Unsafe Or Dangerous Sign: If an unsafe or dangerous sign is not repaired or made safe within five (5) working days after giving said notice, the code enforcement officer shall have the right to at once abate and remove said sign, and the person having charge, control or benefit of any such sign, shall pay to the city within thirty (30) calendar days after written notice is mailed to such person, the costs incurred in such removal.
    3. Abate And Remove Illegal Sign: If an illegal sign is not made conforming within thirty (30) calendar days after giving said notice, the code enforcement officer shall have the right to at once abate and remove said sign, and the owner or person having charge, control or benefit of any such sign, shall pay to the city within thirty (30) calendar days after written notice is mailed to such person, the costs incurred in such removal.
    4. Immediate Removal Authorized: In the case of an unsafe or illegal sign that is either an immediate hazard or whose primary purpose will have been served, at least in part, before the expiration of the notice period required herein, the code enforcement officer may effect an immediate removal without notice, subject to a subsequent right of hearing by the person receiving benefits therefrom.
    5. Notice Of Nonmaintained Abandoned Sign: The code enforcement officer shall require each nonmaintained or abandoned sign to be removed from the building or premises when such sign has not been repaired or put into use by the owner, person having control or person receiving benefits of such structure within thirty (30) calendar days after notice of nonmaintenance or abandonment is given to the owner, person having control or person receiving benefit of such structure.
    6. Notification: Notification by the city to persons having charge or control or benefit of any sign found by the code enforcement officer to be unsafe or dangerous or in violation of the zoning ordinance of the city and where the city is contemplating removal of said sign, shall be accomplished by the city utilizing written notice sent according to the administrative code enforcement ordinance.
    7. Penalty as Alternative: The code enforcement officer shall have discretionary right to enforce removal or alteration of an unsafe or illegal sign by applying the penalty as provided by section 9-13-13 of this chapter as an alternative to the abatement procedures as provided.
G. Right Of Appeal; Sign Review Board: Any person who has been ordered by the code enforcement officer to alter or remove any sign, or any person whose application for a sign permit has been refused, may appeal to the sign review board by serving a written notice to the city within ten (10) days of the order of the code enforcement officer. Such notice shall be considered by the sign review board at its next regularly scheduled meeting. Upon filing of said notice of appeal, the code enforcement officer shall take no further action with regard to the removal of the sign involved until the final decision of the sign review board on the appeal is known, unless the code enforcement officer finds that the sign involved, by reason of its condition, presents an immediate and serious danger to the public, or comes within the provisions of subsection F4 of this section, in which case he shall proceed immediately as provided in this chapter.
H. Plats: All applications for sign permits shall be accompanied by a plat consisting of a plat plan and elevation drawing. The plat shall be in duplicate on a minimum eight and one-half inch by eleven inch (8 1/2" x 11") paper. The plat information shall be drawn and dimensioned with sufficient information so that the code enforcement officer can determine whether the proposed sign will conform with the provisions of this chapter.
    1. Plot Plan Requirements: Specifically, the plat shall show the size of the sign and its location relationship to the following features of the site:
        a. Property lines;
        b. Existing and proposed buildings or other structures;
        c. Control curbs;
        d. Parking areas.
    2. Elevation Drawing Requirements: Specifically, the elevation drawing shall show the following information:
        a. Type of sign;
        b. Sign display;
        c. Sign height;
        d. Sign area.
I. Sign Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person, whether acting as owner, occupant or contractor, or otherwise, to erect, construct, reconstruct, enlarge, locate or alter any sign within the city without first obtaining a sign permit from the city unless exempted from this requirement in this chapter.
J. Fee Schedule: A fee as established by the city council shall be paid to the city for each sign permit issued under this chapter. The fee will cover the cost of issuance, including the inspection tag. (Ord. 2015-09-001, 9-3-2015)

9-13-4: SPECIFIC REGULATIONS FOR ZONES:
No person shall install or maintain any sign in the city in the following zones as described in title 10, chapter 4 of this code, except as herein provided. Signs not allowed in the following subsections are specifically prohibited:
A. Residential Zones: The following provisions regulate signs in residential zones:
    1. Low Profile Signs: Two (2) permanent low profile identification signs which state the official name of the residential development will be allowed in residential zoning districts for residential developments; provided, that these signs conform to the following regulations:
        a. Shall be located at the entrance of the residential development and be a minimum of ten feet (10') from front property lines.
        b. Shall be incorporated into a landscape design scheme or planter box.
        c. Shall be limited to a maximum of four feet (4') in height from finished grade.
        d. Shall be limited to sixteen (16) square feet in area for each sign.
        e. Shall be limited to only two (2) signs per subdivision.
        f. Shall contain no animation.
        g. May be illuminated but the source of illumination shall not be visible.
        h. The community development director, or his/her designee, may approve signs attached to an entry wall or similar feature, which vary from provisions of subsections A1a through A1d of this section.
    2. Promotional Signs For Residential Developments: Promotional signs shall be allowed for residential developments to promote, market and advertise the entire development offering the property for sale and providing pertinent sales information to the public as provided in this subsection A2. Promotional signs are not allowed for the sale of individual lots, homes, or a portion of the development.
        a. Signs shall not exceed twelve feet (12') in height and must be located within the boundaries of the development a minimum of ten feet (10') from a street curb, shall not project into or be installed on any public right-of-way and shall not be located within required intersection clear view zones as set forth in section 10-18-2B of this code. The signs permitted hereunder shall be temporary and shall be removed when all original lots have been sold.
        b. Residential developments with less than ten (10) dwelling units may have up to two (2) signs offering the project for sale or inspection by the public and the total cumulative sign area for both signs shall not exceed forty-eight (48) square feet. Any one sign may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area.
        c. Residential developments with more than ten (10) dwelling units may have up to three (3) signs offering the property for sale or inspection by the public and the total cumulative sign area for all signs shall not exceed one hundred twenty-eight (128) square feet. Maximum sign area shall be calculated at forty-eight (48) square feet for the first ten (10) units and an additional two (2) square feet of sign area per unit over ten (10) units. Any one sign may not exceed sixty-four (64) square feet in area.
        d. One flat wall or fence sign (banner) per residential development may also be used provided they do not exceed the square footage criteria and quantity described in this subsection. Flat wall signs shall not exceed forty (40) square feet (4 feet x 10 feet) and must be attached flush against the wall to which they are attached.
        e. One sign permitted in subsection A2b of this section may be placed on other land belonging to the same owner, providing such other land is directly contiguous to the subdivision or planned development being advertised, and both properties involved are approved phases of the same overall development. Any sign permitted by subsection A2b of this section may be illuminated or may be lighted if the source of lighting is not visible. Animated illumination or lighting shall not be employed.
        f. Action flags are permitted subject to the following provisions:
            (1) Action flags are permitted in new developments only. Once all original lots have been sold the flags must be removed immediately.
            (2) Action flags shall not exceed twenty feet (20') in overall height.
            (3) Action flags shall not exceed fifteen (15) square feet in size.
            (4) Four (4) flags may be placed along the street at each project automobile entrance and two (2) flags at the sales office or model homes.
            (5) Action flags may be printed with the project or company name and logo.
            (6) Action flags shall be kept in good condition and must be replaced when worn or tattered.
    3. Property Signs; For Sale, Lease, Or Rent: One temporary on premises sign identifying the lot or offering the premises for sale, lease, rent, or inspection by the public is permitted and shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in size. Such sign may be double faced or may be a movable freestanding sign, and includes advertising for a model home or an open house at the premises.
    4. Property Signs; New Construction: 
        a. No more than one on-site sign offering the premises for sale, lease or inspection by the public shall be permitted. Sale signs may also be modified to indicate that the property has been sold; provided, that the total for any one sign does not exceed six (6) square feet per face. Such sign may be double faced.
        b. A project construction sign or “built by” or “marketed by” property sign with an aggregate total of up to twenty-four (24) square feet may be allowed. Such sign may be double faced.
    5. Nameplates: One lighted or unlighted nameplate identifying the name of the occupant of the premises not to exceed a maximum area of two (2) square feet.
    6. Planned Developments: For planned developments containing more than two hundred (200) dwelling units, the planning commission may approve an overall sign scheme for the development which provides for larger or more numerous signs than would otherwise be permitted under this chapter.
    7. Landmark Sites, Approved Conditional Uses: Landmark sites and approved conditional uses in a residential zone may have one attached or freestanding sign of up to twenty-four (24) square feet in size with a height limit of six feet (6') and located entirely on private property.
B. Commercial And Industrial Zones: The following provisions regulate signs in commercial and industrial zones (C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, M-1, M-2, A-P and PD commercial):
    1. Freestanding Signs: Freestanding signs are permitted subject to the following provisions:
        a. Number: Each parcel of property or commercial complex may have one freestanding sign. One additional freestanding sign is permitted if the property or complex has more than three hundred feet (300') of frontage on a dedicated public street. Where two (2) or more freestanding signs are constructed, they shall be separated by at least one hundred feet (100'). The second pole sign shall not be higher than seventy percent (70%) of the allowed height of the first sign. A third freestanding sign is allowed for properties with more than six hundred feet (600') of frontage on a dedicated street. The fourth freestanding sign, or additional freestanding signs, must be approved by the sign review board.
        b. Location: Freestanding and projecting signs shall not project into or over any public street right-of-way, except that within the downtown historic district (excluding St. George Boulevard) projecting signs may project a maximum of four feet (4') from the building provided such projecting sign has a minimum ground clearance of ten feet (10') over any sidewalk or street right-of-way. Also, awning signs within the downtown historic district may project over the street right-of-way provided there is a minimum ground clearance of eight feet (8').
        c. Height: Freestanding signs shall not exceed the following heights:
            (1) Signs located within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of a freeway exit, excluding exit 4, and located on a designated major commercial street, shall not exceed fifty feet (50') in height.
            (2) Signs located on the following designated major commercial streets shall not exceed thirty feet (30') in height.
            The following are determined to be major commercial streets:
            Bluff Street to 1250 North
            Convention Center Drive
            Highland Drive
            Hilton Drive to Santa Clara River Bridge
            I-15 within 1,500 feet of an I-15 exit or entrance where property is contiguous to I-15 right-of-way
            Red Cliffs Drive
            Red Hills Parkway (Highland) 800 East to Washington Interchange
            River Road south to 700 South
            Riverside Drive (I-15 east to 400 East)
            St. George Boulevard
            Sunland Drive west of 400 East
            Sunset Boulevard
            100 South, east of I-15 to 1470 East
            400 East between I-15 and Sunland Drive
            850 North between 2720 East and 3050 East
            1470 East between 100 South and 200 South
            2720 East between Red Cliffs Drive and 850 North
            When a street has seventy percent (70%) or more of its frontage zoned for commercial use, the city council shall consider designating such street as a “major commercial street.”
            (3) The height of signs located on all other streets not designated major commercial as noted above, shall not exceed ten feet (10') from the adjacent natural grade, except that signs adjacent to buildings greater than eighteen feet (18') in height shall not exceed fifteen feet (15') in height. Where the natural grade at the sign location is below the curb elevation, the height may be measured from the curb height, provided the overall sign height is not increased by more than five feet (5'), and the sign is within thirty feet (30') of the curb.
            (4) Where two (2) or more pole type signs are allowed, subsequent signs shall not exceed seventy percent (70%) of the allowed height of the main sign.
            (5) In the downtown historic district, pole signs shall not exceed twenty feet (20') in height.
            (6) Height shall be measured from nearest curb grade adjacent to the support pole.
        d. Size: The area of freestanding signs shall not exceed the following:
            (1) Single tenant freestanding signs on major commercial streets noted in subsection B1c(2) of this section shall not exceed seventy-five (75) square feet or one square foot of sign area per linear foot of street frontage up to one hundred twenty (120) square feet maximum per sign face.
            (2) Multi-tenant signs may have one and one-half (1 1/2) square feet of sign area per linear foot of street frontage up to two hundred (200) square feet maximum. A single multi-tenant sign may be allowed up to three hundred (300) square feet if the following occurs:
                (A) The sign permit is approved subject to a condition which precludes the installation of another freestanding sign; and
                (B) The sign area does not exceed one and one-half (1 and 1/2) square feet per linear foot of street frontage.
            (3) Signs within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of a freeway exit, excluding exit 4, may have two (2) square feet of sign area per linear foot of street frontage, up to three hundred (300) square feet maximum.
            (4) On corner lots, the street frontage used to determine size of the primary sign shall be limited to the street upon which the building fronts. Measurement of the street frontage shall include the actual frontage measured to the midpoint of the corner radius. A secondary sign may be allowed on the side street, and its size shall be based on the frontage of the side street.
        e. Animated Signs: Animated signs shall be permitted in commercial zones only. However, no animated sign shall be allowed on property adjacent to a residential zone. Further, animation shall not include sign rotation or movement. Animation shall be limited to electronic message centers or electronic display screens. Flashing or blinking signs are prohibited.
        f. Entrance And Exit Signs: One entrance and exit sign shall be permitted at each driveway entering or leaving the premises. Such signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area nor be more than four feet (4') in height from the ground.
    2. Wall Signs: Wall signs which are permanently attached or painted with a projection of less than twenty four inches (24"), shall be permitted; provided, that the area of any such sign shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the face of the front wall to which it is attached, nor more than ten percent (10%) of the face of a side or rear wall; and further provided, that it does not rise above the roofline or parapet wall.
    3. Property And Project Construction Signs: 
        a. No more than two (2) signs offering the premises for sale, lease or inspection by the public shall be permitted; provided, that the total area of each sign does not exceed thirt-two (32) square feet. Said signs may be modified to indicate that the property has been sold.
        b. A project construction sign or “coming soon” promotional sign of up to sixty-four (64) square feet may be allowed within sixty (60) days of obtaining a building permit for such project. Such sign shall be removed within one year from the date the sign was erected.
    4. Off Premises Signs: Off premises signs shall not be permitted, except under the following conditions:
        a. Off premises signs shall be permitted along the interstate highway within the city limits upon property zoned commercial or manufacturing and lying within a corridor extending five hundred feet (500') on each side of the centerline of said interstate highway.
        b. No off premises sign shall be located on an interstate highway or freeway within five hundred feet (500') of an interchange, or intersection at grade, or rest area (measured along the interstate highway or freeway from the off premises sign to the nearest point of the beginning or ending of pavement widening at the exit from or entrance to the main traveled way). No off premises sign shall be higher than fifty feet (50') above freeway grade or more than seventy feet (70') above adjacent ground level.
        c. No off premises sign structure shall be located closer than one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') to another off premises sign structure, except that within two thousand feet (2,000') of an interchange, signs may be five hundred feet (500') apart.
        d. Off premises signs must be at least three hundred feet (300') away from a residential zone.
        e. The support structure must be painted one of the following city council approved Pantone earth tone colors that blends into the natural environment: Pantone 469, 476, 465, and 477.
        Existing off premises signs not painted in accordance with this provision by January 1, 2020, will be considered nonconforming.
        f. An off premises EMS is permitted subject to compliance with this subsection B4, UDOT standards, federal standards, and the following standards:
            (1) Display: Messages displayed on off premises EMS shall have a minimum display duration of eight (8) seconds and must be static during each individual message. No portion of the message may flash, scroll, twirl, bounce, pulse, twinkle, animate, change color, fade in or fade out, or imitate movement. The transition from one static display to another must be instantaneous on the entire sign face. Off premises EMS must have a default mechanism to turn off the sign within twenty-four (24) hours of a malfunction which makes it noncompliant.
            (2) Audio: Audio speakers shall be prohibited.
            (3) Brightness: Each EMS shall be limited in brightness to a maximum lighting level of 0.3 foot-candle over ambient light levels as measured using a foot-candle meter at the distance based on the formula of the square root of the area of the sign face times 100 (sq. root of area of sign face x 100). The illuminance of an EMS shall be measured with an illumination meter set to measure foot-candles accurate to at least two (2) decimals. Illumination shall be measured with the EMS off, and again with the EMS displaying a white image. All measurements shall be taken perpendicular to the face of the EMS at a distance determined by the total square footage of the EMS face as set forth in the formula above. Each EMS must have a redundant system for controlling sign brightness, including an automatic light sensing device that adjusts the brightness as ambient light conditions change, and a backup system based on sunrise and sunset times.
            (4) Separation: A minimum separation of one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') is required for off premises EMS which face the same direction and are located on the same side of I-15.
            (5) Residential Zones: Off premises EMS must be at least three hundred feet (300') away from any residential zone. An existing off premises sign within three hundred feet (300') of a residential zone, may be converted to an EMS, if the EMS and the residential zone is separated by topography or a geological feature which will permanently visually obstruct the sign from the residential zone or the electronic message sign view area is not located within the residential zone.
            (6) Certifications: The following certifications are additional standards of approval or continuation of any off premises EMS:
                (A) Within ten (10) calendar days after an EMS is first placed into service, a written certification shall be submitted to the city from the owner/applicant that the sign has been tested and complies with the requirements of this section.
                (B) Based on complaints received, or for other reasonable cause, the city may from time to time require the owner or operator of an EMS to provide, within ten (10) working days after receipt of the city’s written request, an updated written certification that the sign has been retested and has been repaired or modified, as necessary, to comply with the requirements of this section.
                (C) The city may also, without a complaint or cause, verify an EMS compliance with the requirements of this section, including by selecting and engaging qualified experts to measure the sign’s illuminance. If the city reasonably determines that an EMS is not in compliance with such requirements, then the owner or operator of the sign shall correct the noncompliance within ten (10) calendar days after written notice from the city, and shall reimburse all of the city’s costs reasonably incurred in connection with such determination.
    5. Roof Signs: Roof signs shall conform to the following provisions:
        a. Roof signs shall not be higher than the roofline or parapet wall, and shall not be larger than twenty percent (20%) of the wall face of the building.
        b. All roof signs shall be installed or erected in such a manner that the support structure or brace is covered and screened from public view to the extent reasonable to do so.
        c. Roof signs shall not be animated.
    6. Projecting Signs: Projecting signs attached to a building shall comply with the following conditions:
        a. Signs projecting over public property may not project more than four feet (4') from a wall of a building, nor project closer than three feet (3') to the back of the curb. A minimum clearance of ten feet (10') above the sidewalk must be maintained.
        b. Signs projecting over private property may not project more than six feet (6') from a wall of a building.
        c. Signs shall not extend above the roofline.
        d. No more than one projecting sign per tenant space and only at the ground level of the building.
        e. The maximum sign area for projecting signs shall be one square foot of sign area for each linear foot of building frontage up to a maximum of thirty two (32) square feet per sign face (64 square feet maximum for both sides of a projecting sign).
    7. Special Standards: The following special standards for commercial signs shall apply for all signs located on streets not listed in subsection B1c(2) of this section (streets not designated as major commercial streets) and for planned development zones unless a specific sign plan has been approved as part of the PD zone.
        a. Freestanding Signs; Design Standards: Freestanding signs are hereby limited to monument and low profile pole type signs with the following design standards:
            (1) Height: The maximum height of the sign shall not exceed ten feet (10') from adjacent natural grade, except that signs adjacent to buildings with two (2) or more stories or greater than eighteen feet (18') in height shall not exceed fifteen feet (15') in height. Where the natural grade at the sign location is below the curb elevation, the height may be measured from the curb height, provided the overall sign height is not increased by more than five feet (5'), and the sign is within thirty feet (30') of the curb.
            (2) Size: A monument or low profile pole type sign shall be limited in size to seventy-five (75) square feet for properties with up to one hundred feet (100') of frontage on a public road. An additional one square foot of sign area may be allowed for each additional two feet (2') of public road frontage up to a maximum size of one hundred twenty (120) square feet per sign.
            (3) Location: Signs must be located on private property and not within any public right-of-way. Signs shall not obstruct visibility at driveway entrance and exits, intersections and other points along the roadway.
            (4) Number: Each parcel of property or commercial complex may have one monument or low profile pole type sign. One additional monument or low profile pole type sign is permitted if the property has more than two hundred feet (200') of frontage on a public street. Where two (2) freestanding signs are constructed, they shall be separated by at least one hundred feet (100'). A third monument or low profile pole type sign is allowed for properties with more than four hundred feet (400') of frontage on a dedicated public street, and a fourth monument or low profile pole type sign is permitted for properties with six hundred (600) or more feet of public road frontage.
            (5) Sign Materials: Sign materials shall be similar to or compatible with the structure which they identify. Signs shall be constructed predominantly of natural materials such as redwood, ceramic tile, masonry, stucco, stone or materials which simulate the referenced materials. Letters may be illuminated and of a plastic, metal or similar material, including neon. Requests to use alternative materials may be approved by the community development director. Flashing lights, rotating parts or other animation is not permitted. An EMS is permitted when part of a larger sign.
            (6) Color: Bright “day-glo” or fluorescent colors are prohibited. Letters should provide sufficient contrast to be easily legible. Overall color schemes should complement the color scheme of the building. Registered national trademarks are permitted as part of the sign.
        b. Minor Variances: In accordance with section 9-13-11 of this chapter, the sign review board is authorized to approve minor variances from the standards set forth above. In addition, the sign height and sign area may exceed the above described limits upon review and approval of the sign review board as a means to accommodate unique circumstances including, but not limited to: a large center with multiple tenants, visibility issues, and traffic speeds, providing only one sign when the size of the frontage would permit a second or third sign, etc. Regardless, the height under no circumstances shall exceed twenty five feet (25'), and the sign area shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet. If necessary to maintain the purpose of this chapter, the sign review board may impose other conditions of approval. In considering variance requests, the sign review board may approve minor variations to the standards where aesthetic values are not compromised, and the purpose of this chapter is maintained, as determined by the sign review board.
        c. Entrance, Exit Signs; Roof Signs And Projecting Signs: Entrance and exit signs, wall signs, roof signs and projecting signs are permitted subject to provisions contained elsewhere in this chapter.
C. Agricultural And Open Space Zones: The following provisions regulate signs in agricultural, mining and grazing, and open space zones (OS, A-1, A-5, A-10, A-20, and M-G):
    1. Property Signs: Property signs; as permitted in a commercial zone.
    2. Nameplates: Nameplates; as permitted in a residential zone.
    3. Identification Signs: Signs identifying churches, schools, public utilities, buildings and facilities, publicly owned and operated properties, hospitals, homes for the aged, nursing homes, convalescent homes, private clubs, fraternal organizations and roadside stands, subject to the following:
        a. Such signs shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area and shall contain no advertising copy. It shall be located on the property to which it pertains and number shall be limited to one.
        b. Such sign may be illuminated, but the source of illumination shall not be visible and shall be without animation. It may be freestanding or placed against the wall of a building, but no higher than twelve feet (12') above grade and not above the roofline. When freestanding, it shall be parallel with the street, and it shall not be located in or project into any required yard.
    4. Recreational Facilities Signs: Signs identifying golf courses, parks, tennis courts, public riding stables, boarding stables and similar recreational facilities, subject to the following:
        a. Such signs shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area and may be illuminated, but the source of illumination shall not be visible and shall not be animated. Such sign shall contain no advertising copy.
        b. There shall be one such sign per entrance to said facility, and the sign may be double faced. It must be located on the property to which it pertains. It may be freestanding or placed against the wall of a building, in which event it shall be no higher than twelve feet (12') above grade and not rise above the roofline.
    5. Directional Signs, Temporary: Temporary directional signs, not to exceed twelve (12) square feet in area, nonilluminated, containing no advertising copy, and to be removed from the property within ten (10) days after the purpose of the sign is fulfilled.
    6. Freestanding Signs, Temporary: Temporary, freestanding signs pertaining to the subdivisions of subsection A2 of this section. (Ord. 2015-09-001, 9-3-2015)

9-13-5: DESIGN STANDARDS FOR COMMERCIAL SIGNS:
A. Pole Sign Design Standards: The following design standards are mandatory:
    1. Sign Cabinets: Sign cabinets shall be integrated into a uniform sign, rather than added to a pole in an ad hoc manner. The modification or addition of a sign cabinet to an existing pole sign with two (2) or more independent sign cabinets shall be subject to review and approval by the community development director, who may at his/her discretion, refer the permit to the sign review board for approval.
    2. Painted Plywood Signs: Plywood signs are not permitted for permanent signs, unless approved by the sign review board. Sandblasted wood signs are permitted provided they are not higher than ten feet (10'), subject to review and approval by the community development director.
    3. Cladding: All poles supporting signs shall be cladded as a means to improve the appearance of the sign by:
        a. Proportionately increasing that portion of the structure that anchors the sign to the ground; and
        b. Providing a material on the support structure that complements the building architecture.
    Cladding shall primarily be wood, stucco, brick, or rock, duplicating materials which are used on the main building. Metal products may be used if the metal replicates the appearance of a natural material.
    Cladding is not required, if in the opinion of the community development director, the sign contains unique elements that result in a creative flair or defines a product or service with unique design, and the cladding would detract from the creativity of the design.
    4. Pole Transition: There shall be a transition between the pole and sign it supports, wherein the cladded pole(s) is widened at the base of the sign to at least fifty percent (50%) of the width of the sign it supports. (See exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified herein.)
    A transition is not required, if in the opinion of the community development director, the sign contains design elements which serve a similar purpose and results in an aesthetic sign.
    5. Sign Colors: The exterior surface of the sign structure and frame (excluding sign face), shall have colors similar to the adjacent building or have earth tone colors including black, browns and grays.
    6. Landscaping: Landscaping shall be provided at the base of the sign at a ratio of ten (10) square feet for every one foot (1') of sign width, with fifty percent (50%) of the landscaped area containing live plant material. The plant materials used shall be expected to mature to heights of one foot (1') or greater. Where a hardship can be demonstrated, the sign review board may modify or waive this requirement.
    7. Flag Lots: Businesses on flag lots (i.e., lots with narrow frontage on a public road compared to overall lot size) may be allowed a pole sign larger than the minimum size of seventy-five (75) square feet, provided the sign review board determines that the size of the sign is in harmony with the intent of this chapter and the size is in keeping with the building and lot size.
    8. Multiple Freestanding Signs: Where two (2) or more freestanding signs are allowed on a property, the second sign may be erected to the maximum height allowed, notwithstanding subsection 9-13-4B1c of this chapter, provided it is determined by the sign review board that one sign is not adequately visible from adjacent arterial streets.
B. Sign Guidelines: The following guidelines are desired and encouraged, but are not mandatory:
    1. Theme And Plan: Where feasible, signs shall be incorporated into a landscape theme and be part of an overall design plan for the property. Aesthetic appeal is a high priority.
    2. Height: As a general principle, signs should be no higher than the adjacent building for which it advertises. However, along the I-15 freeway or where pole signs are set back off a public road more than twenty-five feet (25'), due to frontage limitations or other design constraints, the sign may be taller than the adjacent building in order to provide better visibility, but shall not be higher than the maximum height limits set forth in this chapter.
    3. Freeway Zone: Notwithstanding subsection 9-13-4B1a of this chapter, properties within the one thousand five hundred foot (1,500') freeway zone may be allowed a second freestanding sign even though the property has less than three hundred feet (300') of frontage, provided the sign review board determines a second sign is proper based on overall lot size and need for freeway visibility. (Ord. 2015-09-001, 9-3-2015)

9-13-6: DOWNTOWN HISTORIC DISTRICT:
The city has established special sign regulations for the six (6) block downtown historic district. (The district encompasses generally the area from 100 East to 100 West and from 200 North to 100 South.) The sign regulations for the historic district are contained in section 10-13E-2 of this code. (Ord. 2015-09-001, 9-3-2015)

9-13-7: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
A. Signs Not To Constitute Traffic Hazard: No sign or other advertising structure shall be erected at the intersection of any streets in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision; or at any location where by reason of the position, shape or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device, or which makes use of the words “stop,” “drive in,” “danger” or any other words, phrases, symbols or characters in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic. In general, no sign shall be placed within a triangular area with legs thirty feet (30') in length measured along the property lines at a corner.
B. Awnings Over Public Property: Awnings over public property shall conform to all provisions of the International Building Code governing such structures. It shall maintain a minimum eight-foot (8') clearance above the sidewalk or public property and shall have no signs affixed to the awnings or their supports.
C. Temporary Signs: 
    1. Any sign, banner, or advertising display intended to be displayed out of doors for promotional or other temporary use, shall be considered to be a temporary sign and shall be permitted subject to all provisions of this chapter and provisions contained in the city temporary banner policy.
    2. Banners shall be allowed according to the city policy regarding temporary banners. The banner policy is available through the community development department. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to remove temporary banners upon expiration of the permit period.
D. Maintenance: Every sign shall be kept in good condition as to maintenance and repair, including the replacement of defective parts, repainting and cleaning. The ground space within a radius of ten feet (10') from the base of any ground sign shall be kept free and clear of all weeds, rubbish and inflammable material. The code enforcement officer shall inspect and enforce this pursuant to subsection 9-13-3F5 of this chapter.
E. Sign Removal: Signs identifying a discontinued use on the property shall be removed from the property within thirty (30) calendar days of the time the use was discontinued, and shall thereafter be considered to be abandoned.
F. Repair Of Building Facade: A damaged building facade as the result of the removal, repair, replacement or installation of any signs shall be repaired by the property owner within thirty (30) calendar days of the time the use was discontinued.
G. Moving To New Location: No sign erected before the adoption of this chapter shall be moved to a new location on the lot or building, or enlarged, or replaced, unless it be made to comply with provisions of this chapter.
H. Ownership: The imprint of the sign owner and sign erector of all signs shall be in plain and public view. Signs not carrying such an imprint will be presumed to be owned by the person in possession of the property on which the sign is located.
I. Lights And Lighted Signs: 
    1. In any zone, no spotlight, floodlight or lighted sign shall be installed in any way which will permit the rays of such sign light to penetrate beyond the property on which such light or lighted sign is located in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance.
    2. Such signs alleged to be a nuisance by the neighboring property owners or tenants shall be subject to a public hearing before the city council as to the validity of the nuisance complaint. If such sign is determined to be a nuisance by the city council, the owner of said sign shall be required to take the appropriate corrective action as directed by the city council or be subject to prosecution under the city nuisance ordinance1.
J. Planned Development Layout Location Signs: The purpose of the layout sign is to aid emergency personnel and visitors to quickly and efficiently locate a particular unit. For planned developments with a common address for multiple units there shall be a permanent sign located at all entrances to the project which:
    1. Identifies the development;
    2. Clearly shows the project address;
    3. Clearly shows the layout of streets and the units with their individual identification number or letter;
    4. The sign must be oriented to the view of the reader;
    5. Shall be incorporated into a landscape feature or design scheme;
    6. The sign shall contain no animation;
    7. The sign may be illuminated, but the source of the illumination shall not be visible; and
    8. The sign shall be placed such that persons in vehicles who are stopped to read the sign will not create a safety hazard. (Ord. 2015-09-001, 9-3-2015)
1See also title 4, chapter 2 of this code for nuisance provisions.

9-13-8: MAINTENANCE OF LEGAL NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
Nonconforming signs shall be required to comply with the requirements of this chapter when any change, other than normal maintenance, is made to the sign. Painting or similar sign repair shall be considered normal maintenance; provided, that the sign content remains basically unchanged. Compliance with current setback requirements may be waived by the sign review board when the board determines that relocating an existing sign is not practical. (Ord. 2015-09-001, 9-3-2015)

9-13-9: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
A. Alterations: A nonconforming sign shall not be raised, moved, replaced, extended or enlarged unless said sign is changed so as to conform to all provisions of this title. “Alterations” shall also mean the changing of the text of the sign when there is a major change in the use of the property. A major change in use occurs whenever the use changes from one of the following land use categories to another office, retail, food/restaurant service, personal service, entertainment, lodging, repairs, institutional, public utility, manufacturing, and warehouse uses. Any major change in use requires any affected nonconforming sign to conform to all the provisions of this title. Alterations shall not be interpreted to include changing the text of a marquee or changing a copy of an off premises sign.
B. Restoration: Nonconforming signs which have been allowed to deteriorate or which have been damaged by fire, collision or any other cause beyond the control of the owner, to the extent of more than sixty percent (60%) of its assessed value shall, if repaired or rebuilt, be repaired or rebuilt in conformity with the regulations of this chapter or shall be removed.
C. Unsafe Or Dangerous: The nonconforming nature of a sign shall in no way prevent it from being subject to the provisions of subsection 9-13-3F of this chapter, if it is unsafe or dangerous. (Ord. 2015-09-001, 9-3-2015)

9-13-10: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
A. Signs Attached To Public Property: No sign, handbill, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind or sort shall be fastened, placed, posted, painted or attached in any way or upon any curbstone, lamppost, telephone pole, telegraph pole, electric light or power pole, hydrant, bridge, tree, rock, sidewalk or street, except signs owned and erected by permission of an authorized public agency as required by law.
B. A-Frame And Movable Freestanding Signs: Portable, temporary A-frame, and movable freestanding signs shall be prohibited. This prohibition applies to signs mounted upon or painted upon vehicles or trailers which are parked primarily for the purpose of calling attention to or advertising a specific business establishment or product.
C. Flashing Signs: Signs which use flashing, blinking, or strobing lights are prohibited. Signs which use subtle lighting changes as part of a video screen, or EMS are permitted.
D. Rotating Signs: Signs which move, rotate, flutter in the wind or make noise are prohibited. Pennants, streamers, and inflatable objects are also prohibited. Temporary banners must be in compliance with the city’s policy on banners.
E. Permit Exceptions: Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this chapter, the following signs and operations shall not require a sign permit; however, any of the following signs included in any other section shall conform to the applicable provisions of this chapter:
    1. The changing of the advertising copy or message on a marquee, provided no more than fifteen percent (15%) of the marquee surface will advertise off premises land, products or businesses.
    2. Painting, repainting, cleaning and normal maintenance and repair of a sign or sign structure unless a substantial structural change is made.
    3. For sale, rent or lease signs, advertising real property, that are thirty-two (32) square feet or less in area. Such sign may be double faced.
    4. The display of official notices used by any court, or public body, or public official, or the posting of notices by any public officer, in the performance of a duty, or by any person giving legal notice.
    5. Directional, warning, exit, parking or similar informational signs of a public or quasi-public nature, provided they have no advertising effect, and signs directed and maintained by an official body or public utility.
    6. Any official flag, pennant or insignia of any nation, state, city or other political unit.
    7. Nameplates of two (2) square foot maximum area.
    8. Bulletin boards not over sixty-four (64) square feet in area for public, charitable or religious institutions where the same are located on the premises of said institutions.
    9. Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection, when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible material.
    10. Wall signs that are painted directly on the wall, provided they do not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the face of the wall on which it is painted. (Ord. 2015-09-001, 9-3-2015)

9-13-11: VARIANCES AND APPEALS; SIGN REVIEW BOARD:
There is hereby created a five (5) member sign review board which is authorized to review sign permit requests and approve minor variances from the standards set forth herein upon proper evidence by the applicant that a variance is warranted. Members of the sign review board shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent and approval of the city council for staggered three (3) year terms. The mayor shall designate one of their number as chairman, and they shall establish their own rules of procedure and meeting times; the board shall meet as necessary to consider applications for sign permits where a variance from standards set forth herein is requested. Three (3) members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business, an affirmative vote of a majority of those members present is required to approve any request. If either the applicant or the city is dissatisfied with the decision of the sign review board, or if challenge is made to the jurisdiction of the board because the item sought to be varied may not be of a “minor” nature, appeal may be had to the city council by filing written request with the city manager within twenty (20) days after a decision is given by the board or after a question of jurisdiction is raised; any decision by the city council shall be a final determination. (Ord. 2015-09-001, 9-3-2015)

9-13-12: SAFETY AND NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
A. Sign Erection Safety Precautions For Streets And Sidewalks: Whenever any sign or other advertising structure is erected in whole or in part on or over any public street or sidewalk, the person or persons performing the work shall, before proceeding to erect the same, take all precautions necessary to ensure the safety of persons and property on such street or sidewalk. Before hoisting any material whatsoever above the surface of any street or sidewalk or placing any material upon the traveled portion of any street or sidewalk, the persons or person performing such work shall exclude the traveling public from the portion of such street or sidewalk in which such work is to be done by means of suitable barriers, protected walkways and warning devices approved by the building inspection department; and whenever the department shall deem it necessary under the conditions then existing, shall provide a guard or guards to exclude all persons not concerned in the work from the portion of the street or sidewalk in which the work is to proceed. When hoisting any sign or advertising structure above the surface of any street or sidewalk, the same shall be accompanied by hoisting devices of approved design and adequate capacity to accomplish the work in accordance with approved engineering practices, all of which hoisting equipment shall be kept and maintained in good and workable condition.
B. City Nonliability: The city, its chief building official and its other agents shall in no way be liable for negligence or failure of the owner, or the person responsible for any damage caused by defective conditions. (Ord. 2015-09-001, 9-3-2015)

9-13-13: PENALTY:
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a class B misdemeanor or lesser offense as determined by the city attorney and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. Each day of violation may be considered to be a separate offense. (Ord. 2015-09-001, 9-3-2015)

CHAPTER 14 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT


9-14-1:      General Provisions
9-14-2:      Definitions
9-14-3:      Grading Permits
9-14-4:      Storm Water Facilities Design And Management Standards
9-14-5:      Post-Construction
9-14-6:      Illicit Discharges
9-14-7:      Enforcement
9-14-8:      Penalties
9-14-9:      Appeals

9-14-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to:
    1. Protect, maintain, and enhance the environment of the city of St. George.
    2. Establish responsibilities for controlling and managing storm water runoff.
    3. Protect the public health, safety and the general welfare of the city and its inhabitants by controlling discharges of pollutants to the city’s storm water facilities and to maintain and improve the quality of the receiving waters into which the storm water outfalls flow, including, but not limited to, lakes, rivers, streams, ponds, wetlands, and groundwater of the city.
    4. Enable the city to comply with the most current National Pollution Discharge Elimination System permit (NPDES) and Utah Pollution Discharge Elimination System (UPDES) and applicable regulations, 40 CFR section 122.26 for storm water discharges.
    5. Allow the city to exercise the powers granted by Utah code, which provides that, among other powers municipalities have with respect to storm water facilities, the power by ordinance or resolution to:
        a. Exercise general regulation over the planning, location, construction, operation and maintenance of storm water facilities in the municipality, whether or not owned and operated by the municipality;
        b. Adopt any rules and regulations deemed necessary to accomplish the purposes of this chapter, including the adoption of a system of fees for services and permits;
        c. Establish standards to regulate the quantity of storm water discharged and to regulate storm water contaminants as may be necessary to protect water quality;
        d. Review and approve plans and plats for storm water management in proposed subdivisions or commercial developments;
        e. Issue permits for storm water discharges, or for the construction, alteration, extension, or repair of storm water facilities;
        f. Suspend or revoke permits when it is determined that the permittee has violated any applicable ordinance, resolution, or condition of the permit;
        g. Regulate and prohibit discharges into storm water facilities of sanitary, industrial, or commercial sewage or waters that have otherwise been contaminated;
        h. Expend funds to remediate or mitigate the detrimental effects of contaminated land or other sources of storm water contamination, whether public or private; and
        i. Establish a viable and fair method of financing the construction, operation and maintenance of the storm water facilities.
B. Administering Entity: The city of St. George shall administer the provisions of this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall relieve any person from responsibility for damage to other persons or property, nor impose upon the city of St. George, its officers, agents or employees, any liability for damage to other persons or property. (Ord. 2015-11-006, 11-19-2015; amd. Ord. 2020-01-003 § 2, 1-9-2020)

9-14-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the definitions in section 8-6-2 shall apply in this chapter as well as the following definitions:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Physical, structural, and/or managerial practices that, when used singly or in combination, prevent or reduce pollution of water, that have been approved by the city of St. George and that have been incorporated by reference into this chapter as if fully set out therein. For purposes of this title, the relevant BMPs are more particularly defined in the city of St. George storm water management program and city of St. George “Standard Specifications For Design And Construction.”
CHANNEL: A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts flowing water continuously or periodically.
CITY OF ST. GEORGE: The city of St. George or authorized designee.
CITY STORM WATER FACILITIES: Storm systems that receive runoff from public rights-of-way, natural waterways, and drainage systems identified in a city easement.
COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT OR SALE: One (1) plan for development or sale, separate parts of which are related by any announcement, piece of documentation (including sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, plat, blueprint, contract, zoning request, computer design, etc.), physical demarcation (including contracts) that identify the scope of the project. A plan may still be a common plan of development or sale even if it is taking place in separate stages or phases, is planned in combination with other construction activities, or is implemented by different owners or operators.
CONTAMINANT: Any unnatural, physical, chemical, biological, or radiological substance or matter in water.
DISCHARGE: Dispose, deposit, spill, pour, inject, seep, dump, leak or place by any means including any direct or indirect entry of any solid or liquid matter into the municipal separate storm water facilities.
EASEMENT: An acquired privilege or right of use or enjoyment that a person, party, firm, corporation, municipality or other legal entity has in the land of another.
EROSION: The removal of soil particles by the action of water, wind, ice or other geological agents, whether naturally occurring or acting in conjunction with or promoted by anthropogenic activities or effects (human cause).
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN: A written plan (including drawings or other graphic representations) that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during construction activities.
GRADING PERMIT: A permit issued by the city of St. George to allow grading of a property.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS: Illegal or unauthorized connections to the municipal separate storm sewer system whether or not such connections result in discharges into that system.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system that is not composed entirely of storm water and not specifically exempted under 40 CFR section 122.26.
IMMEDIATELY: Requires owner/operator to, on the same day a condition requiring corrective action is found (or as soon afterward as possible considering normal work schedule and task size), take all reasonable steps to minimize or prevent the discharge of pollutants until a permanent solution is installed and made operational.
LAND DISTURBING/GRADING ACTIVITY: Any activity on property that results in a change in the existing soil cover (both vegetative and nonvegetative) and/or the existing soil topography. Land disturbing/grading activities include, but are not limited to, development, redevelopment, demolition, construction, reconstruction, clearing, grading, filling, and excavation.
LONG-TERM STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN: A site-specific written document that identifies potential sources of storm water pollution. It describes storm water control measures and best management practices (BMPs) that will be used to reduce or eliminate pollutants in storm water discharges into the city’s MS4. It contains the procedures the owner will implement to comply with the terms and conditions of the storm water maintenance agreement. The long-term storm water management plan is required as a condition of the development plan approval and is required as part of the city’s small MS4 UPDES general permit from the state of Utah.
MAINTENANCE: Any activity that is necessary to keep a storm water facility in good working order so as to function as designed. Maintenance shall include complete reconstruction of a storm water facility if reconstruction is needed in order to restore the facility to its original operational design parameters. Maintenance shall also include the correction of any problem on the site property that may directly impair the functions of the storm water facility.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4): The conveyances owned or operated by the municipality for the collection and transportation of storm water, including, but not limited to, the roads, streets and their drainage systems, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, and storm drains.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM PERMIT OR NPDES PERMIT: The provisions of the Federal Clean Water Act for the control of storm water discharges, also a permit issued pursuant to 33 USC section 1342.
NOTICE OF INTENT (NOI): Whenever a contractor disturbs one (1) acre or more of property, or less than one (1) acre if part of a common plan of development, an NOI through the state of Utah must be filed. This is a binding contract between the state of Utah and the contractor stating that the contractor will address storm water and drainage issues on site and downstream throughout the duration of the project until the NOT is filed.
NOTICE OF TERMINATION (NOT): Whenever a contractor completes a project on one (1) acre or more of property, or less than one (1) acre if part of a common plan of development, it is the contractor’s responsibility to maintain the storm water and drainage controls until such time as the NOT is filed and accepted by the state of Utah and city of St. George.
NOTICE OF VIOLATION (NOV): Whenever the city of St. George finds that a person is in noncompliance with this chapter, the city of St. George may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Requirements in this notice are at the discretion of the city of St. George, and may include monitoring, payment to cover costs relating to the noncompliance, and the implementation of best management practices.
PERSON: Any and all persons including any individual, firm or association and any municipal or private corporation organized or existing under the laws of this or any other state or country.
PROPERTY OWNER: Landowner of property within the boundary of the city of St. George.
REDEVELOPMENT: The replacement or improvement of impervious surfaces on a developed site.
RUNOFF: That portion of the precipitation on a drainage area that is discharged from the area into the municipal separate storm water facilities; including, but not limited to: water produced by storms, surface drainage, snow and ice melt, and other water handled by the storm sewer drainage system.
SEDIMENT: Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, gravity, or ice and has come to rest on the earth’s surface either above or below sea level.
SEDIMENTATION: Soil particles suspended in storm water that can settle in streambeds and disrupt the natural flow of the stream.
STABILIZATION: Providing adequate measures, vegetative and/or structural, that will prevent erosion from occurring.
STORM WATER FACILITIES: The drainage structures, conduits, ditches, storm sewers, and all device appurtenances by means of which storm water is collected, transported, pumped, treated or disposed of.
STORM WATER MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT: A document recorded in the Washington County recorder’s office that acts as a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance of storm water management practices and will reference a long-term storm water management plan. The storm water maintenance agreement is required as a condition of the development plan approval and is required as part of the city’s small MS4 UPDES general permit from the state of Utah.
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT: The programs to manage quality and quantity of storm water runoff.
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM (SWMP): The city of St. George storm water master program as adopted by the city.
STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP): All drawings, documents, specifications for the programs, drainage systems, structures, BMPs, concepts and techniques intended to maintain or restore quality and quantity of storm water runoff.
STORM WATER RUNOFF: Flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from precipitation.
STRUCTURAL BMPs: Devices that are constructed or installed to provide control of storm water runoff.
SURFACE WATER: Includes waters upon the surface of the earth in bounds created naturally or artificially including, but not limited to, streams, other watercourses, lakes and reservoirs.
UPDES: Utah Pollution Discharge Elimination System.
WATERCOURSE: A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or manmade, which gathers or carries surface water. (Ord. 2015-11-006, 11-19-2015; amd. Ord. 2019-04-001 § 2, 4-4-2019; Ord. 2020-01-003 § 2, 1-9-2020)

9-14-3: GRADING PERMITS:
A. When Required: Every person shall obtain a grading permit for any land disturbance or grading activity on land of one (1) acre or more.
B. Exemptions: The following activities are exempt from the permit requirement:
    1. Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property, or natural resources.
    2. Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as a permitted main or accessory use.
    3. Additions or modifications to existing single-family structures.
C. Application For A Grading Permit: Each application shall include the following:
    1. Name of applicant;
    2. Business or residence address of applicant;
    3. Name, address or telephone number of the owner of the property of record;
    4. Address and legal description of subject property including the tax reference number and parcel number of the subject property;
    5. Name, address and telephone number of the contractor and any subcontractor(s) who shall perform the land disturbing/grading activity and who shall implement the erosion and sediment control plan;
    6. A statement indicating the nature, extent and purpose of the land disturbing/grading activity, including the size of the area for which the permit shall be applicable and a schedule for the starting and completion dates of the land disturbing/grading activity;
    7. A diagram with contours and cross sections showing the extent of grading and BMPs;
    8. Drainage study, if required by city;
    9. A sediment and erosion control plan as provided in this chapter;
    10. A storm water pollution prevention plan as provided in this chapter;
    11. Each application for a grading permit shall be accompanied by payment of grading permit and other storm water management fees, as adopted by resolution and found in the city fee schedule;
    12. Air quality/dust control plan as required in this code;
    13. A copy of the Utah state notice of intent (NOI).
D. Review And Approval Of Application: 
    1. The city of St. George will review each application for a grading permit to determine its conformance with the provisions of this chapter. Both the SWPPP and NOI are required to be approved before the grading permit can be issued. The city of St. George shall provide one (1) of the following responses in writing:
        a. Approval of the permit application;
        b. Approval of the permit application, subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this chapter, and issue the permit subject to these conditions; or
        c. Denial of the permit application, indicating the reason(s) for the denial.
    2. If the city of St. George has granted conditional approval of the permit, the applicant shall submit a revised plan that conforms to the conditions established by the city of St. George. No grading permit will be released until the development plans have been approved.
E. Permit Duration: Every grading permit shall expire and become null and void if substantial work authorized by such permit has not commenced within sixty (60) calendar days of issuance and becomes null and void if the entire project is not completed within twelve (12) months from the date of issuance or an extension has been granted based on ongoing work on the project and substantial work being completed. Both the SWPPP and NOI are required to be active during the entire project including any extensions. The NOI is active for one (1) calendar year from issuance and must be renewed until the project is complete and a NOT is filed.
F. Storm Water Inspections: The applicant must notify the city of St. George in advance of the commencement of construction to schedule a preconstruction meeting. During the duration of the project, weekly or bi-weekly and within twenty-four (24) hours of rain events, inspections of the storm water BMPs shall be conducted by the owner/operator. All inspections shall be documented and prepared on a city of St. George approved form. The city of St. George shall be given access to inspect storm water BMPs on private properties that discharge to the MS4.
G. Performance Bonds: The city of St. George may, at its discretion, require the submittal of a performance bond prior to issuance of a permit in order to ensure that the storm water practices are installed by the permit holder as required by the approved storm water pollution prevention plan. The amount of the installation performance bond shall be one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the total estimated construction cost of the structural BMPs approved under the permit plus any reasonably foreseeable additional related costs, e.g., for damages or enforcement. The performance bond shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure to complete work specified in the storm water pollution prevention plan. The applicant shall provide an itemized construction cost estimate complete with unit prices which shall be subject to acceptance, amendment or rejection by the city of St. George. The performance bond shall be released in full only upon submission of as-built plans that the structural BMP has been installed in accordance with the approved plan and other applicable provisions of this chapter. Provisions for a partial pro rata release of the performance bond based on the completion of various development stages can be made at the discretion of the city of St. George. (Ord. 2015-11-006, 11-19-2015; amd. Ord. 2019-04-001 § 2, 4-4-2019; Ord. 2020-01-003 § 2, 1-9-2020)

9-14-4: STORM WATER FACILITIES DESIGN AND MANAGEMENT STANDARDS:
A. Storm Water Design And Best Management Practices (BMPs): Anyone subject to this chapter must comply with this code, all storm water programs and plans adopted by the city and with the city of St. George “Standard Specifications for Design and Construction.” These standards include specific design criteria and operation and maintenance requirements for each storm water practice. These standards may be updated and expanded from time to time, at the discretion of the city. Storm water facilities that are designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with these standards and with BMP criteria will be presumed to meet the minimum water quality performance standards.
B. Notice Of Intent (NOI) Requirements: All persons grading or disturbing one (1) acre or more, or less than an acre if part of a common plan of development, shall obtain a notice of intent (NOI) through the state of Utah. This form requires that a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) is developed on a form approved by the city of St. George. This is a binding contract between the state of Utah and the contractor stating that the contractor will address storm water and drainage issues on site and downstream throughout the duration of the project until the notice of termination (NOT) is filed. The NOI and SWPPP shall be signed by both the owner and the operator.
C. Adoption Of The Current UPDES Permit: The SWPPP must be developed and consistent with the most current UPDES storm water general permit for construction activities as described in the State of Utah, Department of Environmental Quality, General Permit for Discharges from Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (MS4s).
D. Sediment And Erosion Control Plan Requirements: The sediment and erosion control plan shall apply to construction projects disturbing one (1) acre or more, and to construction projects of less than one (1) acre that are part of a larger common plan of development or sale. The sediment and erosion control plan shall accurately describe the potential for soil erosion and sedimentation problems resulting from land disturbing/grading activity and shall explain and illustrate the measures that are to be taken to control these problems. The length and complexity of the plan is to be commensurate with the size of the project, severity of the site condition, and potential for off-site damage. The erosion and sediment control requirements must be developed and consistent with the most current UPDES storm water general permit for construction activities as described in the State of Utah, Department of Environmental Quality, General Permit for Discharges from Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (MS4s) and shall include the following as applicable:
    1. Provide and maintain natural buffers and/or equivalent erosion and sediment controls when a water of the state is located within fifty feet (50') of the site’s earth disturbances.
    2. Preserve naturally vegetated areas where possible and, if feasible, direct storm water to these areas to maximize storm water infiltration and filtering to reduce pollutant discharges.
    3. Install sediment controls along any perimeter areas of the site that will receive pollutant discharges.
    4. Minimize sediment track-out.
    5. Manage stockpiles.
    6. Minimize dust.
    7. Minimize steep slope disturbances.
    8. Preserve native topsoil.
    9. Minimize soil compaction.
    10. Protect storm drain inlets.
    11. Minimize erosion of storm water conveyance channels and their embankments, outlets, adjacent streambanks, slopes, and downstream waters.
    12. Properly design sediment basin or similar impoundments.
    13. Proper storage and use of treatment chemicals to minimize potential discharge into storm water conveyance systems.
    14. Stabilize exposed portions of the site.
E. Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) Requirements: All persons grading or disturbing one (1) acre or more, or less than an acre if part of a common plan of development, shall develop a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) on a form approved by the city of St. George for the protection, control and restoration of storm water quality. Property owners and operators are responsible to manage storm water runoff and sediment, unless this responsibility is relinquished through the terms and conditions of an easement, agreement, or contract. The storm water pollution prevention plan shall include sufficient information to allow the city of St. George to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the project site, the potential impacts of all proposed development of the site, both present and future, on the water resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of the measures proposed for managing storm water generated at the project site. To accomplish this goal the storm water pollution prevention plan shall be submitted on a form approved by the city of St. George. The SWPPP shall include a notice of intent (NOI) signed by both the owner and operator. The SWPPP shall be developed consistent with the most current UPDES storm water general permit for construction activities as described in the State of Utah, Department of Environmental Quality, General Permit for Discharges from Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (MS4s) and shall include the following:
    1. Storm water team.
    2. Nature of construction activities.
    3. Site map.
    4. Non-storm water discharges.
    5. Description of storm water controls.
    6. Perimeter controls for a “linear construction site.”
    7. Sediment track-out controls.
    8. Sediment basins.
    9. Treatment chemicals.
    10. Stabilization measures.
    11. Spill prevention response procedures.
    12. Waste management procedures.
    13. Procedures for inspection, maintenance, and corrective action.
    14. Staff training.
    15. Compliance with other requirements.
    16. SWPPP certification.
    17. Post-authorization additions to the SWPPP.
F. Site Inspection Requirements: Site inspections shall comply with most current UPDES storm water general permit for construction activities as described in the State of Utah, Department of Environmental Quality, General Permit for Discharges from Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (MS4s) and shall include the following:
    1. Inspections shall be performed by a qualified person who by coursework and registration is knowledgeable in the principles and practices of erosion and sediment control and pollution prevention, who possesses the skills to assess conditions that could impact storm water quality and has skills to assess effectiveness of any storm water controls selected and installed to meet the requirements of the post-construction storm water maintenance agreement.
    2. If part of a common plan of development, inspections shall be performed at least once every seven (7) days; or
    3. If not part of a common plan of development, inspections may be performed at least once every seven (7) days or once every fourteen (14) calendar days and within twenty-four (24) hours of the occurrence of a storm event of one-half inch (0.5") or greater.
    4. Access shall be granted to qualified city of St. George personnel on private property as described in the approved SWPPP to inspect the construction storm water BMPs that discharge to the MS4.
G. Notice Of Termination (NOT) Requirements: All persons grading or disturbing one (1) acre or more, or less than an acre if part of a common plan of development, shall file a NOT through the state of Utah after completion of the final project acceptance by the city of St. George. It is the contractor’s responsibility to maintain the storm water and drainage controls until such time as the NOT is filed and accepted by the state of Utah and city of St. George. (Ord. 2015-11-006, 11-19-2015; amd. Ord. 2020-01-003 § 2, 1-9-2020)

9-14-5: POST-CONSTRUCTION:
A. Standards To Minimize Impacts On Water Quality: New development and redevelopment projects must have requirements or standards to ensure that any storm water controls or management practices will prevent or minimize impacts to water quality.
B. Standards To Minimize Development In Susceptible Areas: New development and redevelopment projects include nonstructural BMPs such as requirements and standards to minimize development in areas susceptible to erosion and sediment loss; to minimize the disturbance of native soils and vegetation; to preserve areas in the municipality that provide important water quality benefits; to implement measures for flood control; and to protect the integrity of natural resources and sensitive areas.
C. Projects Greater Than Or Equal To One (1) Acre: Newly developed and redeveloped projects that disturb greater than or equal to one (1) acre, including projects less than one (1) acre that are of a larger common plan of development or sale, shall include a process to evaluate and encourage a low impact development (LID) approach which encourages the implementation of structural BMPs, where practicable, that infiltrate, evapotranspire or harvest and use storm water from the site to protect water quality. Structural controls may include green infrastructure practices such as rainwater harvesting, rain gardens, permeable pavement, and vegetative swales. The selection and design of post-construction controls shall take into consideration clogging or obstruction issues, freeze-thaw problems, effect on slope stability and groundwater, and the ability to effectively maintain the control.
D. Specific Criteria: Newly developed and redeveloped projects must meet specific criteria which require that best management practices (BMPs) are designed to treat the water from a specific design storm (the two (2) year, twenty-four (24) hour event, etc.) must be incorporated into the permittee’s post-construction minimum control measure and documented in the storm water pollution prevention plan. Permittee may allow other unique or complex methodologies.
E. Inspections: Owners/operators of newly developed and redeveloped projects shall conduct inspections and perform any necessary maintenance at least annually and provide certification that adequate maintenance has been performed and the structural controls are operating as designed to protect water quality. This required inspection shall be conducted by the property owner/operators or qualified third parties. On sites where the property owner/operator is conducting maintenance, the permittee shall allow municipal inspections to conduct inspections at least once every five (5) years, or more frequently as needed to show that adequate maintenance is being performed. The owner shall grant access to the city of St. George to inspect storm water control measures on private properties that discharge to the MS4 to ensure that adequate maintenance is being performed.
F. Stabilization Requirements: Any area that has been disturbed by grading activity shall be stabilized according to a schedule provided by the contractor or the owner/operator and approved by the city of St. George. A plan must be submitted with the final design describing the vegetative or other stabilization and management techniques to be used at a site. This plan will explain not only how the site will be stabilized, but who will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation or other stabilization at the site, and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate cover is preserved. A long-term storm water management plan and a post-construction storm water agreement are required prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
G. Inspection Of Storm Water Facilities: Periodic inspections of facilities shall be performed by the city of St. George on public property. On private property, the landowner, its successors and assigns, including any homeowners’ association, shall conduct periodic inspections and maintain the storm water facilities. This includes all inlets, pipes, channels, and detention basins built to convey storm water, as well as all other structures, improvements, and vegetation provided to control the quantity and quality of the storm water. “Adequate maintenance” is defined as good working condition so that these storm water facilities are performing their designed functions. An annual inspection report must be filled out for storm water facilities located on private property and retained for three (3) years to ensure that the facilities are in good working condition and acceptable to the city of St. George. The owner must provide the records for the city of St. George upon request.
H. Records Of Installation And Maintenance Activities: Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a storm water facility shall make records of all maintenance and repairs to the facility, and shall retain the records for at least three (3) years. These records shall be made available to the city of St. George upon request.
I. Failure To Meet Or Maintain Design Or Maintenance Standards: If a responsible party fails or refuses to meet the design or maintenance standards required for storm water facilities, the city of St. George, after reasonable notice, may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance needs by performing all necessary work to place the facility in proper working condition. In the event that the storm water facility becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the city of St. George shall notify in writing the party responsible for maintenance of the storm water facility. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall immediately repair the facility in an approved manner. In the event that corrective action is not undertaken within that time, the city of St. George may take necessary corrective action. The cost of any action by the city of St. George under this section shall be charged to the responsible party and a lien placed on property for payment. (Ord. 2015-11-006, 11-19-2015; amd. Ord. 2019-04-001 § 2, 4-4-2019; Ord. 2020-01-003 § 2, 1-9-2020)

9-14-6: ILLICIT DISCHARGES:
A. Scope: This section shall apply to all water generated on developed or undeveloped land entering the city’s separate storm sewer system.
B. Prohibition Of Illicit Discharges: No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the municipal separate storm sewer system any discharge that is not composed entirely of storm water. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any non-storm water, uncontaminated discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system is prohibited except as described as follows:
    1. Water line flushing or other potable water sources,
    2. Landscape irrigation or lawn watering,
    3. Diverted stream flows,
    4. Rising groundwater,
    5. Groundwater infiltration to storm drains,
    6. Uncontaminated pumped groundwater,
    7. Foundation or footing drains,
    8. Crawl space pumps,
    9. Air conditioning condensation,
    10. Springs,
    11. Natural riparian habitat or wetland flows,
    12. Swimming pools (if dechlorinated – typically less than one (1) ppm chlorine),
    13. Firefighting activities, and
    14. Any other uncontaminated water source.
    15. Discharges specified in writing by the city of St. George as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
    16. Dye testing is an allowable discharge if the city of St. George has so specified in writing.
    17. The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm water discharge permitted under a UPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the State of Utah, Division of Water Quality; provided, that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations; and provided, that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system.
C. Prohibition Of Illicit Connections: 
    1. The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the separate municipal storm sewer system is prohibited.
    2. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
D. Reduction Of Storm Water Pollutants By The Use Of Best Management Practices: Any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, will be required to implement, at the person’s expense, the BMPs necessary to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES/UPDES permit authorizing the discharge of storm water associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed in compliance with the provisions of this section.
E. Notification Of Spills: Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting in, or may result in, illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into the city storm water facilities, the person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials the person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, the person shall notify the city of St. George in person or by telephone no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by telephone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city of St. George within three (3) business days of the telephone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3) years. (Ord. 2015-11-006, 11-19-2015; amd. Ord. 2020-01-003 § 2, 1-9-2020)

9-14-7: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Enforcement Authority: Consistent with the most current UPDES storm water general permit for construction activities as described in the State of Utah, Department of Environmental Quality, General Permit for Discharges from Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (MS4s), the city of St. George may detect, investigate, eliminate and enforce against non-storm water discharges, including illegal dumping, into the MS4. The city of St. George may apply escalating enforcement procedures as necessary for the severity of violation and the recalcitrance of the violator. The city of St. George may issue notices of violation, stop work orders, citations, and impose civil penalties.
Non-storm water discharges to the MS4, including spills, illicit connections, illegal dumping, and sanitary sewer overflows into the storm sewer system, require ceasing the illicit discharge or otherwise eliminating the discharge or removal of such discharges.
The city may complete periodic inspections to ensure that the owner/operator’s chosen BMPs used to address the site storm water are performing adequately. If BMPs are not performing adequately, the city will have the owner/operator update the erosion and sediment control plan and the storm water pollution prevention plan. The city of St. George shall be given access to inspect storm water BMPs on private properties that discharge to the MS4.
B. Violations: 
    1. Written Notice Of Violation: Whenever the city of St. George finds that any permittee or any other person discharging non-storm water has violated or is violating this chapter or a permit or order issued hereunder, the city may serve upon such person written notice of the violation. An explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted to the city of St. George. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the discharger of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation.
    2. Consent Orders: The city of St. George is empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with the person responsible for the noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the person to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. The order may also include an order for civil penalties to be paid for the violations. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as orders issued pursuant to subsections B3 and B4 of this section.
    3. Compliance Order: When the city finds that any person has violated or continues to violate this chapter or a permit or order issued hereunder, he may issue an order to the violator directing that, following a specific time period, adequate structures or devices be installed or procedures implemented and properly operated. Orders may also contain such other requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including civil penalties for the violation(s), the construction of appropriate structures, installation of devices, self-monitoring, and management practices.
    4. Cease And Desist Orders: When the city finds that any person has violated or continues to violate this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, the city may issue an order to cease and desist all such violations and direct those persons in noncompliance to:
        a. Comply forthwith;
        b. Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and terminating the discharge; and
        c. Pay any civil penalties assessed for the violation(s).
C. Conflicting Standards: Whenever there is a conflict between any standard contained in this chapter and in the city of St. George storm water management program adopted by the city of St. George, the strictest standard shall prevail. (Ord. 2015-11-006, 11-19-2015; amd. Ord. 2019-04-001 § 2, 4-4-2019; Ord. 2020-01-003 § 2, 1-9-2020)

9-14-8: PENALTIES:
A. Violations: Any person who shall commit any act declared unlawful under this chapter, who violates any provision of this chapter, who violates the provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or who fails or refuses to comply with any lawful communication or notice to abate or take corrective action as directed by the city of St. George, shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate violation.
B. Recovery Of Damages And Costs: The city of St. George may recover:
    1. All damages caused by the violator to the city, which may include any reasonable expenses incurred in investigating violations of and enforcing compliance with this chapter, or any other actual damages caused by the violation.
    2. The costs of the city’s maintenance of storm water facilities when the user of such facilities fails to maintain them as required by this chapter.
C. Civil Penalties: The civil penalties/fine schedule shall be used to determine a reasonable and appropriate penalty for all violations.
D. Other Remedies: The city may bring legal action to enjoin the continuing violation of this chapter, and the existence of any other remedy, at law or equity, shall be no defense to any such actions.
E. Remedies Cumulative: The remedies set forth in this section shall be cumulative, not exclusive, and it shall not be a defense to any action, civil or criminal, that one (1) or more of the remedies set forth herein has been sought or granted. (Ord. 2015-11-006, 11-19-2015; amd. Ord. 2019-04-001 § 2, 4-4-2019; Ord. 2020-01-003 § 2, 1-9-2020)

9-14-9: APPEALS:
A. Appeal: Any person aggrieved by the imposition of a civil penalty or order to bring their property into compliance as provided by this chapter may appeal said penalty or order.
B. Appeals To Be In Writing: The appeal shall be in writing and filed with the city recorder within fifteen (15) days after the civil penalty or order is served.
C. Upon Receipt Of An Appeal: The hearing examiner designated by the city shall hold a hearing upon receipt of an appeal. Notice shall be provided to the appealing party at the address provided by the appealing party at the time of appeal. The decision of the hearing examiner shall be final.
D. Standard Of Review And Proof: The hearing examiner shall ensure due process is provided. The person appealing bears the burden of proof that the city’s decision was in error. The hearing officer shall review the facts “de novo” without deference to the city’s determination of the factual matters. The hearing officer shall determine the correctness of the city’s interpretation and application of the plain meaning of the regulations and shall decide whether the preponderance of the evidence shows that the violation(s) exist. Each party may present witnesses and evidence. The hearing shall be informal, and the rules of evidence do not apply.
E. Appealing Decisions Of The Hearing Examiner: The alleged violator and the city may appeal a decision of the hearing examiner by filing a petition with the district court within thirty (30) days of the decision. (Ord. 2015-11-006, 11-19-2015; amd. Ord. 2019-04-001 § 2, 4-4-2019; Ord. 2020-01-003 § 2, 1-9-2020)

TITLE 10 ZONING REGULATIONS

Chapter
1            General Provisions
2            Definitions
3            Appeals and Variances
4            Zones
5            Agricultural Zones (A-0.5, A-1, A-5, A-10, A-20)
6            Gravel and Grazing Zone (G-G)
7            Residential Zones
    7A           Residential Estate Zones
    7B           Single-Family Residential Zones
    7C           Multiple-Family Residential Zones
    7D           Mobile Home Zones
    7E           Residential Central City Zone
    7F           Planned Development Residential Zone
    7G           Planned Development – Student Housing Zone
    7H           Planned Development – Traditional Neighborhood Zone
8            Administrative Professional (AP), Commercial (C), and Manufacturing Zones (M), and Planned Development Zones (PD-AP, PD-C, PD-M and PD-MU)
    8A           Administrative Professional Zone
    8B           Commercial Zones
    8C           Manufacturing Zones
    8D           Planned Development Zones
9            Reserved
10           Airport Vicinity Zones
11           Open Space
12           Reserved
13           Overlay Zones
    13A          Hillside Development Overlay Zone (HDOZ)
    13B          Development in Geologic Hazard or Adverse Construction Condition Overlay Zone
    13C          Development in Flood and Erosion Hazard Overlay Zone
    13D          Resort Overlay Zone
    13E          St. George Arts District Overlay Zone, Landmark Sites, and the Historic Preservation Commission
14           Outdoor Lighting
15           Reserved
16           Nonconforming Uses and Noncomplying Structures
17           Permitted with Standards and Conditional Uses
    17A          Permitted with Standards – General Provisions
    17B          Conditional Use Permit Review
18           Walls, Fences and Hedges
    18A          Rockery Walls
19           Off-Street Parking Requirements
20           Motor Vehicle Access and Loading
21           Reserved
22           Reserved
23           Landscape Standards
24           (Reserved)
25           Subdivision Regulations
    25A          General Provisions
    25B          Administration and Enforcement
    25C          Plats and Plans
    25D          Improvements

CHAPTER 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS


10-1-1:      Short Title
10-1-2:      Conflict
10-1-3:      Land Use Decision Required
10-1-4:      Site Plan Required
10-1-5:      Inspection
10-1-6:      Permits, Licenses to Comply
10-1-7:      Public Nuisance
10-1-8:      Changes and Amendments
10-1-9:      Reconsideration of Denied Amendments
10-1-10:     Fees
10-1-11:     Annexations
10-1-12:     Completion of Landscaping and Public Infrastructure Improvements – Private Site Development Improvements – Improvement Completion Assurance
10-1-13:     Land Use Authority
10-1-14:     Penalty

10-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known as the zoning ordinance of the city of St. George, Utah. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-1-2: CONFLICT:
The provisions of this title are in addition to all other city ordinances, the laws of the state of Utah, the laws of the United States, and applicable common law. The city does not enforce private restrictive covenants, nor shall any such covenant modify the regulations herein. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-1-3: LAND USE DECISION REQUIRED:
A. Interpretation of Zoning Ordinance: Any use of land that is not plainly designated as an allowed use in the zone is prohibited. A specific land use category supersedes one that is more general or broader in scope. For example, if a land use has been specified (e.g., drycleaners) in this title, and it has not been listed as a permitted use in a zone, it is prohibited in the zone, even if a use that is more general or broader in scope is permitted (e.g., general commercial) in the zone.
B. Land Use Decision Required: No development may commence, or land use changed or expanded, without a final land use decision, which determines that the development, or the change or expansion, is allowed in the zone and complies with all land use regulations. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-1-4: SITE PLAN REQUIRED:
A detailed site plan, drawn to scale, shall be filed as a part of any land use application. The site plan shall show, where pertinent:
A. Scale used;
B. Direction of north point;
C. Lot lines, adjacent streets or rights-of-way, easements, and landscaped areas showing types of ground cover and trees;
D. Location of all existing structures on the property, including driveway entrances, utility poles, etc.;
E. Location of the proposed construction and improvements, including setbacks, location and dimensions of signs, location of garbage receptacles, etc.;
F. Motor vehicle access, including individual parking stalls, circulation patterns, curb, gutter and sidewalk locations;
G. Any necessary explanatory notes; and
H. Name, address and telephone number of building contractor and owner. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-1-5: INSPECTION:
The building official, or an authorized designee of the city, shall have the right to enter any building for the purpose of determining the use thereof, or to enter the premises for the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this title; provided, such right of entry shall be exercised only at reasonable hours, and in no case shall entry be made to any occupied building in the absence of the owner, manager, or tenant thereof without permission of the owner, manager, or tenant, or the written order or search warrant of a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-1-6: PERMITS, LICENSES TO COMPLY:
A. All applications for any development activity, including the modification or expansion of a land use, shall comply with all applicable regulations.
B. All departments, officials and public employees of the city, vested with authority to issue the permits or licenses provided for herein, shall conform to the land use regulations and shall issue no permit or license for uses, buildings or purposes where the same would be in conflict with any provision of this title. Any permit or license issued that conflicts with any provision of this title is voidable. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-1-7: PUBLIC NUISANCE:
Any building or structure erected, constructed, altered, enlarged, converted, moved or maintained in violation of the law, and any use of land or structure in violation of any provision of this title, is a public nuisance. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-1-8: CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS:
All zoning maps, land use maps and regulations, and the general plan, may be amended from time to time by the city council. All proposed amendments shall be submitted first to the planning commission for consideration at a public hearing. The city council shall consider the recommendation at a public meeting, and make a final determination to adopt, modify, revise, or reject the proposed amendment. Sixty (60) days after the proposed amendment was submitted to the planning commission for consideration, the city council may consider the planning commission’s failure to make a timely recommendation as a negative recommendation. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-1-9: RECONSIDERATION OF DENIED AMENDMENTS:
A. In the event the city council denies an application to change a zoning map, land use map, regulation, or the general plan, or in the event the application is withdrawn, the planning commission shall not consider a new or revised application for the same change within a period of one (1) year from the date of such denial action, unless the conditions upon which the application was based have substantially changed. A new or revised application is considered withdrawn if it is not submitted for a decision within six (6) months of filing the initial or revised application.
B. Substantial Change: For purposes of this section, a “substantial change” in an application shall mean a substantial reduction in density and/or land area to be developed, a change in the type or intensity of the proposed use (e.g., residential instead of commercial), or other factors which clearly constitute a substantial change. The community development director or designee shall make a substantial change determination. The city council may adopt, modify, revise, or reject the determination. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-1-10: FEES:
Applicant shall pay all fees according to the current fee schedules of the city. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-1-11: ANNEXATIONS:
Unless otherwise established by agreement, all new areas annexed into the city shall have a general plan land use designation of agriculture, be zoned agriculture (A-20), and be in the hillside overlay zone if the area annexed has slopes that are twenty percent (20%) or greater. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-1-12: COMPLETION OF LANDSCAPING AND PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS – PRIVATE SITE DEVELOPMENT IMPROVEMENTS – IMPROVEMENT COMPLETION ASSURANCE:
A. The following infrastructure improvements are deemed essential for the public health and safety, and are required for developments for human occupation: all infrastructure improvements required to meet the building code, fire code, flood and storm water management provisions, street and access requirements, and other applicable public safety improvements adopted in city ordinances or St. George standard specifications for design and construction. Failure to complete all essential improvements may result in the suspension of the building permit. All essential improvements shall be completed prior to recording an approved subdivision plat, or prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, unless the following requirements are met:
    1. The applicant has provided a financial assurance for required and uncompleted infrastructure improvements; or
    2. The applicant has agreed in a written document to terms acceptable to the city that vary the conditions and timing of issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
B. All required landscaping improvements shall be completed prior to any development activity or the recording of a plat, or issuance of a business license, or the applicant shall post a one hundred percent (100%) improvement completion assurance acceptable to the city.
C. All required private site development improvements shall be completed prior to recording of a plat, unless the applicant has entered into a development improvement agreement under terms acceptable to the city and is current in its obligations under that agreement.
D. An improvement completion assurance is required. The two (2) acceptable forms of completion assurance are cash, or an irrevocable letter of credit. Partial release of an improvement completion assurance is permitted only at the following intervals: upon proof by applicant of fifty percent (50%) of improvement completion, and seventy percent (70%) of improvement completion. Final release of the improvement completion assurance shall occur only upon proof by applicant of one hundred percent (100%) of construction completion. The city shall consider applicant’s proof of construction completion using objective inspection standards by qualified city employees or appointees knowledgeable in landscaping, public infrastructure improvements, or private site development improvements, as applicable.
E. Upon the city’s acceptance of public infrastructure improvements, the applicant shall execute an improvement warranty for the improvement warranty period. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-1-13: LAND USE AUTHORITY:
Unless otherwise provided herein, the community development director or designee is the land use authority for land use decisions required in this title. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-1-14: PENALTY:
Any firm, corporation, person or persons, or any action on behalf of such person, persons, firms or corporations, responsible for violating, causing, permitting, or maintaining a violation of this title is guilty of a class C misdemeanor unless otherwise stated in this title. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

CHAPTER 2 DEFINITIONS


10-2-1:      Definitions

10-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms are defined as follows. Terms used in the present tense include the future tense. Terms defined in the singular number include the plural and the plural the singular. Terms that have not been defined herein but are separately defined in the building code shall be construed as defined therein:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure that is incidental and subordinate to a main building located on the same lot or parcel, contains no living space, and is not attached to a main building.
ACCESSORY USE: An allowed land use that is subordinate and incidental to the main use on the lot or parcel.
ADJACENT: Property that is joined, touches, or is directly across a public street, private street, access easement, or alley from the subject property, except a freeway, or a constructed or transportation master planned arterial (eighty-foot (80') right-of-way) street or greater.
ADJOINING PROPERTY OWNERS: All owners within one hundred fifty feet (150') in each direction from the lot or parcel, as determined from the tax records of the county.
AGRICULTURE: Tilling soil or raising and harvesting crops.
ALLEY: A private paved secondary access constructed to city standards.
ALLOWED USE: A use of land that:
    A. Is specifically permitted, or permitted with standards, in the zone;
    B. Has received a conditional use permit; or
    C. Is a valid nonconforming use.
APIARY: A property where one (1) or more bee colonies is kept.
APPEAL AUTHORITY: The administrative hearing officer is the appeal authority unless otherwise specified herein.
ARTS DISTRICT: A defined neighborhood or part of the city which the city council has determined to be appropriate for arts district distinction. Such areas or sites do not have to be contiguous in order to constitute a district.
ATTACHED (STRUCTURE): Sharing a minimum of one (1) common wall and integrated roof, or having portions of a structure, connected with a minimum roof width of twelve feet (12') with the design and materials being consistent.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY: A required assembly that prevents the flow of water from the water distribution system back to the culinary water source.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building that is below the first floor.
BED AND BREAKFAST: A building in which a full-time, live-in caretaker resides and serves one (1) or more meals per day, and provides overnight accommodations for short-term guests.
BEE: The common honey bee (Apis millifera), or the mason bee (Osmia lignaria). “Bee” does not include the African honey bee (Apis mellifera scutellate), or any hybrid thereof.
BEE COLONY: All bees in a hive, including queens, workers, or drones.
BEEKEEPER: A person who owns or maintains one (1) or more colonies of bees on their own private property.
BODY PIERCING: Creating a new body opening for jewelry or decoration. This term specifically excludes ear piercing.
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, for the occupancy or enclosure of persons, animals or chattel.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the average of the midpoint of the two (2) tallest elevations, measured from the adjacent grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, the deck line of a mansard roof, or the midpoint between ridge and eaves of a sloped roof, as depicted below:Flat Roof (One (1) Story)
[IMAGE: <10-2-1_001.png>]Flat Roof (Two (2) Story)
[IMAGE: <10-2-1_002.png>]Sloped Roof (One (1) Story)
[IMAGE: <10-2-1_003.png>]Sloped Roof (Two (2) Story)
(H1 + H2) / 2 = Building Height
[IMAGE: <10-2-1_004.png>]
BULK PLANT: Wholesale for Class 1 and 2 flammable or combustible liquids or gases.
CARGO CONTAINER: Any portable, reusable container generally referred to as a sea cargo container, cargo container or shipping container made as a prefabricated metal structure and primarily designed or used for transporting freight by commercial transportation on ships, by rail or mounted on a chassis for movement by a tractor trailer and built in accordance with the U.S. Department of Transportation Standards. “Cargo container” does not include semitrailers as defined in Section 41-6a-102 Utah Code Annotated and must be free from damage, rust, and exposed metal, painted in one (1) solid muted earth tone color or similar color as a main structure, with no writing, signs, numbers or logos.
CARPORT: A private garage not completely enclosed by walls and a door.
CASITA: See “Guesthouse.”
CERTIFIED WATER AUDITOR: A person who has been certified by the city of St. George, the Washington County Water Conservancy District, the Irrigation Association, or other city-approved certification program.
CHILD CARE: The provision, day or night, of supplemental parental care, instruction and supervision for a nonrelated child or children, on a regular basis, and for less than twenty-four (24) hours a day. The term does not include babysitting services on a casual, nonrecurring nature or in the child’s home, nor cooperative, reciprocate child care by a group of parents in their respective domiciles.
    A. Child Care, In-Home Babysitting: The provision of child care for four (4) or fewer children within a dwelling;
    B. Child Care, Family: The provision of child care for up to ten (10) children, including the provider’s children who are under the age of eighteen (18), within the provider’s primary residence.
CHILD CARE CENTER: A structure or building, including outside play areas, used for the provision of child care for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day.
CHURCH: See “Religious Facility.”
CITY FACILITY: Land, right-of-way, easement, structure or appurtenances owned by the city or by an agency or corporation wholly controlled by the city.
COMMERCIAL CENTER: A commonly owned or developed project that shares parking, internal pedestrian circulation and public street access with a variety of commercial uses.
COMMON AREA: Land within a development not individually owned or dedicated for public use, which is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents of the development. May include recreation structures, landscaping, and improvements.
COMMON AREA, LIMITED: Land within a development not individually owned or dedicated for public use, which is designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of a specified residence of the development. May include driveways, landscaping, and improvements.
CONDITIONAL USE: A land use that, because of its unique characteristics or potential impact on the municipality, surrounding neighbors, or adjacent land uses, may not be compatible in some areas or may be compatible only if certain conditions are required that mitigate or eliminate detrimental impacts.
CONDOMINIUM OR TOWNHOUSE PROJECT: A development designed and approved for separate ownership of a single unit in a multiple-family development, together with an undivided interest in the common area and facilities.
CONSTRUCTION DRAWINGS: All plans, specifications, reports and studies necessary to meet the requirements of this title and other ordinances of the city of St. George in the approval process of a subdivision, and to obtain a building permit. They include, but are not limited to, floor plans, elevations, site plans, utilities and utility design, roadways, drainage, and other infrastructure and improvements.
COPING: A protective cap, top, or cover of a wall, parapet, or pilaster; often of stone, terra cotta, concrete, metal, or wood.
CREMATORIUM: A business, properly licensed by the state, that is devoted to cremation and/or embalming of the dead, but does not include facilities for burial, internment, body viewing, or funeral services.
CUESTA: A landform that has a steep ascent in one direction and a gentle descent in the opposite direction as designated on the ridgeline map. The steep slope is the cuesta face, an erosion escarpment, and the gentle one is the back slope of the cuesta.
CUESTA CREST: The ridgeline formed by the highest elevations of a cuesta.
CUT: Land surface that is reshaped by man through the removal of soil, rock or other materials.
DAIRY: The processing of milk or milk products (excludes on-site livestock).
DARK SKY: A nighttime sky that is substantially free of interference from artificial light.
DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY: 
    A. Any construction or expansion of a building or structure;
    B. Any change in use of a building or structure that creates additional demand and need for public facilities;
    C. Any change in the use of land that creates additional demand and need for public facilities; or
    D. Grading, filling, or clearing of land.
DISTRIBUTION UNIFORMITY: The measure of the uniformity of irrigation water over an area.
DRIP EMITTER: A drip irrigation fitting that delivers water slowly at the root zone of the plant, usually measured in gallons per hour.
DROUGHT TOLERANT PLANT: A plant that can survive without irrigation for an extended period once established, although supplemental water may be desirable during drought periods for improved appearance and disease resistance.
DWELLING: Any structure, manufactured home, mobile home, or portion thereof that is used for residential purposes, excluding short-term residential rental use.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A building arranged or designed to be separately occupied by more than two (2) dwelling units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building designed as a single dwelling unit.
DWELLING, TWO (2) FAMILY  : A building designed as two (2) dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT: A building, or separate portion thereof, with sleeping and kitchen facilities for the exclusive use of one (1) family.
DWELLING UNIT, ACCESSORY  : A subordinate residential living area created within a single-family dwelling or a detached building on the same residential lot as a single-family dwelling which meets the requirements of chapter 17A of this title.
ELEVATED OPEN FRONT PORCH: An open porch that is at least eight feet (8') wide, four feet (4') deep and extends to at least fifty percent (50%) of the front façade facing any street, is covered by a roof that is integrated into and part of the roof or roof extension and is of the same design and material as the roof, and the floor of which is elevated at least eighteen inches (18") above the sidewalk grade.
EROSION HAZARD: The hazard associated with the natural process, either sudden or gradual, which moves a river channel.
EROSION HAZARD AREA: An area designated by the erosion hazard boundary maps.
EROSION HAZARD BOUNDARY MAPS: Maps designating the boundary of the erosion hazard area.
FAMILY: 
    A. An individual; or
    B. The immediate family members and up to one (1) additional unrelated person living with them as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit; or
    C. A group of not more than four (4) persons, who need not be immediate family members, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit; or
    D. Two (2) unrelated persons and any children related to either of them living together as a single housekeeping unit.
FENCE: A barrier to limit visibility, provide privacy, define a property line, or prevent ingress or egress, made out of materials such as concrete or masonry block, wood, metal, stone, chain link or vegetation. A retaining wall is not a fence.
FENCE HEIGHT: Fence height is measured vertically, from finished grade to the shortest side of the fence.
FILL: The deposit of soil, rock or other materials placed by man.
FINANCIAL, MEDICAL AND PROFESSIONAL OFFICE: Financial institutions, medical and professional offices/services, limited to daytime hours of operation, and excludes a hospital, payday loan and sexually oriented business.
FIRST FLOOR: The lowest above-grade story in a structure; provided, the floor level is not more than four feet (4') below final grade for more than fifty percent (50%) of the perimeter. It can include habitable or uninhabitable floor area, as depicted below:
[IMAGE: <10-2-1_005.jpg>]
FIXED SPRAY: The pattern of spray from an irrigation head nozzle, which is fixed and nonchanging.
FLOOD, BASE: The flood event with a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): The official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the flood boundary floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
    A. The overflow of inland waters; and/or
    B. The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD, SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: Land subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
FLOODLIGHT: A fixture or lamp designed to “flood” an area with light. A specific form of lamp or fixture designed to direct its output in a specific direction. Such lamps are often designated by the manufacturer and are commonly used for outdoor lighting.
FLOODPLAIN: Land that:
    A. Is within the one hundred (100) year floodplain designated by FEMA; or
    B. Has not been studied or designated by FEMA but presents a likelihood of experiencing chronic flooding or a catastrophic flood event, because the land has characteristics that are similar to those of a one hundred (100) year floodplain designated by FEMA.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot (1').
FLOOR AREA: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of each story of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of party walls. Basement floors, interior balconies and mezzanines, elevator shafts, stairwells and enclosed porches are included. Garage area is not included.
FLOW RATE: The rate at which water flows through pipes and valves (gallons per minute or cubic feet per second).
FOOT-CANDLE: A unit of measure of the intensity of light falling on a surface, equal to one (1) lumen per square foot.
FRUIT STAND: A structure that is no more than one thousand (1,000) square feet and is used exclusively for sale during the harvest season of seasonal crops, seedling plants, or garden, farm, or other agricultural produce if the seasonal crops are, seedling plants are, or garden, farm, or other agricultural produce is sold by:
    A. The producer of the seasonal crops, seedling plants, or garden, farm, or other agricultural produce;
    B. An employee of the producer; or
    C. A member of the immediate family of the producer.
FULLY SHIELDED: An outdoor light fixture constructed so in its installed position, all of the light emitted by the fixture is projected below the horizontal plane passing through the lowest light-emitting part of the fixture.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building or portion thereof, other than a private garage, designed or used for servicing, repairing, equipping, hiring, selling or storing motor driven vehicles.
GEOLOGIC OR FLOOD HAZARD AREAS: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations located within the area of special flood or geologic hazard.
GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEER: A person with a four (4) year degree in civil engineering or engineering geology from an accredited university who, through training and experience, is able to assure that geological factors affecting engineering works are recognized, adequately interpreted and presented for use in engineering practice and for the protection of the public.
GLARE: Light, originating from a direct artificial light source, or any light reflected off a reflective surface, that causes visual discomfort or reduced visibility.
GRADE: 
    A. For buildings adjoining one (1) street only, the elevation of the sidewalk at the center of that wall adjoining the street;
    B. For buildings adjoining more than one (1) street, the average of the elevations of the sidewalks at the centers of all walls adjoining the street;
    C. For buildings having no wall adjoining the street, the average level of the ground (finished surface) adjacent to the exterior walls of the building. All walls approximately parallel to and not more than five feet (5') from a street line are to be considered as adjoining a street.
GRADE, ADJACENT: A reference plane representing the average of finished ground level adjoining the building at exterior walls. Where the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference grade shall be established by the lowest points within the area between the building and the lot line or, where the lot line is more than six feet (6') from the building, between the building and a point six feet (6') from the building.
[IMAGE: <10-2-1_006.png>]
GROUND COVER: Plant material planted in such a way as to form a continuous cover over the ground that can be maintained at a height not more than twelve inches (12").
GUESTHOUSE (CASITA): A detached living quarters located within a building that is subordinate to and located on the same lot or parcel as the primary dwelling. A guesthouse may also be referred to as a “casita”.
HARDSCAPE: Elements of the landscape constructed from nonliving materials such as concrete, boulders, brick, blacktop and lumber. Includes patios, decks and paths but does not include driveways and sidewalks.
HILLSIDE REVIEW BOARD: The city of St. George hillside review board created under this title.
HIVE: An artificial or natural receptacle used to house bees.
HOLIDAY OR FESTIVE LIGHTING: Any low wattage, seasonal decorative outdoor lighting.
HOME OCCUPATION: A business, transaction or activity conducted entirely within a dwelling, and exclusively by persons residing within the dwelling in a manner that is indiscernible from, and clearly incidental and secondary to, the residential use, without altering the dwelling site or structure, the character of the neighborhood, the demand for public facilities or services, or creating an unsafe condition or short term residential rental.
HOUSEHOLD PETS: Animals ordinarily permitted in the house and kept for personal use and not for commercial purposes, not including goats or pigs.
HYDRO ZONE: The grouping of plants with similar water requirements so each zone can be irrigated with a separate irrigation valve.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY: Consists of spouse, parent, children, grandparent or grandchildren and the spouse’s parent, children, grandparent or grandchildren.
IMPROVEMENT COMPLETION ASSURANCE: Means cash, or an irrevocable letter of credit under terms acceptable to the city, to guaranty the proper completion of landscaping or an infrastructure improvement required as a condition precedent to:
    A. Recording a subdivision plat; or
    B. Development of any property or project.
IMPROVEMENT WARRANTY: An applicant’s unconditional warranty that the applicant’s installed and accepted landscaping or infrastructure improvement:
    A. Complies with the municipality’s written standards for design, materials, and workmanship; and
    B. Will not fail in any material respect, as a result of poor workmanship or materials, within the improvement warranty period.
IMPROVEMENT WARRANTY PERIOD: A period:
    A. No later than one (1) year after acceptance of required landscaping; or
    B. No later than one (1) year after acceptance of required infrastructure, unless the city:
        1. Determines for good cause that a one (1) year period would be inadequate to protect the public health, safety, and welfare; and
        2. Has substantial evidence, on record:
            (a) Of prior poor performance by the applicant; or
            (b) That the area upon which the infrastructure will be constructed contains suspect soil, and the municipality has not otherwise required the applicant to mitigate the suspect soil.
INFILTRATION RATE: The rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a depth of water per unit of time (inches per hour).
INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENT: Permanent infrastructure that an applicant must install:
    A. Pursuant to published installation and inspection specifications for public improvements; and
    B. As a condition of:
        1. Recording a subdivision plat; or
        2. Development of any property or project.
IRRIGATION CONTRACTOR (IC): A person who has been certified by a city-approved certification program to install irrigation systems, meets state and local license, insurance and bonding requirements, and is able to show proof of such upon demand. An irrigation contractor installs, repairs, designs and maintains irrigation systems.
IRRIGATION DESIGNER: A landscape architect or a person who has been certified by the Irrigation Association (IA), the city of St. George or other city-approved certification programs to prepare irrigation system designs.
IRRIGATION PLAN: A plan that shows the components of the irrigation system with water meter size, backflow prevention, precipitation rates, flow rate and operating pressure for each irrigation circuit, together with identification of all irrigation equipment.
IRRIGATION RUNOFF: Irrigation water that is not absorbed by the soil or landscape area to which it is applied and which flows onto other areas.
JOINT UTILITY COMMITTEE (JUC): A committee comprised of city staff and representatives from local utility service providers which meets regularly to discuss the engineering, design, placement, and other issues related to utility improvements within the city.
LAND USE APPLICANT: The property owner, or the property owner’s designee, who submits a land use application regarding the property owner’s land.
LAND USE APPLICATION: 
    A. Means an application submitted by a land use applicant to obtain a land use decision; and
    B. Does not mean an application to enact, amend, or repeal a land use regulation.
LAND USE AUTHORITY: Unless otherwise provided herein, the community development director or designee is the land use authority for land use decisions required in this title.
LAND USE DECISION: The final action of a land use authority or appeal authority regarding:
    A. A land use permit;
    B. A land use application; or
    C. The enforcement of a land use regulation, land use permit, or development agreement.
LAND USE PERMIT: A permit issued by a land use authority.
LAND USE REGULATION: 
    A. An ordinance, law, code, map, resolution, specification, fee, or rule that governs the use or development of land; and
    B. Does not include:
        1. The general plan;
        2. A land use decision of the city council, even if the decision is expressed in a resolution or ordinance; or
        3. A temporary revision to an engineering specification that does not materially:
            (a) Increase a land use applicant’s cost of development compared to the existing specification; or
            (b) Impact a land use applicant’s use of land.
LANDMARK BUILDING OR SITE: Any site (including significant trees or other plant life located thereon) or structure of particular historic or aesthetic significance to the city or state. Such significance shall exist where cultural, political, spiritual, economic, social or artistic history of the community is reflected or exemplified by the site or structure, or if it is identified with historic personages or with important events, or if the structure or site embodies distinguishing characteristics of an architectural specimen, inherently valuable for a representation of a period, style or method of construction.
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT: A person who is licensed to practice landscape architecture by the state of Utah.
LANDSCAPE OR LANDSCAPING: Any combination of living plants, berms, trees, shrubs, vines, ground covers, flowers, grass and other plants that are generally not considered to be weeds or noxious plants; natural features such as rock, stone, or wood chips; nonvegetative permeable ground cover; and structural features, including, but not limited to, fountains, reflecting pools, outdoor artwork, screen walls, fences or benches that create an attractive and pleasing environment.
LANDSCAPE OR LANDSCAPING MAINTENANCE: Maintaining or keeping any landscaping or any area required to be landscaped:
    A. In a live and thriving condition, with consideration for normal growth and water needs; and
    B. Fertilized, mowed, trimmed, edged, mulched and free from weeds, dead plants, litter, refuse, or debris in compliance with regionally accepted horticultural practice.
LANDSCAPE PLAN: A plan that clearly and accurately identifies the location and species of new and existing trees, shrubs, ground covers, and other plants on a site, and any other landscape element, and includes an irrigation plan.
LANDSCAPED AREA: An entire parcel of real property less the building footprint, driveways, nonirrigated portions of parking lots, hardscape (such as decks and patios), and other nonporous areas. Water features are included in the calculation of the landscaped area.
LIGHT, DIRECT ARTIFICIAL: “Direct artificial light” means any light cast directly to an illuminated area from an artificial light source, as defined by this section, or from any surface on or within the artificial light source’s luminaire that is intended to reflect, refract, or diffuse light from the artificial light source. This does not include light reflected, refracted, or diffused from other surfaces such as nonreflective surfaces on or within the luminaire, or the ground or adjacent walls; provided, those surfaces are not primarily intended for the reflection, refraction, or diffusion of the artificial light source.
LIGHT POLLUTION: Any artificial light that is emitted either directly or indirectly by reflection that alters the appearance of the nighttime sky; interferes with astronomical observations; or interferes with the natural functioning of native wildlife.
LIGHT SOURCE, ARTIFICIAL: “Artificial light source” means the part of a lighting device that produces light.
LIGHT TRESPASS: The projection of any light from a direct artificial light outside the lot or parcel boundary or street right-of-way where the artificial light source is located, unless the projection outside the lot or parcel boundary or street right-of-way is lawfully permitted.
LIGHTING, OUTDOOR: “Outdoor lighting” means the illumination of an outdoor area or object by any indoor or outdoor artificial light source.
LIVESTOCK: Large domesticated animals, which are not ordinarily permitted in the house, such as horses, cattle, goats, sheep, llamas, or ostriches, but not hogs or pigs.
LIVESTOCK FEED YARD: A commercial operation to fatten or maintain livestock prior to their shipment to a stockyard for sale or rendering.
LOT: A tract of land, regardless of any label, that is created by and shown on a subdivision plat that has been recorded in the office of the county recorder. The terms “lot” and “parcel” are used throughout this title interchangeably.
LOT, CORNER: A lot having frontage on two (2) or more improved public or private streets. If common area or limited common area is located between the lot line and right-of-way, it is considered a corner lot.
LOT DEPTH: The minimum distance measured from the front property line to the rear property line of the same lot.
LOT LINE: Any line defining the boundaries of a lot.
LOT WIDTH: The distance between the side lot lines measured at the front yard setback.
LOW FUEL VOLUME AND HIGH-WATER CONTENT PLANTS: Plants that do not produce excessive amounts of leaves and branches that will fuel fires.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this title.
LUMEN: Unit of luminous flux; used to measure the amount of light emitted by lamps.
MANUFACTURING, CUSTOM: An establishment primarily engaged in the on-site production of goods by hand manufacturing which involves only the use of hand tools or domestic mechanical equipment not exceeding two (2) horsepower or a single kiln not exceeding eight (8) kilowatts, and the incidental direct sale to customers of only those goods produced on site. Typical uses include ceramic studios, candle making shops or custom jewelry manufacturing.
MANUFACTURING, HEAVY: The converting of raw or partially processed materials into a product used for further processing or distribution. Examples of heavy manufacturing include lumber and paper mills, sewage treatment plants, stone, clay, glass product manufacturing, asphalt and concrete batch plants, and similar operations. These uses may be conducted partially or wholly outdoors and usually create noxious byproducts such as dust, fumes, hazardous waste products, noise, vibration, and glare.
MANUFACTURING, LIGHT: An establishment engaged in the manufacture, predominantly from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, and packaging of such products, and incidental storage, sales, and distribution of such products, but excluding basic industrial processing.
MULCH: Any organic material such as leaves, bark, wood chips, straw, or inorganic material such as crushed stone or gravel, or other materials left loose and applied to the soil surface for the beneficial purpose of controlling weeds and conserving soil moisture.
NATURAL WATERWAYS: The natural drainage channel along rivers, streams, creeks, springs, gullies or washes.
NONCOMPLYING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: A structure that:
    A. Legally existed before its current land use designation; and
    B. Because of one (1) or more subsequent land use ordinance changes, does not conform to the setback, height restrictions, or other regulations, excluding those regulations which govern the use of land.
NONCONFORMING USE: A use of land that:
    A. Legally existed before its current land use designation;
    B. Has been maintained continuously since the land use ordinance that created the nonconformity was enacted; and
    C. Because of one (1) or more land use ordinance changes, does not conform to the regulations that currently govern the use of the land.
NURSING HOME: An institution providing long-term residence and care for the aged or infirm.
PARCEL: Any real property with a separate tax identification number that is not a lot created by and shown on a subdivision plat recorded in the office of the county recorder. The terms “lot” and “parcel” are used throughout this title interchangeably.
PARCEL, CORNER: A parcel having frontage on two (2) or more improved public or private streets.
PARCEL DEPTH: The minimum distance measured from the front property line to the rear property line of the same parcel.
PARCEL LINE: Any line defining the boundaries of a parcel.
PARCEL WIDTH: The distance between the side parcel lines measured at the front yard setback.
PARKING LOT: An area, other than a street, used for parking, whether or not required by ordinance.
PARKING SPACE: Space within a building, lot or parking lot designated for parking or storing one (1) automobile.
PERMANENT COSMETICS: A mark or design made on or under the skin by a process of pricking or ingraining an indelible pigment, dye, or ink in the skin for masking discolorations or cosmetically enhancing facial features which shall follow the natural line of the feature and shall be limited to eyeliner, eyebrows, lip coloring, and medical reconstruction procedures only.
PERMANENT COSMETICS ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment engaging in permanent cosmetics as a secondary use to an establishment employing cosmetologist/barber(s), aesthetician(s), electrologist(s), or nail technician(s) licensed by the state under UCA Chapter 58-11a, excluding tattoo establishments and home occupations.
PERSONAL CARE SERVICE: An establishment primarily engaged in the provision of frequently recurring needed services of a personal nature. Typical uses include but are not limited to beauty and barber shops, massage therapy, custom tailoring and seamstress shops, esthetician, portrait studios, shoe repair shops, and tanning and nail salons.
PERSONAL INSTRUCTION SERVICE: An establishment primarily engaged in the provision of informational, instructional, personal improvement and similar services of a nonprofessional nature. Typical uses include but are not limited to art and music schools, driving and computer instruction, handicraft or hobby instruction, health and fitness studios.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A development that is the subject of a zone-change application, submitted to the planning commission and city council, and, when required, presented with a conceptual plan showing the form, manner, layout and other parameters of the planned development prior to the preparation of a preliminary plat.
PLAT, FINAL: A plat prepared in accordance with the provisions of this title, which plat is designed to be placed on record in the office of the Washington County recorder.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY: A plat prepared in accordance with the provisions of this title which plat, and accompanying plans, reports, diagrams and text, is made for the purpose of showing the design of a proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in and around it. The preliminary plat is essentially a study plan which, when approved, will serve as a basis for the preparation of the construction drawings and final plat.
PLATEAU: A flat or predominantly flat area of land, which is raised sharply above adjacent land on at least one (1) side as designated on the ridgeline map.
PLATEAU EDGE: The junction of the plateau and the sharp vertical rise that separates the plateau from lower adjacent land.
PRIVATE SITE DEVELOPMENT IMPROVEMENT: A required site feature that an applicant must install:
    A. As a condition of development of a commercial, industrial, mixed-use, condominium, or multifamily project; and
    B. That is not an infrastructure improvement.
QUALIFYING STUDENT: A student enrolled in spring or fall classes at Dixie State University in classes awarded eight (8) credits or more for each semester.
RECEIVING AREA: An area within a proposed development that is designated to accept density transferred from a designated sending area within the proposed development.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle that is:
    A. Built on a single chassis;
    B. Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
    C. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
    D. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
RELIGIOUS FACILITY: A meetinghouse, church, temple, mosque, synagogue or other permanent structure, used primarily for regular religious worship.
RESIDENTIAL CENTRAL CITY AREA (RCC): The area located between 100 South to 700 South, and between 700 East to Bluff Street or bounded by Bluff Street on the west, Diagonal Street to Main Street and then to St. George Boulevard on the north, and by Interstate 15 on the south and east.
RESIDENTIAL TREATMENT FACILITY: A residence where more than one (1) person with a disability resides and the residence is licensed with the State Department of Human Services or the Department of Health as a residential facility to care for the disabled.
RESTAURANT/CAFÉ: Preparation and sale of food and drink for on-premises public consumption.
RETAINING WALL: Includes any structure designed to resist the lateral displacement of soil or other materials, not including rockery walls. An example includes block walls, concrete walls, or a segmented wall designed and approved as a retaining wall.
RETAINING WALL HEIGHT: Retaining walls shall be measured from the top of the exposed face to finish grade.
RIDGELINE: The junction of a rising slope and a descending slope, including a cuesta crest and a plateau edge.
ROCK: A natural solid mineral matter occurring in large masses or fragments.
ROCKERY WALL: A system of stacked rocks constructed to retain soil or rock and include rock-faced slopes.
SENDING AREA: An area within a proposed development that is designated to transfer density to a designated receiving area within the proposed development.
SETBACK: The minimum distance to a structure from the property lines.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: See section 3-8-2.
SHORT-TERM GUEST: Guests whose duration of visit is twenty-nine (29) consecutive calendar days or less.
SHORT-TERM RESIDENTIAL RENTAL: Property that is occupied, possessed or used by any person or entity for transient lodging where the term of occupancy, possession, or use of the property by the person or entity is offered for twenty-nine (29) consecutive calendar days or less, for direct or indirect compensation or other consideration.
SIGNIFICANT HISTORIC BUILDING: A building or structure that is either:
    A. A designated landmark site as approved by the city council; or
    B. A residential or commercial building that meets the requirements of section 10-13E-4A2; or
    C. Any building which meets the criteria for the National Register of Historic Places.
SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS: Minimum lot areas, yard setbacks, exceptions, building height, lot coverage, landscaping, and open space for each zone.
SLOPE: A vertical rise in feet measured over a horizontal distance, expressed as a percentage, measured generally at right angles to contour lines.
SMALL ANIMAL: An animal that, on average, will reach a mature weight of no more than fifteen (15) pounds and does not include rabbits or urban hens.
SPRINKLER, SPRAY: An irrigation head that sprays water through a nozzle.
SPRINKLER, STREAM: An irrigation head that projects water through a gear rotor in single or multiple streams.
STABLE, PRIVATE: A detached building designed and used to care for livestock owned by the residents and not kept for commercial purposes.
STABLE, PUBLIC: A public building designed and used to care for livestock.
STATE AND LOCAL CONSTRUCTION CODES: Regulations adopted in or pursuant to the State Construction and Fire Codes Act, UCA Title 15A.
STORAGE RENTAL UNITS: (Also known as MINISTORAGE or SELF-STORAGE): A building separated into individual spaces for customer storage and retrieval of personal effects, household goods, furniture or archived materials.
STORY: That portion of a building between the upper surface of a floor and the upper surface of the next floor or roof above.
STREET, PRIVATE: A private thoroughfare that affords access to property consistent with city standards.
STREET, PUBLIC: A public thoroughfare that affords principal means of access to abutting property.
STREET SIDE: An area located between the side of a structure and a public or private street, extending from the front yard setback to the rear yard setback. See also LOT, CORNER, and PARCEL.
STREET TREE: Includes all trees located within the public right-of-way of all streets within the city.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change to the support of a structure, such as a bearing wall, column, beam truss or girder.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected that is attached, on, or below the ground in any manner.
SUBDIVIDER: Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, trust, or other legal entity, having legal title to real property for which a subdivision is proposed. A “subdivider” includes an authorized representative of the subdivider who is authorized to represent the subdivider for the purpose of effecting the subdivision of real property, having legal title to real property for which a subdivision is proposed.
SUBDIVIDER’S ENGINEER: A civil engineer licensed in the state of Utah engaged by the subdivider to prepare a conceptual planned development, a preliminary plat, construction drawings, a final plat, or to compile such data as may be required in connection therewith or in accordance with the provisions of this title.
TABLELAND: Land where the slope in any direction is less than fifteen percent (15%).
TATTOO ESTABLISHMENT: Any location, place, area, structure, or business used for the practice of tattooing or the instruction of tattooing, excluding permanent cosmetics establishments.
TURF: A surface layer of mowed grass.
UNDISTURBED: An area that remains in a natural, pristine condition and not subject to grading, excavation, or other similar disturbance.
UNPAVED SURFACE: A parcel of land or portion thereof that is not paved with an approved surfacing material such as asphalt or concrete.
URBAN HENS AND RABBITS: Keeping of chickens (hens only) and rabbits, as an accessory use to a single-family dwelling, to produce food for the family residing on the subject property.
VALVE: A device used to control the flow of water in an irrigation system.
VEHICLE: Any form of motorized transport or any trailer.
VESSEL: Every type of watercraft, other than a seaplane on the water, used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water.
WATER PERFORMANCE AUDIT: A water performance audit is an on-site survey and measurement of irrigation equipment and management efficiency performed by a certified water auditor.
YARD, FRONT: On a lot or parcel with a building, the area that includes the full width of the lot or parcel from the main building to any lot line abutting a street, or private right of access. On a vacant lot or parcel, the area that includes the full width of the lot from the depth of the minimum setback to any lot line abutting any street. A corner lot or parcel has two (2) front yards.
YARD, REAR: On a lot with a building, the area that includes the full width of the lot from the rear façade of the building to the rear lot line. On a vacant lot, the area that includes the full width of the lot from the rear setback to the rear lot line.
YARD, SIDE: On a lot with a building, the areas between the side lines of the building and the side line of the lot and extending from the front yard line to the rear yard line. On a vacant lot, the areas between the front and rear setback lines, from each side yard setback line to its closest side lot line.
[IMAGE: <10-2-1_007.png>]
(Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-06-002, 6-4-2020)

CHAPTER 3 APPEALS AND VARIANCES


10-3-1:      Appeal Authorities
10-3-2:      Appeal Period
10-3-3:      Standard of Review – Appeals
10-3-4:      Standard of Review – Variance
10-3-5:      Judicial Review

10-3-1: APPEAL AUTHORITIES:
A. Land Use Appeals: Except as provided in subsections B and D of this section, the administrative hearing officer, appointed pursuant to title 1, chapter 15 of this code, is the appeal authority for challenges to all final land use authority decisions, and challenges to fees imposed hereunder. Appeals under this section shall be pursuant to title 1, chapter 15 of this code.
B. Land Use Appeal of Geologic Hazard Determinations: An applicant who has appealed a decision of the land use authority, administering or interpreting a geologic hazard regulation, may request that a panel of qualified experts serve as the appeal authority for purposes of determining the technical aspects of the appeal. Upon the applicant’s timely written request, payment of one-half (½) of the cost of the panel, the city shall assemble a panel of:
    1. One (1) expert designated by the city and unaffiliated with the project;
    2. One (1) expert designated by the applicant and unaffiliated with the project; and
    3. One (1) expert chosen jointly by the first two (2) designated experts and unaffiliated with the project.
C. Request for Variance: The appeal authority decides requests for variances. A land use applicant may request a variance by submitting the request on a form supplied by the city, and by paying any applicable fees.
D. Constitutional Takings Appeal: In order to promote the protection of private property rights, and to prevent the taking, seizure, or exaction of private property without just compensation, the city shall adhere to the following before authorizing the physical taking or exaction of private real property:
    1. Takings Review Procedure: Prior to any proposed action to physically take or exact property by the city, the city attorney should review the proposed action to determine if a constitutional taking requiring just compensation would occur under the Fifth or Fourteenth Amendments to the Constitution of the United States, under Article I, Section 22 of the Utah Constitution, or under any recent court rulings. The city attorney should determine whether the proposed action bears an essential nexus to a legitimate governmental interest, and whether the action is roughly proportionate and reasonably related to the legitimate governmental interest. The city attorney should also determine whether the action deprives the private property owner of all reasonable use of the property. Upon identifying a possible constitutional taking, the city attorney should, in a confidential, privileged, and protected writing, inform the mayor, city council, and land use authority of the possible consequences of its proposed action. This opinion shall be advisory only. No liability shall be attributed to the city for failure to follow the recommendation of the city attorney. The guidelines in this chapter are advisory only and shall not expand nor limit the scope of the city’s liability for a constitutional taking;
    2. Appeal: Any private property owner who believes that his/her property is proposed to be taken by a final action of the land use authority may appeal the that final decision to the appeal authority within thirty (30) days after the written decision is made. The appeal must be filed in writing with the city recorder. The appeal authority shall have fourteen (14) days to hear and decide the appeal after it is filed. The appeal authority can affirm or reverse the decision of the land use authority. The appeal authority, with advice from the city attorney, shall review the appeal pursuant to subsection D1 of this section. The decision of the appeal authority shall be in writing with copies given to the appellant, mayor, city council, and the land use authority. Failure to appeal does not constitute a failure to exhaust available administrative remedies, or as a bar to bringing legal action. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-3-2: APPEAL PERIOD:
The land use applicant, the municipality, or any person adversely affected by the land use authority’s decision administering or interpreting this title may, within ten (10) days, file a written notice of appeal with the city recorder, alleging that there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the land use authority in the administration or interpretation of this title, and pay the appeal fee. The appeal shall be pursuant to the terms in title 1, chapter 15 of this code. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-3-3: STANDARD OF REVIEW – APPEALS:
A. The appeal authority shall ensure due process for the applicant and the adversely affected parties.
B. At all times, the appellant bears the burden of proof that the land use authority’s decision was in error.
C. The appeal authority shall review the facts “de novo,” without deference to the land use authority’s determination of factual matters.
D. The appeal authority shall:
    1. Determine the correctness of the land use authority’s interpretation and application of the plain meaning of the land use regulations; and
    2. Interpret and apply a land use regulation to favor a land use application unless the land use regulation plainly restricts the land use application.
E. Within a reasonable time, the appeal authority shall issue a written decision, supported by findings of fact and conclusions of law consistent with the standards provided herein. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-3-4: STANDARD OF REVIEW – VARIANCE:
A. Criteria: The appeal authority shall grant a variance only if:
    1. Literal enforcement of the zoning ordinance would cause an unreasonable hardship for the applicant that is not necessary to carry out the general purpose of the zoning ordinance;
    2. There are special circumstances attached to the property that do not generally apply to other properties in the same zone;
    3. Granting the variance is essential to the enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed by other properties in the same zone;
    4. The variance will not substantially affect the general plan and will not be contrary to the public interest; and
    5. The spirit of the zoning ordinance is observed and substantial justice is done.
B. Unreasonable Hardship: In determining whether enforcement of the zoning ordinance would cause unreasonable hardship under subsection A1 of this section, the appeal authority may not find an unreasonable hardship unless the alleged hardship:
    1. Is located on or associated with the property for which the variance is sought; and
    2. Comes from circumstances peculiar to the property, not from conditions that are general to the neighborhood; and
    3. Is not self-imposed or economic.
C. Special Circumstances: The appeal authority may find that special circumstances exist only if the special circumstances:
    1. Relate to the hardship complained of; and
    2. Deprive the property of privileges granted to other properties in the same zone.
D. At all times, the applicant bears the burden of proving that all of the criteria justifying a variance have been met.
E. The appeal authority may not grant a use variance.
F. For each request for variance, the appeal authority shall issue a written decision that includes the findings of fact and conclusions of law upon which the decision is based, and any conditions of approval the appeal authority determines are reasonable and necessary to mitigate the impact of granting the requested variance.
G. A variance “runs with the land.”
H. A variance shall expire if the applicant fails to obtain a building permit within one (1) year from the date of the decision or fails to complete the construction authorized by the variance according to the terms of the building permit. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-3-5: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Any person adversely affected by the appeal authority’s decision may file, within thirty (30) days of the written decision, a petition in the district court for a review of that decision. The standard for the review shall be the standard provided in Utah Code Annotated, 10-9a-801. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

CHAPTER 4 ZONES


10-4-1:      Citywide Zoning
10-4-2:      Zone Changes – Water and Utility Sources, Access Required

10-4-1: CITYWIDE ZONING:
All property within the city is subject to the city’s zoning districts. If such zoning is invalidated for any reason, no building permit, subdivision, or approval for any development activity may be applied for until the city establishes valid zoning for the property. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-4-2: ZONE CHANGES – WATER AND UTILITY SOURCES, ACCESS REQUIRED:
Zone changes shall not be approved unless the property is served by approved sources and facilities for water, power, sewer, and access to a dedicated public street. Alternatively, it is the property owner’s responsibility to construct and connect to such approved sources and facilities. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

CHAPTER 5 AGRICULTURAL ZONES (A-0.5, A-1, A-5, A-10, A-20)


10-5-1:      Allowed Uses
10-5-2:      Height Regulations
10-5-3:      Area, Width and Yard Requirements
10-5-4:      Design Criteria
10-5-5:      Yards Unobstructed – Exceptions
10-5-6:      Curb, Gutter, Sidewalk and Driveway
10-5-7:      Utility Requirements
10-5-8:      Temporary Buildings
10-5-9:      Setbacks along Streets
10-5-10:     Related Provisions

10-5-1: ALLOWED USES:
Any use not specifically permitted, permitted with standards, or conditionally permitted is prohibited. Only the following uses are allowed:
A. Uses indicated by the letter “P” below are permitted in the designated zone.
B. Uses indicated by the letters “PS” are permitted uses with required standards in this zone. Uses must comply with the standards and evaluation criteria established in chapter 17 of this title.
C. Uses indicated by the letter “C” are conditional uses in the designated zone.
+---------------+--------------------------------------+-------+-----+-----+------+------+
|                                                      | A-0.5 | A-1 | A-5 | A-10 | A-20 |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+-------+-----+-----+------+------+
| Agriculture                                          | P     | P   | P   | P    | P    |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+-------+-----+-----+------+------+
| Apiaries/beekeeping, chapter 10-17                   | PS    | PS  | PS  | PS   | PS   |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+-------+-----+-----+------+------+
| Barns and corrals for agriculture and                | P     | P   | P   | P    | P    |
| livestock – at least 100' from any dwelling          |       |     |     |      |      |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+-------+-----+-----+------+------+
| Barns and corrals for agriculture and                | P     | P   |     |      |      |
| livestock – at least 50' from any dwelling           |       |     |     |      |      |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+-------+-----+-----+------+------+
| Cemetery                                             |       |     | P   | P    | P    |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+-------+-----+-----+------+------+
| City facility, primary                               | P     | P   | P   | P    | P    |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+-------+-----+-----+------+------+
| City facility accessory uses – Accessory             | P     | P   | P   | P    | P    |
| structure and use                                    |       |     |     |      |      |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+-------+-----+-----+------+------+
| Commercial kennels – Up to 12 animals                |       |     | PS  | PS   | PS   |
| per acre – At least 100' from any dwelling           |       |     |     |      |      |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+-------+-----+-----+------+------+
| Commercial agriculture or livestock business         | P     | P   | P   | P    | P    |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+-------+-----+-----+------+------+
| Communication transmission facilities,               | PS    | PS  | PS  | PS   | PS   |
| including wireless, primary                          |       |     |     |      |      |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+-------+-----+-----+------+------+
| Communication transmission facilities,               | C     | C   | C   | C    | C    |
| including wireless, primary, height                  |       |     |     |      |      |
| over 50'                                             |       |     |     |      |      |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+-------+-----+-----+------+------+
| Greenhouse, high tower or plant nurseries            | P     | P   | P   | P    | P    |
| (no retail)                                          |       |     |     |      |      |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+-------+-----+-----+------+------+
| Livestock – Up to 12 animals per acre                | P     | P   | P   | P    | P    |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+-------+-----+-----+------+------+
| Livestock – Over 12 animals per acre                 | P     |     | P   | P    | P    |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+-------+-----+-----+------+------+
| Medical cannabis pharmacy, Utah licensed –           |       |     | P   | P    | P    |
| At least 600' from a primarily residential           |       |     |     |      |      |
| zone                                                 |       |     |     |      |      |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+-------+-----+-----+------+------+
| Medical cannabis production establishment,           |       |     |     |      | P    |
| Utah licensed:                                       |       |     |     |      |      |
|  Cultivation facility                                |       |     |     |      |      |
|  Independent testing laboratory                      |       |     |     |      |      |
|  Processing facility                                 |       |     |     |      |      |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+-------+-----+-----+------+------+
| Public utility facilities, primary                   | PS    | PS  | PS  | PS   | PS   |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+-------+-----+-----+------+------+
| Religious facility, primary                          | P     | P   | P   | P    | P    |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+-------+-----+-----+------+------+
| Residential treatment facility                       |       |     | PS  |      |      |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+-------+-----+-----+------+------+
| School, public or charter, primary                   | P     | P   | P   | P    | P    |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+-------+-----+-----+------+------+
| Single-family dwelling, primary                      |       | P   | P   | P    | P    |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+-------+-----+-----+------+------+
| Single-family | Accessory structure and use          |       | P   | P   | P    | P    |
| dwelling      |                                      |       |     |     |      |      |
| accessory     |                                      |       |     |     |      |      |
| uses:         |                                      |       |     |     |      |      |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+-------+-----+-----+------+------+
| "             | Accessory dwelling unit              |       | PS  | PS  | PS   | PS   |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+-------+-----+-----+------+------+
| "             | Child care, in-home babysitting      |       | P   | P   | P    | P    |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+-------+-----+-----+------+------+
| "             | Child care, family                   |       | P   | P   | P    | P    |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+-------+-----+-----+------+------+
| "             | Guesthouse                           |       | PS  | PS  | PS   | PS   |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+-------+-----+-----+------+------+
| "             | Home occupation                      |       | P   | P   | P    | P    |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+-------+-----+-----+------+------+
| "             | Hogs to be raised by resident        |       | PS  | PS  | PS   | PS   |
|               | for purposes of meeting requirements |       |     |     |      |      |
|               | of a youth club - maximum of         |       |     |     |      |      |
|               | 2 hogs per 37,500 sf for a           |       |     |     |      |      |
|               | maximum of 6 months                  |       |     |     |      |      |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+-------+-----+-----+------+------+
| "             | Hog pen/shelter – Up to 8' tall      |       | PS  | PS  | PS   | PS   |
|               | and 100 sf – Allowed only in         |       |     |     |      |      |
|               | rear yard at least 100' from         |       |     |     |      |      |
|               | any dwelling; required effective     |       |     |     |      |      |
|               | manure management                    |       |     |     |      |      |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+-------+-----+-----+------+------+
| "             | Small animals (not produced          |       | P   | P   | P    | P    |
|               | for food) up to 8 animals            |       |     |     |      |      |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+-------+-----+-----+------+------+
| "             | Urban hens and rabbits – Up          |       | P   | P   | P    | P    |
|               | to 6 adult hens and 4 adult          |       |     |     |      |      |
|               | rabbits per 1,000 sf of lot          |       |     |     |      |      |
|               | area – No more than 16 animals       |       |     |     |      |      |
|               | per lot, up to 10 rabbits –          |       |     |     |      |      |
|               | Up to 1 rooster per acre kept        |       |     |     |      |      |
|               | at least 50' from any residential    |       |     |     |      |      |
|               | zone                                 |       |     |     |      |      |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+-------+-----+-----+------+------+
| "             | Urban hen/rabbit coop, pen or        |       | PS  | PS  | PS   | PS   |
|               | cage – Up to 8' tall and 200         |       |     |     |      |      |
|               | sf – Allowed only in rear yard,      |       |     |     |      |      |
|               | at least 20' from lot line           |       |     |     |      |      |
|               | (unless solid perimeter fence);      |       |     |     |      |      |
|               | required effective manure management |       |     |     |      |      |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+-------+-----+-----+------+------+
(Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-06-002, 6-4-2020)

10-5-2: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No residential dwelling shall be erected to a height less than ten feet (10'), and no structure shall be greater than forty feet (40'), unless a conditional use permit is granted for a greater height. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-5-3: AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The minimum area, width and yard requirements for each zone are as indicated below:
+----------+---------------+-------------+------------------+---------+---------+
| District | Area Minimum  | Minimum Lot |        Minimum Yard Setbacks         |
|          |               |    Width    |                                      |
+----------+---------------+-------------+------------------+---------+---------+
| "        | "             | "           | Front and Street |  Side   |  Rear   |
|          |               |             |       Side       |         |         |
+----------+---------------+-------------+------------------+---------+---------+
| A-0.5    | 20,000 square | 80 feet     | 25 feet          | 10 feet | 10 feet |
|          | feet          |             |                  |         |         |
+----------+---------------+-------------+------------------+---------+---------+
| A-1      | 40,000 square | 100 feet    | 25 feet          | 10 feet | 10 feet |
|          | feet          |             |                  |         |         |
+----------+---------------+-------------+------------------+---------+---------+
| A-5      | 5 acres       | 100 feet    | 25 feet          | 25 feet | 25 feet |
+----------+---------------+-------------+------------------+---------+---------+
| A-10     | 10 acres      | 500 feet    | 25 feet          | 25 feet | 25 feet |
+----------+---------------+-------------+------------------+---------+---------+
| A-20     | 20 acres      | 500 feet    | 25 feet          | 25 feet | 25 feet |
+----------+---------------+-------------+------------------+---------+---------+
(Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-5-4: DESIGN CRITERIA:
A complete application for single-family occupancy must include a site plan, architectural plans and construction drawings of one-quarter (¼) scale, that show building materials, exterior elevations and floor plans of all proposed structures that meet the following criteria:
A. HUD Standards, Construction Codes: All development must comply with the construction codes and, as applicable, the national manufactured housing construction and safety standards and ICC guidelines for manufactured housing installations, that are capable of transferring design deadloads and live loads, and other design loads unique to local home sites, due to wind, seismic, soil and water conditions, that are imposed by or upon the structure into the underlying soil or bedrock without failure.
B. Perimeter footings at least twelve inches (12") below grade.
C. For all dwellings:
    1. Space beneath the structure must be enclosed at the perimeter of the dwelling in accordance with ICC guidelines and constructed of weather resistant materials aesthetically consistent with concrete or masonry type foundation materials.
    2. A minimum landing of thirty-six inches by thirty-six inches (36" x 36") at each exit.
    3. All manufactured home running gear, tongues, axles and wheels must be removed and stored off site or in a separately enclosed structure.
D. Exterior Materials: Each dwelling shall have exterior materials of wood, hardwood, brick, concrete, stucco, glass, metal lap, vinyl lap, tile or stone.
E. Width of Dwelling: The width of each dwelling shall not be less than twenty feet (20') at the narrowest point of its first floor, exclusive of any garage, bay window, or appendages.
F. Minimum Floor Area: Each dwelling shall have a minimum floor area, exclusive of garage and basement, of one thousand (1,000) square feet. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-5-5: YARDS UNOBSTRUCTED – EXCEPTIONS:
A. Every part of the setback area shall be open to the sky, unobstructed except for:
    1. The ordinary projections of belt courses, eaves, chimneys, flues, cantilevered balconies, decks, ornamental features, open fire escapes, or open outside stairways (in side or rear only), which project into a setback not more than four feet (4');
    2. A porte-cochere may extend from the main dwelling doorway and over a circular drive. The porte-cochere shall be open on three (3) sides and no more than thirty feet (30') wide if it projects into the front setback. Each porte-cochere shall have a fifteen-foot (15') or greater setback from the front property line;
    3. City public transit shelters, with or without public restrooms, may be located within a setback area adjacent to a public street;
    4. Patio Cover: A patio or area cover is only permitted in a rear yard and must meet the following standards:
        a. The patio or area covered shall not be enclosed on any side;
        b. No more than one-third (⅓) of the rear yard is covered;
        c. No cover shall be closer than two feet (2') to the rear and side property line.
B. Accessory Structures: 
    1. Accessory buildings shall not cover more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the rear yard;
    2. If the accessory building is located in the side yard portion of the rear yard, the structure must be designed and constructed to resemble the main structure by incorporating the same building materials, colors, roof pitch, and design;
    3. No portion of an accessory structure may be:
        a. Within twenty-five feet (25') of any property line except a pool may be constructed within ten feet (10') of the property line for a street side yard if a fence is provided;
        b. Within six feet (6') of any structure;
        c. Projected across a property line;
        d. Constructed in a manner that will divert storm water onto adjacent property;
        e. Located over a utility easement without prior written approval from the joint utility committee and an encroachment agreement with terms acceptable to the city attorney; or
        f. Permitted, constructed, or used prior to occupancy of the main structure;
    4. An accessory building smaller than one hundred twenty (120) square feet that does not require a building permit is allowed in the side and rear yard to property line; provided, there is an accessible walkway at least three feet (3') in width. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-5-6: CURB, GUTTER, SIDEWALK AND DRIVEWAY:
A. When Required: The installation of curb, gutter, sidewalk, and pavement of a type approved by the city is required on any future or existing street where such improvements are not already in existence, or where existing improvements are damaged or broken. Said installation shall be required prior to obtaining a certificate of occupancy unless a current improvement completion assurance has been provided.
B. Driveway Improvements: Driveways are required to be paved with an approved surface. Properties located in the A-5, A-10, and A-20 zones are required to pave twenty feet (20') from the public right-of-way. Driveways that extend beyond the twenty feet (20') may substitute pavement for six-inch (6") depth of Type II road base, and three inches (3") of gravel, with a minimum size of one-inch (1") diameter. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-5-7: UTILITY REQUIREMENTS:
In all areas of the city, connection shall be made to public water, electrical and sewer facilities, unless waived by the city engineer or designee upon a demonstration of an equivalent alternative acceptable to the city. All utilities shall be located underground, unless specifically approved by the city engineer or designee. All construction shall comply with state building codes and all city standards. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-5-8: TEMPORARY BUILDINGS:
A. Construction or Sales Office: A temporary, on-site construction or sales office that does not meet minimum construction standards may be approved by the city during the construction of permanent facilities for the permitted duration. Such temporary approval may be made for a period up to one (1) year. Extensions may be granted for good cause shown, for an additional six (6) months, up to a maximum of eighteen (18) months.
B. Cargo Containers: Cargo containers may be approved by the city for temporary use by an applicant, only when a permitted use exists or is under construction, and under the following standards:
    1. Activities with Building Permit: For on-site use only during permitted construction or renovation; provided, a building permit has been issued for construction-related activities. For the purpose of permitted cargo containers, a building permit will be considered inactive after one hundred eighty (180) days after the last inspection that shows substantial progress toward completion of the project.
    2. Activities without Building Permit: For on-site use during moving or construction activities that do not require a permit on site for thirty (30) days. One (1) thirty (30) day extension may be granted for good cause shown.
    3. Vertical stacking is prohibited.
    4. Cargo containers shall not be located in fire lanes, required parking spaces or landscaping. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-5-9: SETBACKS ALONG STREETS:
Lots that have the rear or side property lines adjacent to a public street, or common areas between property lines and a public street, shall maintain the following minimum rear or side setbacks:
A. Side and rear yard setbacks on a street side yard shall be the same as a front yard. If a six-foot (6') masonry wall exists along a side property line, side yard setbacks may be reduced to twenty feet (20'). The masonry wall along a street side yard may extend to the front plane of the residence, but shall not encroach on the twenty-five-foot (25') setback from the front property line.
B. Double-Fronting Lots in Residential Zones: Lots that have a rear property line adjacent to a public street shall maintain the following minimum rear setbacks:
    1. Double-fronting rear yard setback shall be the same as a front yard. If a six-foot (6') masonry wall exists along a rear property line, rear yard setbacks may be reduced to twenty feet (20').
    2. Setbacks for double-fronting lots shall be measured from the masonry wall. The landscape strip shall be on the street side of the wall. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-5-10: RELATED PROVISIONS:
A. Outdoor Lighting – Chapter 14 of this title.
B. Permitted with Standards and Conditional Uses – Chapter 17 of this title.
C. Walls, Fences and Hedges – Chapter 18 of this title.
D. Off-Street Parking Requirements – Chapter 19 of this title.
E. Motor Vehicle Access and Loading – Chapter 20 of this title.
F. Signs – Title 9, chapter 13 of this code. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

CHAPTER 6 GRAVEL AND GRAZING ZONE (G-G)


10-6-1:      Allowed Uses
10-6-2:      Height Regulations
10-6-3:      Area, Width, Yard and Height Requirements
10-6-4:      Design Criteria
10-6-5:      Yards Unobstructed – Exceptions
10-6-6:      Curb, Gutter and Sidewalk – When Required
10-6-7:      Utility Requirements
10-6-8:      Temporary Buildings
10-6-9:      Setbacks along Streets
10-6-10:     Related Provisions

10-6-1: ALLOWED USES:
Any use not specifically permitted, permitted with standards, or conditionally permitted is prohibited. Only the following uses are allowed:
A. Uses indicated by the letter “P” below are permitted uses in this zone.
B. Uses indicated by the letters “PS” are permitted uses with required standards in this zone. Uses must comply with the standards and evaluation criteria established in chapter 17 of this title.
C. Uses indicated by the letter “C” are conditional uses in this zone.
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------+-----+
|                                                                                 | G-G |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| Agriculture                                                                     | P   |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| Barns and corrals for agriculture and livestock – At least 100' from            | P   |
| any dwelling                                                                    |     |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| Cemetery                                                                        | P   |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| City facility, primary                                                          | P   |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| City facility accessory uses: accessory structure and use                       | P   |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| Concrete or asphalt mixing and batch plants                                     | PS  |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| Commercial agriculture or livestock business                                    | P   |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| Communication transmission facilities, including wireless, primary              | PS  |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| Communication transmission facilities, including wireless, primary,             | C   |
| height over 50'                                                                 |     |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| Greenhouse, high tower or plant nurseries (no retail)                           | P   |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| Livestock – Up to 12 animals per acre                                           | P   |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| Public utility facilities, primary                                              | PS  |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| Public utility facilities accessory uses: accessory structures                  | PS  |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| Religious facility, primary                                                     | P   |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| Sand and gravel – Extraction and crushing                                       | PS  |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| School, public or charter, primary                                              | P   |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| Single-family dwelling, primary                                                 | P   |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| Single-family | Accessory structure and use                                     | P   |
| dwelling      |                                                                 |     |
| accessory     |                                                                 |     |
| uses:         |                                                                 |     |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| "             | Child care, in-home babysitting                                 | P   |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| "             | Child care, family                                              | P   |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| "             | Guesthouse                                                      | PS  |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| "             | Home occupation                                                 | P   |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| "             | Small animals (not produced for food) up to 8 animals           | P   |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| "             | Urban hens and rabbits – Up to 6 adult hens and 4 adult rabbits | P   |
|               | per 1,000 sf of lot area – No more than 16 animals per lot,     |     |
|               | up to 10 rabbits                                                |     |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| "             | Urban hen/rabbit coop, pen or cage – Up to 8' tall and 200      | P   |
|               | sf – Allowed only in rear yard, at least 20' from lot line      |     |
|               | (unless solid perimeter fence); required effective manure       |     |
|               | management                                                      |     |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------+-----+
(Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-6-2: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No residential dwelling shall be erected to a height less than ten feet (10'), and no structure shall be greater than forty feet (40'), unless a conditional use permit is granted for a greater height. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-6-3: AREA, WIDTH, YARD AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS:
The minimum lot area, width and yard requirements are as indicated below:
+------------------+----------------------------+------------------+------+------+
| Lot Area Minimum | Minimum Lot Width/Frontage |     Minimum Yard Setbacks      |
+------------------+----------------------------+------------------+------+------+
|                  |                            | Front and Street | Side | Rear |
|                  |                            |       Side       |      |      |
+------------------+----------------------------+------------------+------+------+
| 20 acres         | 100'                       | 25'              | 20'  | 20'  |
+------------------+----------------------------+------------------+------+------+
(Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-6-4: DESIGN CRITERIA:
A complete application for single-family occupancy must include a site plan, architectural plans and construction drawings of one-quarter (¼) scale, that show building materials, exterior elevations and floor plans of all proposed structures that meet the following criteria:
A. HUD Standards, Construction Codes: All development must comply with the construction codes and, as applicable, the national manufactured housing construction and safety standards and ICC guidelines for manufactured housing installations, that are capable of transferring design deadloads and live loads, and other design loads unique to local home sites, due to wind, seismic, soil and water conditions, that are imposed by or upon the structure into the underlying soil or bedrock without failure.
B. Perimeter footings at least twelve inches (12") below grade.
C. For all dwellings:
    1. Space beneath the structure must be enclosed at the perimeter of the dwelling in accordance with ICC guidelines and constructed of weather resistant materials aesthetically consistent with concrete or masonry type foundation materials.
    2. A minimum landing of thirty-six inches by thirty-six inches (36" x 36") at each exit.
    3. All manufactured home running gear, tongues, axles and wheels must be removed and stored off-site or in a separately enclosed structure.
D. Exterior Materials: Each dwelling shall have exterior materials of wood, hardwood, brick, concrete, stucco, glass, metal lap, vinyl lap, tile or stone.
E. Width of Dwelling: The width of each dwelling shall not be less than twenty feet (20') at the narrowest point of its first floor, exclusive of any garage, bay window, or appendages.
F. Minimum Floor Area: Each dwelling shall have a minimum floor area, exclusive of garage and basement, of five hundred (500) square feet. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-6-5: YARDS UNOBSTRUCTED – EXCEPTIONS:
Every part of the setback area shall be open to the sky, unobstructed except for:
A. The ordinary projections of belt courses, eaves, chimneys, flues, cantilevered balconies, decks, ornamental features, open fire escapes, or open outside stairways which project into a setback not more than four feet (4');
B. A porte-cochere may extend from the main dwelling doorway and over a circular drive. The porte-cochere shall be open on three (3) sides and no more than thirty feet (30') wide if it projects into the front setback. Each porte-cochere shall have a fifteen-foot (15') or greater setback from the front property line;
C. City public transit shelters, with or without public restrooms, may be located within a setback area adjacent to a public street;
D. Accessory Structure: An accessory structure shall not cover more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the rear yard, and is limited as follows:
    1. If the accessory structure is located in the side yard portion of the rear yard, the structure must be designed and constructed to resemble the main structure by incorporating the same building materials, colors, roof pitch, and design;
    2. No portion of an accessory structure may be:
        a. Within twenty-five feet (25') of any street (except a pool may be constructed in a street side yard if a fence is provided);
        b. Within six feet (6') of any structure;
        c. Projected across a property line;
        d. Constructed in a manner that will divert storm water onto adjacent property;
        e. Located over a utility easement without prior written approval from the joint utility committee and an encroachment agreement with terms acceptable to the city attorney; or
        f. Permitted, constructed, or used prior to occupancy of the main structure;
    3. An accessory structure smaller than one hundred twenty (120) square feet that does not require a building permit is allowed in the side and rear yard, and no separation is required. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-6-6: CURB, GUTTER AND SIDEWALK – WHEN REQUIRED:
The installation of curb, gutter, sidewalk, and pavement of a type approved by the city is required on any future or existing street where such improvements are not already in existence, or where existing improvements are damaged or broken. Said installation may be required as a condition of obtaining a certificate of occupancy unless a current improvement completion assurance has been provided. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-6-7: UTILITY REQUIREMENTS:
In all areas of the city, connection shall be made to public water, electrical and sewer facilities, unless waived by the city engineer or designee upon demonstration of an equivalent alternative acceptable to the city. All utilities shall be located underground, unless specifically approved otherwise by the city engineer or designee, and all construction shall comply with state building codes and all city standards. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-6-8: TEMPORARY BUILDINGS:
A. Construction or Sales Office: A temporary, on-site construction or sales office that does not meet minimum construction standards may be approved by the city during the construction of permanent facilities for the permitted duration. Such temporary approval may be made for a period up to one (1) year. Extensions may be granted for good cause shown, for an additional six (6) months, up to a maximum of eighteen (18) months.
B. Cargo Containers: Cargo containers may be approved by the city for temporary use by the applicant, only when a permitted use exists or is under construction, and under the following standards:
    1. Activities with Building Permit: For on-site use only during permitted construction or renovation; provided, a building permit has been issued for construction-related activities. For the purpose of permitted cargo containers, a building permit will be considered inactive after one hundred eighty (180) days after the last inspection that shows substantial progress toward completion of the project.
    2. Activities without Building Permit: For on-site use during moving or construction activities that do not require a permit on site for thirty (30) days. One thirty (30) day extension may be granted for good cause shown.
    3. Vertical stacking is prohibited.
    4. Cargo containers shall not be located in fire lanes, required parking spaces or landscaping. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-6-9: SETBACKS ALONG STREETS:
Lots that have the rear or side property lines adjacent to a public street, or common areas between property lines and a public street, shall maintain the following minimum rear or side setbacks:
A. Side and rear yard setbacks on a street side yard shall be the same as a front yard. If a six-foot (6') masonry wall exists along a side property line, side yard setbacks may be reduced to twenty feet (20'). The masonry wall along a street side yard may extend to the front plane of the residence, but shall not encroach on the twenty-five-foot (25') setback from the front property line.
B. Double-Fronting Lots in Residential Zones: Lots that have a rear property line adjacent to a public street shall maintain the following minimum rear setbacks:
    1. Double-fronting rear yard setback shall be the same as a front yard. If a six-foot (6') masonry wall exists along a rear property line, rear yard setbacks may be reduced to twenty feet (20').
    2. Setbacks for double-fronting lots shall be measured from the masonry wall. The landscape strip shall be on the street side of the wall. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-6-10: RELATED PROVISIONS:
A. Outdoor Lighting – Chapter 14 of this title.
B. Permitted with Standards and Conditional Uses – Chapter 17 of this title.
C. Walls, Fences and Hedges – Chapter 18 of this title.
D. Off-Street Parking Requirements – Chapter 19 of this title.
E. Motor Vehicle Access and Loading – Chapter 20 of this title.
F. Signs – Title 9, chapter 13 of this code. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

CHAPTER 7 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
Residential Estate (RE), Single-Family, Multiple-Family, Mobile Home (MH), Residential Central City (RCC), and Planned Development Zones (PD-R, PD-SH and PD-TNZ)


10-7-1:      Yards Unobstructed – Exceptions
10-7-2:      Curb, Gutter and Sidewalk – When Required
10-7-3:      Utility Requirements
10-7-4:      Temporary Buildings
10-7-5:      Setbacks along Streets
10-7-6:      Design Criteria
10-7-7:      Related Provisions
7A           Residential Estate Zones
    10-7A-1:     Allowed Uses
    10-7A-2:     Height Regulations
    10-7A-3:     Lot Area, Width and Yard Requirements
7B           Single-Family Residential Zones
    10-7B-1:     Allowed Uses
    10-7B-2:     Height Regulations
    10-7B-3:     Lot Area, Width, Yard Requirements
7C           Multiple-Family Residential Zones
    10-7C-1:     Allowed Uses
    10-7C-2:     Height Regulations
    10-7C-3:     Density Regulations
    10-7C-4:     Area, Width and Yard Requirements
    10-7C-5:     Minimum Required Building Separation
    10-7C-6:     Landscaped Area and Amenity Requirements
    10-7C-7:     Access to Multiple-Family
    10-7C-8:     Miscellaneous
7D           Mobile Home Zones
    10-7D-1:     Allowed Uses
    10-7D-2:     Height Regulations
    10-7D-3:     Area, Width and Yard Requirements
    10-7D-4:     Design Criteria
    10-7D-5:     Landscaped Area and Amenity Requirements
7E           Residential Central City Zone
    10-7E-1:     Allowed Uses
    10-7E-2:     Development Standards
    10-7E-3:     Architectural Design Standards
7F           Planned Development Residential Zone
    10-7F-1:     Allowed Uses
    10-7F-2:     General Requirements
    10-7F-3:     Preliminary Plat
    10-7F-4:     PD-R Planned Residential Development Standards
    10-7F-5:     Landscaped Area and Amenity Requirements
7G           Planned Development – Student Housing Zone
    10-7G-1:     Allowed Uses
    10-7G-2:     General Requirements
    10-7G-3:     Preliminary Plat
    10-7G-4:     PD-SH Student Housing Development Standards
7H           Planned Development – Traditional Neighborhood Zone
    10-7H-1:     Zone Standards
    10-7H-2:     Administration
    10-7H-3:     Regulating Text
    10-7H-4:     Application Review Process
    10-7H-6:     Use Regulations – Land Uses

10-7-1: YARDS UNOBSTRUCTED – EXCEPTIONS:
A. Every part of the setback area shall be open to the sky, unobstructed except for:
    1. The ordinary projections of belt courses, eaves, chimneys, flues, cantilevered balconies, decks, ornamental features, open fire escapes, or open outside stairways which project into a setback not more than four feet (4');
    2. A porte-cochere may extend from the main dwelling doorway and over a circular drive. The porte-cochere shall be open on three (3) sides and no more than thirty feet (30') wide if it projects into the front setback. Each porte-cochere shall have a fifteen-foot (15') or greater setback from the front property line;
    3. City public transit shelters, with or without public restrooms, may be located within a setback area adjacent to a public street;
    4. Carport in the Side Yard: A carport open on three (3) sides may be located in an interior side yard area to within one foot (1') of the side property line, subject to the following standards and restrictions:
        a. The carport roof structure and support columns must be secured, fire rated, and built of fire-resistant materials in compliance with the International Residential Code and the International Fire Code;
        b. Not to exceed fifteen feet (15') in height;
        c. Have a six-foot (6') tall masonry wall along the side property line adjacent to the carport;
        d. Only one (1) side yard area may be covered; the other side must remain open to the sky, and on corner lots, the street side yard setback must remain open to the sky;
        e. The wall of the dwelling or any structure on the adjoining property adjacent to the carport must be a minimum of eight feet (8') from the property line; and
        f. Comply with all other codes and ordinances;
    5. A patio or area cover is only permitted in a rear yard and must meet the following standards:
        a. The patio or area covered shall only be enclosed on three (3) sides or less;
        b. No more than one-third (⅓) of the rear yard is covered;
        c. No cover shall be closer than two feet (2') to the rear and side property line.
B. Accessory Structure: A one (1) story accessory structure is limited as follows:
    1. Side Yard: 
        a. The structure must be located outside of the required setbacks;
        b. Be constructed to resemble the main structure by incorporating the same building materials, colors, roof pitch, and design;
        c. Separated at least six feet (6') from any structure; and
        d. No greater than twenty feet (20') in height;
    2. Rear Yard: Rear yard accessory structures are permitted if they meet the requirements found here:
        a. No portion of a rear yard accessory structure shall be:
            (1) Within twenty-five feet (25') of any street, except a pool may be constructed in a street side yard,
            (2) Within six feet (6') of any structure,
            (3) Projected across a property line,
            (4) Constructed in a manner that will divert storm water onto adjacent property,
            (5) Located over a utility easement without prior written approval from the joint utility committee and an encroachment indemnification agreement with terms acceptable to the city attorney, or
            (6) Greater than twenty feet (20') in height.
        b. A rear yard accessory structure may be located zero feet (0') from the rear and side property lines if no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the rear yard is used for accessory structures.
        c. Rear yard accessory structures shall not be permitted, constructed, or used prior to occupancy of the main structure.
    3. Structures with a roof connection that is less than twelve feet (12') in width, which do not match the materials and design of the main structure, will be considered an accessory structure.
    An accessory structure smaller than one hundred twenty (120) square feet, that does not require a building permit, is allowed in the side and rear yard, and no separation is required.
C. Common Area Boundaries – Yard: For a limited common area that is assigned to the specific use of a designated property, the outer boundaries of such limited common area are considered the lot line of the designated property for purposes of determining exceptions to open- and unobstructed-yard regulations. Other common areas shall not be considered within the ownership of individual properties for the purpose of determining the setback areas. Driveways to the garage of a pad or unit may be located in limited common areas. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-7-2: CURB, GUTTER AND SIDEWALK – WHEN REQUIRED:
The installation of curb, gutter, sidewalk, and pavement of a type approved by the city is required on any future or existing street where such improvements are not already in existence, or where existing improvements are damaged or broken. Said installation may be required as a condition of obtaining a certificate of occupancy unless a current improvement completion assurance has been provided. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-7-3: UTILITY REQUIREMENTS:
In all areas of the city, connection shall be made to public water, electrical and sewer facilities, unless waived by the city engineer or designee upon a demonstration of an equivalent alternative acceptable to the city. All utilities shall be located underground, unless specifically approved by the city engineer or designee. All construction shall comply with state building codes and all city standards. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-7-4: TEMPORARY BUILDINGS:
A. Construction or Sales Office: A temporary, on-site construction or sales office that does not meet minimum construction standards may be approved by the city as a temporary construction or sales office during the construction of permanent facilities for the permitted duration. Such temporary approval may be made for a period up to one (1) year. Extensions may be granted for good cause shown, for an additional six (6) months, up to a maximum of eighteen (18) months.
B. Cargo Containers: Cargo containers may be approved by the city for temporary use by the applicant, only when a permitted use exists or is under construction, and under the following standards:
    1. Activities with Building Permit: For on-site use only during permitted construction or renovation; provided, a building permit has been issued for construction-related activities. For the purpose of permitted cargo containers, a building permit will be considered inactive after one hundred eighty (180) days after the last inspection that shows substantial progress toward completion of the project.
    2. Activities without Building Permit: For on-site use during moving or construction activities that do not require a permit on site for thirty (30) days. One thirty (30) day extension may be granted for good cause shown.
    3. Vertical stacking is prohibited.
    4. Cargo containers shall not be located in fire lanes, required parking spaces or landscaping. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-7-5: SETBACKS ALONG STREETS:
A. Lots that have the rear or side property lines adjacent to a public street, or common areas between property lines and public street, shall maintain the following minimum rear or side setbacks:
    1. Side and rear yard setbacks on a street side yard shall be the same as a front yard. If a six-foot (6') masonry wall exists along a side property line, the side yard setback may be reduced to twenty feet (20'). The masonry wall along a street side yard shall extend to the front plane of the residence, but shall not encroach on the twenty-five-foot (25') setback from the front property line.
    2. Double-Fronting Lots in Residential Zones: Lots that have a rear property line adjacent to a public street shall maintain the following minimum rear setbacks:
        a. Double-fronting rear yard setback shall be the same as a front yard. If a six-foot (6') masonry wall exists along a rear property line, the rear yard setback may be reduced to twenty feet (20').
        b. Setbacks for double-fronting lots shall be measured from the masonry wall, if any. The required landscape strip shall be on the street side of the wall.
B. Less than Required Front Yard Setback: In areas where the front yard setback on adjacent property is less than twenty-five feet (25'), new construction may be constructed at a distance that is halfway between the distance of the two (2) setbacks of adjacent properties. In a case where one (1) of the adjacent setbacks is greater than twenty-five feet (25'), the setback shall be a distance that is halfway between the distance of the lesser adjacent setback and twenty-five feet (25'). In no case shall the setback be less than twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-7-6: DESIGN CRITERIA:
A complete application for single-family occupancy must include a site plan, architectural plans and construction drawings of one-quarter (¼) scale, that show building materials, exterior elevations and floor plans of all proposed structures that meet the following criteria:
A. HUD Standards, Construction Codes: All development must comply with the construction codes and, as applicable, the national manufactured housing construction and safety standards and ICC guidelines for manufactured housing installations, that are capable of transferring design deadloads and live loads, and other design loads unique to local home sites, due to wind, seismic, soil and water conditions, that are imposed by or upon the structure into the underlying soil or bedrock without failure.
B. Perimeter footings at least twelve inches (12") below grade.
C. For all dwellings:
    1. Space beneath the structure must be enclosed at the perimeter of the dwelling in accordance with ICC guidelines and constructed of weather-resistant materials aesthetically consistent with concrete or masonry type foundation materials.
    2. A minimum landing of thirty-six inches by thirty-six inches (36" x 36") at each exit.
    3. All manufactured home running gear, tongues, axles and wheels must be removed and stored off site or in a separately enclosed structure.
D. Prohibited Exterior Materials: 
    1. Plain concrete block, slump block, weeping mortar.
    2. Colored or architectural concrete block.
    3. Plywood siding.
    4. Metal siding, sheet metal.
    5. Untreated metal, or reflective roofing.
E. Width of Dwelling: The width of each dwelling shall not be less than twenty feet (20') at the narrowest point of its first floor, exclusive of any garage, bay window, or appendages.
F. Minimum Floor Area: 
    1. Each dwelling located on a lot of seven thousand (7,000) square feet or less in size shall have a minimum floor area, exclusive of garages and basement, of nine hundred (900) square feet.
    2. Each dwelling located on a lot greater than seven thousand (7,000) square feet in size shall have a minimum floor area, exclusive of garage and basement, of one thousand (1,000) square feet.
G. Any addition to the main structure shall be constructed using the same design, finishes, materials, and colors.
H. Access: A dead-end street system may not serve more than thirty (30) single-family lots or dwellings, or more than one hundred (100) multifamily dwellings. A second access, compliant with all fire and building codes and all engineering standards as currently adopted by the city, shall be provided for additional lots or dwelling units. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-06-002, 6-4-2020)

10-7-7: RELATED PROVISIONS:
A. Outdoor Lighting – Chapter 14 of this title.
B. Permitted with Standards and Conditional Uses – Chapter 17 of this title.
C. Walls, Fences and Hedges – Chapter 18 of this title.
D. Off-Street Parking Requirements – Chapter 19 of this title.
E. Motor Vehicle Access and Loading – Chapter 20 of this title.
F. Landscape Standards – Chapter 23 of this title.
G. Signs – Title 9, chapter 13 of this code. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

ARTICLE A. RESIDENTIAL ESTATE ZONES
(RE-5, RE-12.5, RE-20, RE-37.5)


10-7A-1:     Allowed Uses
10-7A-2:     Height Regulations
10-7A-3:     Lot Area, Width and Yard Requirements

10-7A-1: ALLOWED USES:
Any use not specifically permitted, permitted with standards, or conditionally permitted is prohibited. Only the following uses are allowed:
A. Uses indicated by the letter “P” below are permitted in the designated zone.
B. Uses indicated by the letters “PS” are permitted uses with required standards in this zone. Uses must comply with the standards and evaluation criteria established in chapter 17 of this title.
C. Uses indicated by the letter “C” are conditional uses in the designated zone.
+---------------+--------------------------------------+------+---------+-------+---------+
|                                                      | RE-5 | RE-12.5 | RE-20 | RE-37.5 |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+------+---------+-------+---------+
| City facility, primary                               | P    | P       | P     | P       |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+------+---------+-------+---------+
| City facility accessory uses; accessory              | P    | P       | P     | P       |
| structure and use                                    |      |         |       |         |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+------+---------+-------+---------+
| Commercial agriculture or livestock business         | P    | P       | P     | P       |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+------+---------+-------+---------+
| Communication transmission facilities,               | PS   | PS      | PS    | PS      |
| including wireless, primary                          |      |         |       |         |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+------+---------+-------+---------+
| Communication transmission facilities,               | C    | C       | C     | C       |
| including wireless, primary, height over             |      |         |       |         |
| 50'                                                  |      |         |       |         |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+------+---------+-------+---------+
| Lot size averaging                                   |      |         | P     | P       |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+------+---------+-------+---------+
| Private country club, golf course and park           | P    | P       | P     | P       |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+------+---------+-------+---------+
| Public utility facilities, primary                   | PS   | PS      | PS    | PS      |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+------+---------+-------+---------+
| Public utility facilities accessory uses;            | P    | P       | P     | P       |
| accessory structures                                 |      |         |       |         |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+------+---------+-------+---------+
| Religious facility, primary                          | P    | P       | P     | P       |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+------+---------+-------+---------+
| School, public or charter, primary                   | P    | P       | P     | P       |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+------+---------+-------+---------+
| Short term residential rental                        | PS   | PS      | PS    | PS      |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+------+---------+-------+---------+
| Single-family dwelling, primary                      | P    | P       | P     | P       |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+------+---------+-------+---------+
| Single-family | Accessory structure and use          | P    | P       | P     | P       |
| dwelling      |                                      |      |         |       |         |
| accessory     |                                      |      |         |       |         |
| uses:         |                                      |      |         |       |         |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+------+---------+-------+---------+
| "             | Accessory dwelling unit              | PS   | PS      | PS    | PS      |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+------+---------+-------+---------+
| "             | Agriculture                          | P    | P       | P     | P       |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+------+---------+-------+---------+
| "             | Apiaries/beekeeping                  | PS   | PS      | PS    | PS      |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+------+---------+-------+---------+
| "             | Barns and corrals for agriculture    | PS   |         |       |         |
|               | and livestock – At least 50'         |      |         |       |         |
|               | from any dwelling                    |      |         |       |         |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+------+---------+-------+---------+
| "             | Barns and corrals for agriculture    | PS   | PS      | PS    | PS      |
|               | and livestock – At least 100'        |      |         |       |         |
|               | from any dwelling                    |      |         |       |         |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+------+---------+-------+---------+
| "             | Child care, in-home babysitting      | P    | P       | P     | P       |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+------+---------+-------+---------+
| "             | Child care, family                   | P    | P       | P     | P       |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+------+---------+-------+---------+
| "             | Greenhouse, high tower or plant      | P    | P       | P     | P       |
|               | nurseries (no retail)                |      |         |       |         |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+------+---------+-------+---------+
| "             | Guesthouse                           | PS   | PS      | PS    | PS      |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+------+---------+-------+---------+
| "             | Home occupation                      | P    | P       | P     | P       |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+------+---------+-------+---------+
| "             | Livestock – 1 animal per 12,000      | P    | P       | P     | P       |
|               | sf; 2 per 20,000 sf; 1 additional    |      |         |       |         |
|               | animal for each additional 10,000    |      |         |       |         |
|               | sf over 20,000 sf                    |      |         |       |         |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+------+---------+-------+---------+
| "             | Hogs to be raised by resident        |      |         |       | PS      |
|               | for purposes of meeting requirements |      |         |       |         |
|               | of a youth club - maximum of         |      |         |       |         |
|               | 2 hogs per 37,500 sf for a maximum   |      |         |       |         |
|               | of 6 months                          |      |         |       |         |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+------+---------+-------+---------+
| "             | Hog pen/shelter – Up to 8' tall      |      |         |       | PS      |
|               | and 100 sf – Allowed only in         |      |         |       |         |
|               | rear yard at least 100' from         |      |         |       |         |
|               | any dwelling; required effective     |      |         |       |         |
|               | manure management                    |      |         |       |         |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+------+---------+-------+---------+
| "             | Small animals (not produced for      | P    | P       | P     | P       |
|               | food) up to 8 animals                |      |         |       |         |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+------+---------+-------+---------+
| "             | Sale of homegrown eggs and produce   | P    | P       | P     | P       |
|               | from the residence, subject to       |      |         |       |         |
|               | the provisions and restrictions      |      |         |       |         |
|               | in the home occupation ordinance     |      |         |       |         |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+------+---------+-------+---------+
| "             | Urban hens and rabbits – Up to       | PS   | PS      | PS    | PS      |
|               | 6 adult hens and 4 adult rabbits     |      |         |       |         |
|               | per 1,000 sf of lot area – No        |      |         |       |         |
|               | more than 16 animals per lot,        |      |         |       |         |
|               | up to 10 rabbits, and up to 1        |      |         |       |         |
|               | rooster per 37,500 sf kept at        |      |         |       |         |
|               | least 50' from any residential       |      |         |       |         |
|               | zone                                 |      |         |       |         |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+------+---------+-------+---------+
| "             | Urban hen/rabbit coop, pen or        | P    | P       | P     | P       |
|               | cage – Up to 8' tall and 200         |      |         |       |         |
|               | sf – Allowed only in rear yard,      |      |         |       |         |
|               | at least 20' from lot line (unless   |      |         |       |         |
|               | solid perimeter fence); required     |      |         |       |         |
|               | effective manure management          |      |         |       |         |
+---------------+--------------------------------------+------+---------+-------+---------+
(Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-06-002, 6-4-2020)

10-7A-2: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No residential dwelling shall be erected to a height less than ten feet (10') and no structure shall be greater than forty feet (40'), unless a conditional use permit is granted for a greater height. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-7A-3: LOT AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
A. The minimum lot area, width, street frontage and yard requirements are as follows:
+----------+------------------+----------------+------------------+---------+---------+
| District | Minimum Lot Area |  Minimum Lot   |        Minimum Yard Setbacks         |
|          |                  | Width/Frontage |                                      |
+----------+------------------+----------------+------------------+---------+---------+
| "        | "                | "              | Front and Street |  Side   |  Rear   |
|          |                  |                |       Side       |         |         |
+----------+------------------+----------------+------------------+---------+---------+
| RE-5     | 5 acres          | 80 feet        | 25 feet          | 10 feet | 10 feet |
+----------+------------------+----------------+------------------+---------+---------+
| RE-12.5  | 12,500 square    | 80 feet        | 25 feet          | 10 feet | 10 feet |
|          | feet             |                |                  |         |         |
+----------+------------------+----------------+------------------+---------+---------+
| RE-20    | 20,000 square    | 80 feet        | 25 feet          | 10 feet | 10 feet |
|          | feet             |                |                  |         |         |
+----------+------------------+----------------+------------------+---------+---------+
| RE-37.5  | 37,500 square    | 80 feet        | 25 feet          | 10 feet | 10 feet |
|          | feet             |                |                  |         |         |
+----------+------------------+----------------+------------------+---------+---------+
B. Lot Size Averaging: 
    1. Lot size averaging is an alternative to traditional minimum lot size standards and encourages a mix of lot sizes within a subdivision. The overall density of the zoning district remains approximately the same, but flexibility is provided in the mixing of lot sizes.
    2. Standards: 
        a. Lot size averaging is a permitted use within the RE-20 and RE-37.5 zones.
            (1) Project density shall not exceed the following:
            +----------+---------------------------------+
            | District | Maximum Dwelling Units per Acre |
            +----------+---------------------------------+
            | RE-20    | 2.0 du/acre                     |
            +----------+---------------------------------+
            | RE-37.5  | 1.2 du/acre                     |
            +----------+---------------------------------+
        b. No lot size shall be reduced to less than sixty-five percent (65%) of the required lot size for the applicable zoning district.
        c. No lot frontage (width) shall be reduced to less than eighty percent (80%) of the required lot frontage for the applicable zoning district.
        d. Lot size averaging shall apply to new subdivisions, not to existing recorded plats, and not to amendments to recorded plats.
        e. Open space dedications and/or trail easements shall be included in the subdivision density calculations for the purpose of complying with subsection B2a of this section.
        f. Not more than one-half (½) of the proposed lots within the subdivision may be less than the zone’s standard lot size. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

ARTICLE B. SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONES
(R-1-6, R-1-7, R-1-8, R-1-10, R-1-12, R-1-20, R-1-40)


10-7B-1:     Allowed Uses
10-7B-2:     Height Regulations
10-7B-3:     Lot Area, Width, Yard Requirements

10-7B-1: ALLOWED USES:
Any use not specifically permitted, permitted with standards, or conditionally permitted is prohibited. Only the following uses are allowed:
A. Uses indicated by the letter “P” below are permitted in the designated zone.
B. Uses indicated by the letters “PS” are permitted uses with required standards in this zone. Uses must comply with the standards and evaluation criteria established in chapter 17 of this title.
C. Uses indicated by the letter “C” are conditional uses in the designated zone.
+---------------+----------------------+-------+-------+-------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
|                                      | R-1-6 | R-1-7 | R-1-8 | R-1-10 | R-1-12 | R-1-20 | R-1-40 |
+---------------+----------------------+-------+-------+-------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| City facility, primary               | P     | P     | P     | P      | P      | P      | P      |
+---------------+----------------------+-------+-------+-------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| City facility accessory              | P     | P     | P     | P      | P      | P      | P      |
| uses; accessory structure            |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
| and use                              |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
+---------------+----------------------+-------+-------+-------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| Communication transmission           | PS    | PS    | PS    | PS     | PS     | PS     | PS     |
| facilities, including                |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
| wireless, primary                    |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
+---------------+----------------------+-------+-------+-------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| Communication transmission           | C     | C     | C     | C      | C      | C      | C      |
| facilities, including                |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
| wireless, primary, height            |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
| over 50'                             |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
+---------------+----------------------+-------+-------+-------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| Public utility facilities,           | PS    | PS    | PS    | PS     | PS     | PS     | PS     |
| primary                              |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
+---------------+----------------------+-------+-------+-------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| Public utility facilities            | P     | P     | P     | P      | P      | P      | P      |
| accessory uses;accessory             |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
| structures                           |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
+---------------+----------------------+-------+-------+-------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| Religious facility, primary          | P     | P     | P     | P      | P      | P      | P      |
+---------------+----------------------+-------+-------+-------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| School, public or charter,           | P     | P     | P     | P      | P      | P      | P      |
| primary                              |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
+---------------+----------------------+-------+-------+-------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| Short term residential               | PS    | PS    | PS    | PS     | PS     | PS     | PS     |
| rental                               |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
+---------------+----------------------+-------+-------+-------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| Single-family dwelling,              | P     | P     | P     | P      | P      | P      | P      |
| primary                              |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
+---------------+----------------------+-------+-------+-------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| Single-family | Accessory structure  | P     | P     | P     | P      | P      | P      | P      |
| dwelling      | and use              |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
| accessory     |                      |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
| uses:         |                      |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
+---------------+----------------------+-------+-------+-------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| "             | Agriculture          | P     | P     | P     | P      | P      | P      | P      |
+---------------+----------------------+-------+-------+-------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| "             | Apiaries/beekeeping  |       |       |       |        | PS     | PS     | PS     |
+---------------+----------------------+-------+-------+-------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| "             | Child care, in-home  | P     | P     | P     | P      | P      | P      | P      |
|               | babysitting          |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
+---------------+----------------------+-------+-------+-------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| "             | Child care, family   | P     | P     | P     | P      | P      | P      | P      |
+---------------+----------------------+-------+-------+-------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| "             | Greenhouse, high     | P     | P     | P     | P      | P      | P      | P      |
|               | tower or plant       |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
|               | nurseries (no        |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
|               | retail)              |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
+---------------+----------------------+-------+-------+-------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| "             | Guesthouse           |       |       |       | PS     | PS     | PS     | PS     |
+---------------+----------------------+-------+-------+-------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| "             | Home occupation      | P     | P     | P     | P      | P      | P      | P      |
+---------------+----------------------+-------+-------+-------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| "             | Accessory dwelling   |       |       | PS    | PS     | PS     | PS     | PS     |
|               | unit                 |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
+---------------+----------------------+-------+-------+-------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| "             | Small animals (not   | P     | P     | P     | P      | P      | P      | P      |
|               | produced for food)   |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
|               | up to 8 animals      |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
+---------------+----------------------+-------+-------+-------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| "             | Urban hens and       | P     | P     | P     | P      | P      | P      | P      |
|               | rabbits – Up to      |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
|               | 6 adult hens and     |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
|               | 4 adult rabbits      |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
|               | per 1,000 sf of      |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
|               | lot area – No        |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
|               | more than 16 animals |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
|               | per lot, up to       |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
|               | 10 rabbits           |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
+---------------+----------------------+-------+-------+-------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| "             | Urban hen/rabbit     | P     | P     | P     | P      | P      | P      | P      |
|               | coop, pen or cage –  |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
|               | Up to 8' tall        |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
|               | and 200 sf – Allowed |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
|               | only in rear yard,   |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
|               | at least 20' from    |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
|               | lot line (unless     |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
|               | solid perimeter      |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
|               | fence); required     |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
|               | effective manure     |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
|               | management           |       |       |       |        |        |        |        |
+---------------+----------------------+-------+-------+-------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
(Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-7B-2: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No residential dwelling shall be erected to a height less than ten feet (10') and no structure shall be greater than forty feet (40'), unless a conditional use permit is granted for a greater height. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-7B-3: LOT AREA, WIDTH, YARD REQUIREMENTS:
A. The minimum lot area, width, yard and landscaping requirements in each zone below are as follows:
+------------+------------------+------------------+-------------+----------------------+------+
|  District  | Lot Area Minimum |   Minimum Lot    |           Minimum Yard Setbacks           |
|            |    in Square     |      Width/      |                                           |
|            |       Feet       |     Frontage     |                                           |
+------------+------------------+------------------+-------------+----------------------+------+
| "          | "                | "                |  Front and  |         Side         | Rear |
|            |                  |                  | Street Side |                      |      |
+------------+------------------+------------------+-------------+----------------------+------+
| R-1-6      | 6,000            | 70'              | 20'         | 6' where public      | 10'  |
|            |                  |                  |             | utility easement     |      |
|            |                  |                  |             | doesn’t exist        |      |
|            |                  |                  |             | 8' if public utility |      |
|            |                  |                  |             | easement exists      |      |
+------------+------------------+------------------+-------------+----------------------+------+
| R-1-7      | 7,000            | 70' or 65' in    | 25'         | 6' where public      | 10'  |
|            |                  | the central      |             | utility easement     |      |
|            |                  | city residential |             | doesn’t exist        |      |
|            |                  | area             |             | 8' if public utility |      |
|            |                  |                  |             | easement exists      |      |
+------------+------------------+------------------+-------------+----------------------+------+
| R-1-8:     | 8,000            | 70' or 65' in    | 25'         | 8'                   | 10'  |
|            |                  | the central      |             |                      |      |
|            |                  | city residential |             |                      |      |
| Lot size   | Not less than    | area             |             |                      |      |
| averaging: | an 80% reduction |                  |             |                      |      |
|            |                  | Not less than    |             |                      |      |
|            |                  | 65'              |             |                      |      |
+------------+------------------+------------------+-------------+----------------------+------+
| R-1-10     | 10,000           | 80'              | 25'         | 8'                   | 10'  |
|            |                  |                  |             |                      |      |
| Lot size   | Not less than    | Not less than    |             |                      |      |
| averaging: | a 70% reduction  | a 70% reduction  |             |                      |      |
+------------+------------------+------------------+-------------+----------------------+------+
| R-1-12     | 12,000           | 90'              | 25'         | 8'                   | 10'  |
|            |                  |                  |             |                      |      |
| Lot size   | Not less than    | Not less than    |             |                      |      |
| averaging: | a 70% reduction  | a 70% reduction  |             |                      |      |
+------------+------------------+------------------+-------------+----------------------+------+
| R-1-20     | 20,000           | 100'             | 25'         | 8'                   | 10'  |
|            |                  |                  |             |                      |      |
| Lot size   | Not less than    | Not less than    |             |                      |      |
| averaging: | a 70% reduction  | a 70% reduction  |             |                      |      |
+------------+------------------+------------------+-------------+----------------------+------+
| R-1-40     | 40,000           | 200'             | 25'         | 8'                   | 10'  |
|            |                  |                  |             |                      |      |
| Lot size   | Not less than    | Not less than    |             |                      |      |
| averaging: | a 70% reduction  | a 70% reduction  |             |                      |      |
+------------+------------------+------------------+-------------+----------------------+------+
B. Lot Size Averaging: 
    1. Lot size averaging is an alternative to traditional minimum lot size standards and encourages a mix of lot sizes within a subdivision. The overall density of the zoning district remains approximately the same, but flexibility is provided in the mixing of lot sizes.
    2. Standards: 
        a. Lot size averaging is a permitted use within the R-1-8, R-1-10, R-1-12, R-1-20 and R-1-40 zones. Project density shall not exceed the following:
            
            +----------+---------------------------------+
            | District | Maximum Dwelling Units per Acre |
            +----------+---------------------------------+
            | R-1-8    | 3.7 du/acre                     |
            +----------+---------------------------------+
            | R-1-10   | 3.2 du/acre                     |
            +----------+---------------------------------+
            | R-1-12   | 2.8 du/acre                     |
            +----------+---------------------------------+
            | R-1-20   | 1.8 du/acre                     |
            +----------+---------------------------------+
            | R-1-40   | 1.0 du/acre                     |
            +----------+---------------------------------+
        b. Lot size averaging shall apply to new subdivisions, and not to existing recorded plats, nor to amendments to recorded plats.
        c. Open space dedications and/or trail easements shall be included in the subdivision density calculations for the purpose of complying with subsection B2a of this section.
        d. Not more than one-half (½) of the proposed lots within the subdivision may be less than the zone’s standard lot size. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

ARTICLE C. MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONES
(R-2, R-3, R-4)


10-7C-1:     Allowed Uses
10-7C-2:     Height Regulations
10-7C-3:     Density Regulations
10-7C-4:     Area, Width and Yard Requirements
10-7C-5:     Minimum Required Building Separation
10-7C-6:     Landscaped Area and Amenity Requirements
10-7C-7:     Access to Multiple-Family
10-7C-8:     Miscellaneous

10-7C-1: ALLOWED USES:
Any use not specifically permitted, permitted with standards, or conditionally permitted is prohibited. Only the following uses are allowed:
A. Uses indicated by the letter “P” below are permitted in the designated zone.
B. Uses indicated by the letters “PS” are permitted uses with required standards in this zone. Uses must comply with the standards and evaluation criteria established in chapter 17 of this title.
C. Uses indicated by the letter “C” are conditional uses in the designated zone.
+---------------+---------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
|                                                             | R-2 | R-3 | R-4 |
+---------------+---------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| City facility, primary                                      | P   | P   | P   |
+---------------+---------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| City facility accessory uses: accessory structure and       | P   | P   | P   |
| use                                                         |     |     |     |
+---------------+---------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Communication transmission facilities, including wireless,  | PS  | PS  | PS  |
| primary height 50' or less                                  |     |     |     |
+---------------+---------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Communication transmission facilities, including wireless,  | C   | C   | C   |
| primary, height over 50'                                    |     |     |     |
+---------------+---------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Multiple-family over 20 dwelling units or 12 du/ac          | C   | C   | C   |
+---------------+---------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Public utility facilities, primary                          | PS  | PS  | PS  |
+---------------+---------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Public utility facilities accessory uses: accessory         | P   | P   | P   |
| structures                                                  |     |     |     |
+---------------+---------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Religious facility, primary                                 | P   | P   | P   |
+---------------+---------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| School, public or charter, primary                          | P   | P   | P   |
+---------------+---------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| 2- and single-family dwelling, primary                      | P   | P   | P   |
+---------------+---------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| 2- and        | Accessory structure and use                 | P   | P   | P   |
| single-family |                                             |     |     |     |
| dwelling      |                                             |     |     |     |
| accessory     |                                             |     |     |     |
| uses:         |                                             |     |     |     |
+---------------+---------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| "             | Agriculture                                 | P   | P   | P   |
+---------------+---------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| "             | Child care, in-home babysitting             | P   | P   | P   |
+---------------+---------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| "             | Child care, family                          | P   | P   | P   |
+---------------+---------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| "             | Greenhouse, high tower or plant nurseries   | P   | P   | P   |
|               | (no retail)                                 |     |     |     |
+---------------+---------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| "             | Guesthouse                                  | PS  | PS  | PS  |
+---------------+---------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| "             | Home occupation                             | P   | P   | P   |
+---------------+---------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| "             | Small animals (not produced for food) up to | P   | P   | P   |
|               | 2 animals                                   |     |     |     |
+---------------+---------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
(Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-7C-2: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No residential dwelling shall be erected to a height less than ten feet (10') and no structure shall be greater than forty feet (40'). (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-7C-3: DENSITY REGULATIONS:
A. The minimum lot size for any single-family dwelling or the first unit of each multifamily dwelling is six thousand (6,000) square feet.
B. The minimum lot size for any two (2) family dwelling shall be eight thousand (8,000) square feet.
C. Additional multiple-family units may be added to a multiple-family structure according to the following schedule (in square feet):
+-------------------+-------+------------+------------+
|       Units       |  R-2  |    R-3     |    R-4     |
+-------------------+-------+------------+------------+
| 1st unit          | 6,000 | 6,000      | 6,000      |
+-------------------+-------+------------+------------+
| 2nd unit          | 2,000 | 2,000      | 2,000      |
+-------------------+-------+------------+------------+
| 3rd and 4th units |       | 2,700/unit | 2,000/unit |
+-------------------+-------+------------+------------+
| Additional units  |       | 3,200/unit | 1,700/unit |
+-------------------+-------+------------+------------+
D. In the R-2 zone, no multiple-family dwelling shall contain more than two (2) dwelling units per building.
E. Land outside the multiple-family units shall be designated as common or limited common area, and one (1) owner, or a property owners’ association, shall be established to own and maintain the common areas.
F. Any fractional amount of square footage left over in calculating density may not be considered toward an additional dwelling unit unless the full required amount of land is available. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-7C-4: AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The minimum area, width and yard requirements are as follows:
+------------+---------------------+------------+----------------------+-----------+---------------+---------------+
| Zone/Unit  |    Area Minimum     | MinimumLot | Required Landscaping |           Minimum Yard Setbacks           |
|    Type    |      in Square      |  Frontage  |                      |                                           |
|            |        Feet         |            |                      |                                           |
+------------+---------------------+------------+----------------------+-----------+---------------+---------------+
| "          | "                   | "          | "                    | Front and |     Side      |     Rear      |
|            |                     |            |                      |  Street   |               |               |
|            |                     |            |                      |   Side    |               |               |
+------------+---------------------+------------+----------------------+-----------+---------------+---------------+
| R-2        | 6,000 and 2,000     | 65'        | 30% lot area         | 25'       | 8'            | 10'           |
|            | for each additional |            | 50% front            |           |               |               |
|            | unit                |            | yard                 |           |               |               |
+------------+---------------------+------------+----------------------+-----------+---------------+---------------+
| R-2 MF     | 4,000 per unit      | 30' per    | 30% lot area         | 25'       | 8' (excluding | 10'           |
| subdivided |                     | unit       | 50% front            |           | common wall)  |               |
|            |                     |            | yard                 |           |               |               |
+------------+---------------------+------------+----------------------+-----------+---------------+---------------+
| R-3 MF     | 6,000 per unit      | 70'        | 30% lot area         | 25'       | 20'           | 20'           |
|            |                     |            | 50% front            |           | Min 25' from  | Min 25' from  |
|            |                     |            | yard                 |           | single-family | single-family |
+------------+---------------------+------------+----------------------+-----------+---------------+---------------+
| R-4 MF     | 6,000 per unit      | 70'        | 30% lot area         | 25'       | 20'           | 20'           |
|            |                     |            | 50% front            |           | Min 25' from  | Min 25' from  |
|            |                     |            | yard                 |           | single-family | single-family |
+------------+---------------------+------------+----------------------+-----------+---------------+---------------+
(Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-7C-5: MINIMUM REQUIRED BUILDING SEPARATION:
+--------------------------------------+-----------------------+--------------------------+
|   Building Separation for Detached   |         Side          |           Rear           |
| Units and Multiple-Family Dwellings  |                       |                          |
+--------------------------------------+-----------------------+--------------------------+
| Where there is common area, or       | 10' if height is less | 10' if height is less    |
| limited common area, between         | than 20';             | than 20';                |
| structures and no fence or retaining | 20' if height is 20'  | 40' if height is 20'     |
| wall over 3'                         | or greater            | or greater               |
+--------------------------------------+-----------------------+--------------------------+
| Where there is common area, or       | 16' if height is less | 16' if height is less    |
| limited common area, between         | than 35';             | than 20';                |
| structures and a fence or retaining  | 20' if height exceeds | 20' if height is greater |
| wall over 3'                         | 35'                   | than 20'                 |
+--------------------------------------+-----------------------+--------------------------+
| Building separation for detached single-family projects may be reduced to 3'            |
| if the following standards are met: There is common or limited common area              |
| between structures; structures shall be built in accordance to the provisions           |
| of the current International Residential Code; no fence and no retaining wall           |
| exist between units or building offsets; and the reduced separation is approved         |
| during the zone change.                                                                 |
+--------------------------------------+-----------------------+--------------------------+
A. Multiple-family dwellings eighteen feet (18') or more above grade in height, and adjacent to a single-family use, shall maintain a twenty-five-foot (25') setback adjacent to the single-family use boundary, and a twenty-foot (20') setback adjacent to other residential uses, including the same use and a PD planned development residential zone. If adjacent land is vacant, the use will be considered that of the intended use dictated by the zoning and comply with the above setback standards.
B. Rear yard fences that do not block fire access may be allowed with the approval of the building and fire departments. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-7C-6: LANDSCAPED AREA AND AMENITY REQUIREMENTS:
A. At a minimum, all developments with five (5) or more units shall provide usable recreation or playground areas in a central location as follows:
    1. One thousand (1,000) square feet for the first five (5) units;
    2. An additional two hundred (200) square feet for each unit over five (5) units;
    3. The average width and length of each usable recreation or playground area shall not be less than twenty feet (20'); and
    4. All of the required area shall be usable common space accessible to the entire community.
B. The number of amenities required depends on the size of the development. All amenities shall be approved by the land use authority in accordance with the following:
+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
|             Units              |           Amenities            |
+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 0 – 4                          | 0                              |
+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 5 – 50                         | 1                              |
+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 51 – 100                       | 2                              |
+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 101 – 200                      | 3                              |
+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| 201 – 300                      | 4                              |
+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Add 1 amenity for each 50 additional units or fraction thereof. |
+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
C. The type of amenities required depends on the nature, size, and density of the development. If multiple amenities are required, the type shall vary. All amenities shall be approved by the land use authority in accordance with the following:
    1. All required amenities shall be fully constructed, prior to construction of fifty percent (50%) of the total project units, or in accordance with an executed development agreement with terms acceptable to the city;
    2. In addition to amenities, a minimum of thirty percent (30%) of the lot area shall be maintained in landscaped area, and at least fifty percent (50%) of the front setback area shall be maintained as landscaped area.
D. Table of Amenities: 
+--------------------------------------------------+
| Pool – At least 400 square feet                  |
+--------------------------------------------------+
| Internal health or fitness facilities            |
+--------------------------------------------------+
| Secured, programmed, children’s play areas       |
+--------------------------------------------------+
| In-ground hot tub                                |
+--------------------------------------------------+
| Community garden                                 |
+--------------------------------------------------+
| Perimeter trail                                  |
+--------------------------------------------------+
| Sport court                                      |
+--------------------------------------------------+
| Indoor, keyed, bicycle storage for units         |
+--------------------------------------------------+
| Community library, office, or meeting facilities |
+--------------------------------------------------+
| Exterior social area – At least 400 square feet  |
+--------------------------------------------------+
(Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-7C-7: ACCESS TO MULTIPLE-FAMILY:
A multiple-family development with a density of twelve (12) dwelling units per acre or more shall have two (2) separate accesses for ingress and egress via collector or arterial roads, or via a local access road (fifty-foot (50') minimum right-of-way). (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-7C-8: MISCELLANEOUS:
A. Twin Homes: Each unit of a twin home may be platted and sold separately; provided, the units are attached and meet the building code requirements for separate ownership and each resulting lot area has a minimum of four thousand (4,000) square feet and a minimum of thirty feet (30') of frontage on a public road. Each unit shall have its own water and power meters and separate sewer lateral.
B. Guest Parking: For housing projects with a density of six (6) dwelling units per acre or more there shall be provided guest parking spaces in the amount of one (1) guest parking space per three (3) dwelling units. The guest parking spaces shall be located on premises and within two hundred feet (200') of the dwelling unit they are intended to serve. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

ARTICLE D. MOBILE HOME ZONES
(MH-6, MH-8, MH-10, MH-12, MH-20, MH-40)


10-7D-1:     Allowed Uses
10-7D-2:     Height Regulations
10-7D-3:     Area, Width and Yard Requirements
10-7D-4:     Design Criteria
10-7D-5:     Landscaped Area and Amenity Requirements

10-7D-1: ALLOWED USES:
Any use not specifically permitted, permitted with standards, or conditionally permitted is prohibited. Only the following uses are allowed:
A. Uses indicated by the letter “P” below are permitted in the designated zone.
B. Uses indicated by the letters “PS” are permitted uses with required standards in this zone. Uses must comply with the standards and evaluation criteria established in chapter 17 of this title.
C. Uses indicated by the letter “C” are conditional uses in the designated zone.
+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+-----+
|                                                                                | All |
+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| City facility, primary                                                         | P   |
+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| City facility accessory uses: accessory structure and use                      | P   |
+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| Communication transmission facilities, including wireless, primary,            | PS  |
| height 50' or less                                                             |     |
+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| Communication transmission facilities, including wireless, primary,            | C   |
| height over 50'                                                                |     |
+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| Mobile home accessory  | Accessory structure and use                           | P   |
| uses:                  |                                                       |     |
+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| "                      | Agriculture                                           | P   |
+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| "                      | Child care, in-home babysitting                       | P   |
+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| "                      | Child care, family                                    | P   |
+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| "                      | Home occupation                                       | P   |
+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| "                      | Small animals (not produced for food) up to 2 animals | P   |
+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| Public utility facilities, primary                                             | P   |
+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| Public utility facilities accessory uses: accessory structures                 | P   |
+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| Religious facility, primary                                                    | P   |
+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| School, public or charter, primary                                             | P   |
+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| Single-family dwelling, primary                                                | P   |
+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| Single-family dwelling | Accessory structure and use                           | P   |
| accessory uses:        |                                                       |     |
+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| "                      | Agriculture                                           | p   |
+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| "                      | Child care, in-home babysitting                       | P   |
+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| "                      | Child care, family                                    | P   |
+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| "                      | Home occupation                                       | P   |
+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| "                      | Small animals (not produced for food) up to 8 animals | P   |
+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| Single-family dwelling, 1 story in existing recreation vehicle subdivision     | P   |
| lot                                                                            |     |
+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| Single-family dwelling | Accessory structure and use                           | P   |
| accessory uses:        |                                                       |     |
+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| "                      | Agriculture                                           | P   |
+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| "                      | Child care, in-home babysitting                       | P   |
+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| "                      | Child care, family                                    | P   |
+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| "                      | Home occupation                                       | P   |
+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+-----+
| "                      | Small animals (not produced for food) up to 2 animals | P   |
+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+-----+
(Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-7D-2: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall be erected to a height less than ten feet (10') and no structure shall be greater than thirty-five feet (35'). (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-7D-3: AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The minimum lot area, width and yard requirements are as follows:
+---------------------+------------------+-----------+-----------------+------------------+------------------+
|      District       | Area Minimum per |  Minimum  |                 Minimum Yard Setbacks                 |
|                     |  Unit in Square  | Lot Width |                                                       |
|                     |   Feet/Minimum   |           |                                                       |
|                     | Subdivision Size |           |                                                       |
+---------------------+------------------+-----------+-----------------+------------------+------------------+
| "                   | "                | "         |    Front and    |       Side       |       Rear       |
|                     |                  |           |   Street Side   |                  |                  |
+---------------------+------------------+-----------+-----------------+------------------+------------------+
| MH-6                | 6,000 / 5 acres  | 60'       | 20'             | 8'               | 10'              |
+---------------------+------------------+-----------+-----------------+------------------+------------------+
| MH-8                | 8,000 / 5 acres  | 70'       | 25'             | 8'               | 10'              |
+---------------------+------------------+-----------+-----------------+------------------+------------------+
| MH-10               | 10,000 / 5 acres | 80'       | 25'             | 8'               | 10'              |
+---------------------+------------------+-----------+-----------------+------------------+------------------+
| MH-12               | 12,000 / 5 acres | 90'       | 25'             | 8'               | 10'              |
+---------------------+------------------+-----------+-----------------+------------------+------------------+
| MH-20               | 20,000 / 5 acres | 100'      | 25'             | 8'               | 10'              |
+---------------------+------------------+-----------+-----------------+------------------+------------------+
| MH-40               | 40,000 / 5 acres | 200'      | 25'             | 8'               | 10'              |
+---------------------+------------------+-----------+-----------------+------------------+------------------+
| Single-family       |                  |           | 10' for private | 5' interior      | 5' interior      |
| dwelling, existing  |                  |           | streets and     | lot line         | lot line         |
| recreation          |                  |           | 25' for public  | and 10' adjacent | and 10' adjacent |
| vehicle subdivision |                  |           | streets         | to an exterior   | to an exterior   |
| lots                |                  |           |                 | lot line         | lot line         |
+---------------------+------------------+-----------+-----------------+------------------+------------------+
(Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-7D-4: DESIGN CRITERIA:
A complete application for single-family occupancy must include a site plan, architectural plans, and construction drawings of one-quarter (¼) scale, which show building materials, exterior elevations and floor plans of all proposed structures that meet the following criteria:
A. HUD Standards, Construction Codes: All development must comply with the construction codes and, as applicable, the national manufactured housing construction and safety standards and ICC guidelines for manufactured housing installations, that are capable of transferring design deadloads and live loads, and other design loads unique to local home sites, due to wind, seismic, soil and water conditions, that are imposed by or upon the structure into the underlying soil or bedrock without failure.
B. Perimeter footings at least twelve inches (12") below grade.
C. For all dwellings:
    1. Space beneath the structure must be enclosed at the perimeter of the dwelling in accordance with ICC guidelines and constructed of weather-resistant materials aesthetically consistent with concrete- or masonry-type foundation materials.
    2. A minimum landing of thirty-six inches by thirty-six inches (36" x 36") at each exit.
    3. All manufactured home running gear, tongues, axles and wheels must be removed and stored off site or in a separately enclosed structure.
D. Exterior Materials: Each dwelling shall have exterior materials of wood, hardwood, brick, concrete, stucco, glass, metal lap, vinyl lap, tile or stone.
E. Width of Dwelling: The width of each dwelling shall not be less than twenty feet (20') at the narrowest point of its first floor, exclusive of any garage, bay window, or appendages.
F. Minimum Floor Area: 
    1. Each dwelling located on a lot of seven thousand (7,000) square feet or less in size shall have a minimum floor area, exclusive of garages and basement, of nine hundred (900) square feet.
    2. Each dwelling located on a lot greater than seven thousand (7,000) square feet in size shall have a minimum floor area, exclusive of garage and basement, of one thousand (1,000) square feet. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-7D-5: LANDSCAPED AREA AND AMENITY REQUIREMENTS:
A. At a minimum, all developments with five (5) or more units shall provide usable recreation or playground areas in a central location as follows:
    1. One thousand (1,000) square feet for the first five (5) units;
    2. An additional two hundred (200) square feet for each unit over five (5) units;
    3. The average width and length of each usable recreation or playground area shall not be less than twenty feet (20'); and
    4. All of the required area shall be usable common space accessible to the entire community.
B. The number of amenities required depends on the size of the development. All amenities shall be approved by the land use authority in accordance with the following:
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
|                Units                 |              Amenities              |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 0 – 4                                | 0                                   |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 5 – 50                               | 1                                   |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 51 – 100                             | 2                                   |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 101 – 200                            | 3                                   |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 201 – 300                            | 4                                   |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| For projects in excess of 300 units, add 1 amenity for each 100 additional |
| units or fraction thereof.                                                 |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
C. The type of amenities required depends on the nature, size, and density of the development. If multiple amenities are required, the type shall vary. All amenities shall be approved by the land use authority in accordance with the following:
    1. All required amenities shall be fully constructed prior to construction of fifty percent (50%) of the total project units, or in accordance with an executed development agreement with terms acceptable to the city;
    2. In addition to amenities, a minimum of thirty percent (30%) of the lot area shall be maintained in landscaped area, and at least fifty percent (50%) of the front setback area shall be maintained as landscaped area.
D. Table of Amenities: 
+--------------------------------------------------+
| Pool – At least 400 square feet                  |
+--------------------------------------------------+
| Internal health or fitness facilities            |
+--------------------------------------------------+
| Secured, programmed, children’s play areas       |
+--------------------------------------------------+
| In-ground hot tub                                |
+--------------------------------------------------+
| Community garden                                 |
+--------------------------------------------------+
| Perimeter trail                                  |
+--------------------------------------------------+
| Sport court                                      |
+--------------------------------------------------+
| Indoor, keyed, bicycle storage for units         |
+--------------------------------------------------+
| Community library, office, or meeting facilities |
+--------------------------------------------------+
| Exterior social area – At least 400 square feet  |
+--------------------------------------------------+
(Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

ARTICLE E. RESIDENTIAL CENTRAL CITY ZONE
(RCC, R-1-C)


10-7E-1:     Allowed Uses
10-7E-2:     Development Standards
10-7E-3:     Architectural Design Standards

10-7E-1: ALLOWED USES:
Any use not specifically permitted, permitted with standards, or conditionally permitted is prohibited. Only the following uses are allowed:
A. Uses indicated by the letter “P” below are permitted in the designated zone.
B. Uses indicated by the letters “PS” are permitted uses with required standards in this zone. Uses must comply with the standards and evaluation criteria established in chapter 17 of this title.
C. Uses indicated by the letter “C” are conditional uses in the designated zone.
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| City facility, primary                                                           | P  |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| City facility accessory uses: accessory structure and use                        | P  |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Communication transmission facilities, including wireless, primary               | PS |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Communication transmission facilities, including wireless, primary,              | C  |
| height over 50'                                                                  |    |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Religious facility, primary                                                      | P  |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| School, public or charter, primary                                               | P  |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Single-family dwelling, primary                                                  | P  |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Single-family      | Accessory structure and use                                 | P  |
| dwelling accessory |                                                             |    |
| uses:              |                                                             |    |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| "                  | Child care, in-home babysitting                             | P  |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| "                  | Child care, family                                          | P  |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| "                  | Guesthouse                                                  | PS |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| "                  | Home occupation                                             | P  |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| "                  | Accessory dwelling unit                                     | PS |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| "                  | Small animals (not produced for food) up to 8 animals       | P  |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| "                  | Urban hens and rabbits – Up to 6 adult hens and 4 adult     | P  |
|                    | rabbits per 1,000 sf of lot area – No more than 16          |    |
|                    | animals per lot, up to 10 rabbits                           |    |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| "                  | Urban hen/rabbit coop, pen or cage – Up to 8' tall and      | P  |
|                    | 200 sf – Allowed only in rear yard, at least 20' from       |    |
|                    | lot line (unless solid perimeter fence); required effective |    |
|                    | manure management                                           |    |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+----+
(Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-7E-2: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A. All dwellings/dwelling units shall front on a public street.
B. All streets within the RCC zone shall comply with St. George standard specifications for design and construction, and be a public street, or an RCC modified street, with a minimum width of twenty-seven feet (27') of pavement along the entire depth of the property, with the additional following reduced standards:
    1. Twenty feet (20') of pavement is required along the street side yard of an existing house;
    2. HB30-7 curb and gutters on each side (five feet (5') total);
    3. Four-foot (4') wide sidewalk on both sides of the street;
    4. Only one (1) four-foot (4') wide sidewalk is required if the new dwellings front only on one (1) side of the RCC modified street. Sidewalk shall be located on the new dwelling side of the street;
    5. If new modified street is adjacent to existing side or rear lots, a six-foot (6') solid block wall is required along the existing lots. The wall shall not be located in the required front yard setback of existing lots;
    6. Six-foot (6') solid fencing on a street side yard shall not be located in the required setback. However, a six-foot (6') decorative fence, such as a picket fence or a wrought iron fence with at least fifty percent (50%) of the fence open (up to fifty percent (50%) may be solid, or non-see-through) shall be allowed in the required street side yard setback.
C. All alleys shall comply with St. George standard specifications for design and construction and be a minimum of twenty feet (20') wide when serving garages in the rear yards of lots with dwellings that front on a public street.
D. Legally existing multiple-family dwelling units may be replaced with the same or lesser number of units; provided, such replacement meets all multiple-family code requirements in article C of this chapter, and meets all architectural design standards contained in this chapter. The replacement units shall obtain a building permit within twelve (12) months of abandonment, vacancy, discontinuation of use, or demolition of the nonconforming units, whichever is sooner. If a building permit is not obtained, all residential central city zone standards for new construction control.
E. All new subdivision and development within the RCC zone shall comply with the following minimum standards and the architectural design standards:
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| Minimum lot area   | 5,000 square feet                                            |
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| Minimum lot width/ | 40'                                                          |
| frontage           |                                                              |
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| Front yard(s)      | 15' from back of sidewalk; garage setback shall be a minimum |
|                    | of 25' from property line                                    |
|                    |                                                              |
| Exception:         | Elevated open front porch, only up to 5' in the setback      |
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| Rear yard          | 10'                                                          |
|                    |                                                              |
| Exception:         | Detached garage is allowed in the rear yard; if garage       |
|                    | is accessed by an alley, a 5' setback is required from       |
|                    | the alley                                                    |
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| Side yard          | 8' (5'; provided, no easements or public utilities are       |
|                    | located in the side yard)                                    |
|                    |                                                              |
| Exception:         | Structures with existing nonconforming setbacks may expand   |
|                    | the existing structure and maintain the same setback         |
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| Street side yard,  | 5' from back of sidewalk, if the side yard is adjacent       |
| existing dwelling  | to a RCC modified street                                     |
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| Street side yard   | 15' from back of sidewalk; garage setback shall be a minimum |
|                    | of 25' from property line                                    |
|                    |                                                              |
| Exception:         | Elevated open front porch, only up to 5' in the setback      |
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
(Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-7E-3: ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN STANDARDS:
Architectural design standards apply to all new dwellings and development:
A. Height: Minimum above-grade height is thirteen feet (13') and maximum above-grade height is thirty-five feet (35').
B. Elevated Open Front Porches: A covered front porch is required which extends at least one-half (½) the width of the ground level building frontage and is elevated at least eighteen inches (18") above sidewalk grade with a minimum depth of eight feet (8').
C. Prohibited Exterior Materials: 
    1. Plain concrete block, slump block, weeping mortar;
    2. Plastic or vinyl siding;
    3. Colored or architectural concrete block;
    4. Plywood siding;
    5. Aluminum siding; and
    6. Untreated metal, or reflective roofing.
D. Columns: If columns are included in the design, the columns must be eight inches (8") in diameter minimum.
E. Garage: Garage shall not protrude from the façade and shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the length of the building’s public street façade.
F. Prohibited Architectural Styles: 
    1. A-frame structures;
    2. Geodesic dome structures;
    3. Quonset style;
    4. Yurts.
G. Prohibited Predominant Roof Styles: 
    1. Geodesic domes;
    2. Conical roofs;
    3. Onion dome roofs;
    4. Mansard. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

ARTICLE F. PLANNED DEVELOPMENT RESIDENTIAL ZONE
(PD-R)


10-7F-1:     Allowed Uses
10-7F-2:     General Requirements
10-7F-3:     Preliminary Plat
10-7F-4:     PD-R Planned Residential Development Standards
10-7F-5:     Landscaped Area and Amenity Requirements

10-7F-1: ALLOWED USES:
Any use not specifically permitted, permitted with standards, or conditionally permitted is prohibited. Only the following uses are allowed:
A. Uses indicated by the letter “P” below are permitted in the designated zone only if approved as part of the zone change.
B. Uses indicated by the letters “PS” are permitted uses with required standards, only if approved as part of the zone change.
C. Uses indicated by the letter “C” are conditional uses in the designated zone.
+-----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------+
|                                                                               | PD-R |
+-----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------+
| City facility, primary                                                        | P    |
+-----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------+
| City facility accessory uses: accessory structure and use                     | P    |
+-----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------+
| Communication transmission facilities, including wireless, primary            | PS   |
+-----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------+
| Communication transmission facilities, including wireless, primary,           | C    |
| height over 50'                                                               |      |
+-----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------+
| Multiple-family       | Accessory structure and use                           | P    |
| dwelling accessory    |                                                       |      |
| uses:                 |                                                       |      |
+-----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------+
| "                     | Agriculture                                           | P    |
+-----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------+
| "                     | Child care, in-home babysitting                       | P    |
+-----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------+
| "                     | Child care, family                                    | P    |
+-----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------+
| "                     | Home occupation                                       | P    |
+-----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------+
| "                     | Small animals (not produced for food) up to 8 animals | P    |
+-----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------+
| Public utility facilities, primary                                            | PS   |
+-----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------+
| Public utility facilities accessory uses: accessory structures                | P    |
+-----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------+
| Religious facility, primary                                                   | P    |
+-----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------+
| School, public or charter, primary                                            | P    |
+-----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------+
| Single-family dwelling, primary                                               | P    |
+-----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------+
| Single-family         | Accessory structure and use                           | P    |
| dwelling accessory    |                                                       |      |
| uses:                 |                                                       |      |
+-----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------+
| "                     | Agriculture                                           | P    |
+-----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------+
| "                     | Child care, in-home babysitting                       | P    |
+-----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------+
| "                     | Child care, family                                    | P    |
+-----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------+
| "                     | Guesthouse                                            | PS   |
+-----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------+
| "                     | Home occupation                                       | P    |
+-----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------+
| "                     | Small animals (not produced for food) up to 8 animals | P    |
+-----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------+
| "                     | Accessory dwelling unit (minimum lot size 8,000 sf)   | PS   |
+-----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------+
| Townhouse and condominiums                                                    | P    |
+-----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------+
| Townhouse and         | Accessory structure and use                           | P    |
| condominium accessory |                                                       |      |
| uses:                 |                                                       |      |
+-----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------+
| "                     | Agriculture                                           | P    |
+-----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------+
| "                     | Child care, in-home babysitting                       | P    |
+-----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------+
| "                     | Child care, family                                    | P    |
+-----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------+
| "                     | Home occupation                                       | P    |
+-----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------+
| "                     | Small animals (not produced for food) up to 8 animals | P    |
+-----------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------+
(Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-7F-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Application Requirements: Each application submitted pursuant to this chapter shall include the following:
    1. Documents Required: All requests shall be accompanied by a colored site development plan, materials, and a written text for the entire property proposed to be developed.
    2. Description of the Proposed Use of Land: The projected use of land, including percentages of land devoted to various types of land use, such as building coverage, parking area, landscaped area, etc.
    3. Height and Elevations: The type, character and proposed height of all buildings.
    4. Density: The proposed density in terms of dwelling units per gross acre of land and proposed floor area of nonresidential uses per acre.
    5. Schools, Churches and Open Spaces: The location and boundaries of any proposed school site, church, park or other common or open spaces.
    6. Phasing Plan: A phasing plan, if the development is proposed to be developed in phases.
    7. Topography: Topography at contour intervals of two feet (2').
    8. Landscape Plan: A landscape plan showing the general location of lawn area and trees (this may be a part of the site or plot plan).
    9. Area Reserved for Landscaping: The location and amount of land area reserved for landscaping.
    10. Utilities: Demonstration that all utilities are underground and transformer equipment is screened from streets and from adjacent properties.
    11. Refuse Storage Areas: Refuse storage areas screened so that materials stored within these areas is not visible from access streets, freeways and adjacent properties.
    12. Lighting Plan: A general lighting plan indicating location and luminosity of lights to be installed on the site.
    13. Turning Space: Safe and convenient turning space for cars, sewer vehicles, refuse collection vehicles, firefighting equipment, etc., at the end of private drives and dead-end streets.
    14. Signs: All signs shall be submitted and approved as part of the PD approval.
B. Signs and Advertising: The requirements of the sign ordinance set forth in title 9, chapter 13 of this code apply, unless a variation is specifically approved, and shall not exceed the following:
    1. Freestanding Signs: Freestanding signs shall be monuments and limited to seventy-five (75) square feet. Monument signs shall be limited to ten feet (10') in height. Only one (1) sign per street frontage is permitted.
    2. Wall Signs: One (1) wall sign on a multiple-family project limited to one hundred twenty (120) square feet.
C. Time Limitation: Building permits for construction within planned development zones must be obtained within thirty-six (36) months of the approval of a zone change to planned development. If thirty-six (36) months elapse without the issuance of building permits for the construction of the approved plans within the planned development zone, the zone shall automatically revert back to the previous zone before the zone change to planned development was approved. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-7F-3: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
For all planned development projects that are proposed to be subdivided, applicant may prepare and submit a preliminary plat at the same time as the zone-change application for the planned development. In order to be considered for concurrent review, the application must contain all preliminary plat requirements set forth in chapter 25 of this title, as amended. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-7F-4: PD-R PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A. Minimum Zone Requirements: Each planned residential development zone application shall include a minimum of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet and four (4) dwelling units.
B. Maximum Density: The density shall match the general plan land use map and shall not exceed the maximum density of twenty-two (22) dwelling units per acre.
C. Height Regulations: No residential dwelling shall be erected to a height less than ten feet (10') and no structure shall be greater than forty feet (40'). The city council, after recommendation from the planning commission, may approve increased building height upon making a finding, as part of a zone change approval, that the increase in height will fit harmoniously into the neighborhood, minimizing any negative impacts, after considering the following:
    1. Proposed setbacks provide an appropriate buffer to neighboring properties;
    2. Increased landscaping enhances the project and reduces any negative impacts;
    3. Site layout and design enhance the project and reduce any negative impacts;
    4. The massing and building scale is appropriate for the location;
    5. The proposed height increase is appropriate for the area; and
    6. The increase in height is consistent with any applicable master plan.
D. Area, Coverage, Density, Yard, Common Area and Landscaping Requirements: The minimum lot area, maximum density, maximum lot coverage, yard and common open space/landscaping requirements are as follows:
+--------------------------+--------------+-----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------------------+
|   Maximum Density/Lot    |   Maximum    |     Minimum     |                    Minimum Yard Setbacks                    |
|           Size           | Lot Coverage | Area Landscaped |                                                             |
|                          |              |      Area       |                                                             |
+--------------------------+--------------+-----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------------------+
| "                        | "            | "               |  Front and  |       Side        |           Rear            |
|                          |              |                 | Street Side |                   |                           |
+--------------------------+--------------+-----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------------------+
| As approved by           | 50%          | 30%             | 15'         | Adjacent to       | Adjacent to single-family |
| the city council         |              |                 |             | single-family     | zone: 30'                 |
| with recommendation      |              |                 | 20' for a   | zone: 30'         |                           |
| from the planning        |              |                 | garage or   |                   | Adjacent to a             |
| commission and           |              |                 | carport     | Otherwise:        | street: 20'               |
| not to exceed            |              |                 |             | 10' if height     | with a 6' privacy         |
| 22 DUA, and the          |              |                 |             | is less than      | wall along street         |
| general plan             |              |                 |             | 20';              | right-of-way              |
| land use map             |              |                 |             | 20' if height     |                           |
| limits.                  |              |                 |             | is 20' or greater | Otherwise:                |
|                          |              |                 |             | On a separate     | 10' if height             |
| The minimum lot          |              |                 |             | lot: 8'           | is less than              |
| size in single-family    |              |                 |             |                   | 20';                      |
| residential subdivisions |              |                 |             |                   | 20' if height             |
| with private             |              |                 |             |                   | is 20' or greater         |
| individual lots          |              |                 |             |                   | On a separate             |
| (no common area          |              |                 |             |                   | lot: 8'                   |
| within lots)             |              |                 |             |                   |                           |
| 5,000 square             |              |                 |             |                   |                           |
| feet.                    |              |                 |             |                   |                           |
+--------------------------+--------------+-----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------------------+
| Building separation      | 50%          | 30%             | 3'          | Adjacent to       | Adjacent to single-family |
| for detached             |              |                 |             | single-family     | zone: 30'                 |
| single-family            |              |                 |             | zone: 30'         |                           |
| projects, where          |              |                 |             |                   | Otherwise:                |
| common or limited        |              |                 |             | Otherwise:        | 10' if height             |
| common area between      |              |                 |             | 10' if height     | is less than              |
| structures; structures   |              |                 |             | is less than      | 20';                      |
| shall be built           |              |                 |             | 20';              | 20' if height             |
| in accordance            |              |                 |             | 20' if height     | is 20' or greater         |
| with the current         |              |                 |             | is 20' or greater | On a separate             |
| edition of the           |              |                 |             | On a separate     | lot: 8'                   |
| adopted building         |              |                 |             | lot: 8'           |                           |
| codes of the             |              |                 |             |                   |                           |
| city of St. George;      |              |                 |             |                   |                           |
| no fence and             |              |                 |             |                   |                           |
| no retaining             |              |                 |             |                   |                           |
| wall exists between      |              |                 |             |                   |                           |
| units or building        |              |                 |             |                   |                           |
| offsets; and             |              |                 |             |                   |                           |
| the reduced separation   |              |                 |             |                   |                           |
| is approved during       |              |                 |             |                   |                           |
| the zone change.         |              |                 |             |                   |                           |
+--------------------------+--------------+-----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------------------------+
(Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-06-002, 6-4-2020)

10-7F-5: LANDSCAPED AREA AND AMENITY REQUIREMENTS:
A. At a minimum, all developments with five (5) or more units shall provide usable recreation or playground areas in a central location as follows:
    1. One thousand (1,000) square feet for the first five (5) units;
    2. An additional two hundred (200) square feet for each unit over five (5) units;
    3. The average width and length of each usable recreation or playground area shall not be less than twenty feet (20');
    4. All of the required area shall be usable common space accessible to the entire community; and
    5. The number of amenities required depends on the size of the development. All amenities shall be approved by the land use authority in accordance with the following:
    +--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    |                Units                 |              Amenities              |
    +--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | 0 – 4                                | 0                                   |
    +--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | 5 – 50                               | 1                                   |
    +--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | 51 – 100                             | 2                                   |
    +--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | 101 – 200                            | 3                                   |
    +--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | 201 – 300                            | 4                                   |
    +--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | For projects in excess of 300 units, add 1 amenity for each 100 additional |
    | units or fraction thereof.                                                 |
    +--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    6. The type of amenities required depends on the nature, size, and density of the development. If multiple amenities are required, the type shall vary. All amenities shall be approved by the land use authority in accordance with the following:
        a. All required amenities shall be fully constructed prior to construction of fifty percent (50%) of the total project units, or in accordance with an executed development agreement with terms acceptable to the city;
        b. In addition to amenities, a minimum of thirty percent (30%) of the lot area shall be maintained in landscaped area, and at least fifty percent (50%) of the front setback area shall be maintained as landscaped area;
        c. Table of Amenities: 
        +--------------------------------------------------+
        | Pool – At least 400 square feet                  |
        +--------------------------------------------------+
        | Internal health or fitness facilities            |
        +--------------------------------------------------+
        | Secured, programmed, children’s play areas       |
        +--------------------------------------------------+
        | In-ground hot tub                                |
        +--------------------------------------------------+
        | Community garden                                 |
        +--------------------------------------------------+
        | Perimeter trail                                  |
        +--------------------------------------------------+
        | Sport court                                      |
        +--------------------------------------------------+
        | Indoor, keyed bicycle storage for units          |
        +--------------------------------------------------+
        | Community library, office, or meeting facilities |
        +--------------------------------------------------+
        | Exterior social area – At least 400 square feet  |
        +--------------------------------------------------+
(Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

ARTICLE G. PLANNED DEVELOPMENT – STUDENT HOUSING ZONE
(PD-SH)


10-7G-1:     Allowed Uses
10-7G-2:     General Requirements
10-7G-3:     Preliminary Plat
10-7G-4:     PD-SH Student Housing Development Standards

10-7G-1: ALLOWED USES:
The planned development student housing (PD-SH) provisions apply only to projects located within the “student pedestrian emphasis area” as defined in this title, to provide housing for Dixie State University students. Any use not specifically permitted, permitted with standards, or conditionally permitted is prohibited. Only the following uses are allowed:
A. Uses indicated by the letter “P” below are permitted in the designated zone only if approved as part of the zone change.
B. Uses indicated by the letters “PS” are permitted uses with required standards, only if approved as part of the zone change.
C. Uses indicated by the letter “C” are conditional uses in the designated zone.
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------+-------+
|                                                                           | PD-SH |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------+-------+
| City facility, primary                                                    | P     |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------+-------+
| City facility accessory uses: accessory structure and use                 | P     |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------+-------+
| Communication transmission facilities, including wireless, primary        | PS    |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------+-------+
| Communication transmission facilities, including wireless, primary,       | C     |
| height over 50'                                                           |       |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------+-------+
| Multiple-family dwelling  | Accessory structure and use                   | P     |
| accessory uses:           |                                               |       |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------+-------+
| "                         | Agriculture                                   | P     |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------+-------+
| "                         | Home occupation                               | P     |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------+-------+
| Public utility facilities, primary                                        | PS    |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------+-------+
| Public utility facilities accessory uses: accessory structures            | P     |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------+-------+
| Religious facility, primary                                               | P     |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------+-------+
| School, public or charter, primary                                        | P     |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------+-------+
| Single-family dwelling, primary                                           | P     |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------+-------+
| Single-family dwelling    | Accessory structure and use                   | P     |
| accessory uses:           |                                               |       |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------+-------+
| "                         | Agriculture                                   | P     |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------+-------+
| "                         | Child care, in-home babysitting               | P     |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------+-------+
| "                         | Child care, family                            | P     |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------+-------+
| "                         | Guesthouse                                    | PS    |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------+-------+
| "                         | Home occupation                               | P     |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------+-------+
| "                         | Small animals (not produced for food) up to 8 | P     |
|                           | animals                                       |       |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------+-------+
| Townhouse and condominiums                                                | P     |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------+-------+
| Townhouse and condominium | Accessory structure and use                   | P     |
| accessory uses:           |                                               |       |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------+-------+
| "                         | Agriculture                                   | P     |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------+-------+
| "                         | Child care, in-home babysitting               | P     |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------+-------+
| "                         | Child care, family                            | P     |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------+-------+
| "                         | Home occupation                               | P     |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------+-------+
| "                         | Small animals (not produced for food) up to 2 | P     |
|                           | animals                                       |       |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------+-------+
(Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-7G-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Application Requirements: Each application submitted pursuant to this chapter shall include the following:
    1. Documents Required: All requests shall be accompanied by a colored site development plan, materials, and a written text for the entire property proposed to be developed.
    2. Description of the Proposed Use of Land: The projected use of land, including percentages of land devoted to various types of land use, such as building coverage, parking area, landscaped area, etc.
    3. Height and Elevations: The type, character and proposed height of all buildings.
    4. Density: The proposed density in terms of dwelling units per gross acre of land and proposed floor area of residential and nonresidential uses per acre.
    5. Common Spaces: The location and boundaries of any proposed common, open, recreation, or amenity areas.
    6. Phasing Plan: A phasing plan, if the development is proposed to be developed in phases.
    7. Topography: Topography at contour intervals of two feet (2').
    8. Landscape Plan: A landscape plan showing the general location of lawn area and trees (this may be a part of the site or plot plan).
    9. Area Reserved for Landscaping: The location and amount of land area reserved for landscaping.
    10. Utilities: Demonstration that all utilities are underground and transformer equipment is screened from streets and from adjacent properties.
    11. Refuse Storage Areas: Refuse storage areas screened so that materials stored within these areas are not visible from access streets, freeways and adjacent properties.
    12. Lighting Plan: A general lighting plan indicating location and luminosity of lights to be installed on the site.
    13. Turning Space: Safe and convenient turning space for cars, sewer vehicles, refuse collection vehicles, firefighting equipment, etc.
    14. Signs: All signs shall be submitted and approved as part of the PD approval.
B. Signs and Advertising: The requirements of the sign ordinance set forth in title 9, chapter 13 of this code apply, unless a variation is specifically approved, and shall not exceed the following:
    1. Freestanding Signs: Freestanding signs shall be monuments and limited to seventy-two (72) square feet. Monument signs shall be limited to ten feet (10') in height. One (1) sign per street frontage.
    2. Wall Signs: One (1) wall sign on a multiple-family project limited to one hundred and twenty (120) square feet.
C. Time Limitation: Building permits for construction within planned development student housing zones must be obtained within thirty-six (36) months of the approval of a zone change to planned development. If thirty-six (36) months elapse without the issuance of building permits for the construction of the approved plans within the planned development zone, the zone shall automatically revert back to the previous zone before the zone change to planned development was approved. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-7G-3: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
For all planned development student housing projects that are proposed to be subdivided, applicant may prepare and submit a preliminary plat at the same time as the zone-change application for the planned development. In order to be considered for concurrent review, the application must contain all preliminary plat requirements set forth in chapter 25 of this title, as amended. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-7G-4: PD-SH STUDENT HOUSING DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A. Minimum Zone Requirements: Each planned student housing development zone application shall contain a minimum of one (1) acre within the student pedestrian emphasis area.
B. Height Regulations: No residential dwelling shall be erected to a height less than ten feet (10') and no structure shall be greater than fifty-five feet (55'). The city council, after recommendation from the planning commission, may approve increased building height up to seventy feet (70') upon making a finding, as part of a zone change approval, that the increase in height will fit harmoniously into the neighborhood, minimizing any negative impacts, after considering the following:
    1. Proposed setbacks provide an appropriate buffer to neighboring properties;
    2. Increased landscaping enhances the project and reduces any negative impacts;
    3. Site layout and design enhance the project and reduce any negative impacts;
    4. The massing and building scale is appropriate for the location;
    5. The proposed height increase is appropriate for the area; and
    6. The increase in height is consistent with any applicable master plan.
C. Area – Coverage – Density – Yard – Common Area and Landscaping Requirements: The minimum lot area, maximum density, maximum lot coverage, yard and common open space/landscaping requirements are as follows:
+-------------------+-------------+--------------------+---------------+---------------------------+---------------------+
| Lot Area Minimum/ | Maximum Lot | Minimum Landscaped |                      Minimum Yard Setbacks                      |
|  Maximum Density  |  Coverage   |        Area        |                                                                 |
+-------------------+-------------+--------------------+---------------+---------------------------+---------------------+
| "                 | "           | "                  |   Front and   |           Side            |        Rear         |
|                   |             |                    |  Street Side  |                           |                     |
+-------------------+-------------+--------------------+---------------+---------------------------+---------------------+
| 1 acre/40         | 50%         | 20%                | 25' from      | Adjacent to single-family | Adjacent to single- |
| dwelling          |             |                    | public street | zone: 20' setback,        | family zone:        |
| units/ acre       |             |                    |               | if greater than           | 20' setback,        |
|                   |             |                    |               | 20' in height.            | if greater than     |
|                   |             |                    |               | Otherwise: on             | 20' in height.      |
|                   |             |                    |               | a common parcel:          | Otherwise: on       |
|                   |             |                    |               | 10'                       | a common parcel:    |
|                   |             |                    |               |                           | 10'                 |
+-------------------+-------------+--------------------+---------------+---------------------------+---------------------+
D. Landscape Area and Amenity Requirements: At a minimum, all developments shall provide usable amenity areas in a central location:
    1. Student housing projects shall provide usable amenity and recreation areas outside the front setback, with a total minimum area of one hundred (100) square feet for each unit. Fifty percent (50%) of the required area may be in the form of interior recreation facilities;
    2. The average width and length of each usable recreation area shall not be less than twenty feet (20');
    3. All of the required area shall be usable common space accessible to the entire community; and
    4. The number of amenities required depends on the size of the development, and shall be approved by the land use authority in accordance with the following:
    +--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    |                Units                 |              Amenities              |
    +--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | 0 – 50                               | 1                                   |
    +--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | 51 – 100                             | 2                                   |
    +--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | 101 – 200                            | 3                                   |
    +--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | 201 – 300                            | 4                                   |
    +--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | For projects in excess of 300 units, add 1 amenity for each 100 additional |
    | units or fraction thereof.                                                 |
    +--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    5. The type of amenities required depends on the nature, size, and density of the development. If multiple amenities are required, the type shall vary. All amenities shall be approved by the land use authority in accordance with the following:
        a. All required amenities shall be fully constructed in the first phase of the project, in accordance with an approved PD phasing plan, or in accordance with an executed development agreement with terms acceptable to the city. In every case, all required amenities shall be fully constructed before fifty percent (50%) of the total project units are constructed;
        b. In addition to the amenity and recreation requirement, a minimum of thirty percent (30%) of the lot area shall be maintained in open green space or landscaped area, and at least fifty percent (50%) of the front setback area shall be maintained as landscaped area;
        c. Table of Amenities: 
        +--------------------------------------------------+
        | Pool – At least 400 square feet                  |
        +--------------------------------------------------+
        | Internal health or fitness facilities            |
        +--------------------------------------------------+
        | Secured, programmed, children’s play areas       |
        +--------------------------------------------------+
        | In-ground hot tub                                |
        +--------------------------------------------------+
        | Community garden                                 |
        +--------------------------------------------------+
        | Perimeter trail                                  |
        +--------------------------------------------------+
        | Sport court                                      |
        +--------------------------------------------------+
        | Indoor, keyed, bicycle storage for units         |
        +--------------------------------------------------+
        | Community library, office, or meeting facilities |
        +--------------------------------------------------+
        | Exterior social area – At least 400 square feet  |
        +--------------------------------------------------+
E. Standards: The standards set forth in chapter 7 of this title shall also apply unless otherwise provided in this section.
F. Design Standards: Building façades shall have architectural variations such as:
    1. Contrasting building materials and textures;
    2. Variations in rooflines, colors, reveals and belt courses;
    3. Recessed windows and doors, strongly expressed window mullions, and awnings;
    4. Varying building setbacks from property lines and alcoves, outdoor sitting areas, and small public plazas;
    5. Corner towers, cupolas, corner clock towers, corner spires, balconies and colonnades;
    6. Buildings located on street corners shall have the front façade wrap around the corner to the full depth of the building.
G. Number of Students – Enforcement: A minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) of the occupants must be enrolled in Dixie State University as qualifying students. The property owner shall enter into an agreement with the city in which the property owner acknowledges its responsibility to ensure and monitor compliance for qualified student occupancy. The property owner is responsible for entering into an agreement with the tenant that allows verification and compliance with this section, including waiving any FERPA restrictions for verification purposes. Monitoring requires the property owner to obtain verifiable information from Dixie State University, with evidence that seventy-five percent (75%) of the property occupants are qualifying students. The property owner must provide a semiannual (spring and fall) report to the city indicating the number and percentage of tenants who are qualifying students at the university. Reporting must be submitted to the city no later than thirty (30) days after the commencement of the associated reporting semester. In addition to those penalties provided in section 10-1-14, if the property owner fails to meet the minimum student occupant requirement for one (1) semiannual report, quarterly reports will be required. If the property owner fails to meet the minimum student occupant requirement at the next quarterly report, such failure will result in a fifty percent (50%) reduction in unit occupancy effective at the following quarterly report. Thereafter, if the property owner can show four (4) consecutive quarterly reports with evidence that seventy-five percent (75%) of property occupants are qualifying students, the fifty percent (50%) reduction in unit occupancy will be lifted, and semiannual reporting will be reinstated. It is the duty of the property owner to market and lease to, and maintain the required percentage of, qualified student occupants.
H. Commercial: Commercial uses may be considered during the PD-SH approval on the ground floor, and no minimum or maximum commercial use is required in accordance with section 10-8D-8; it must comply with all other mixed-use standards therein. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-06-002, 6-4-2020)

ARTICLE H. PLANNED DEVELOPMENT – TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD ZONE
(PD-TNZ)


10-7H-1:     Zone Standards
10-7H-2:     Administration
10-7H-3:     Regulating Text
10-7H-4:     Application Review Process
10-7H-6:     Use Regulations – Land Uses

10-7H-1: ZONE STANDARDS:
The planned development traditional neighborhood zone (PD-TNZ) provisions apply only to projects located within a designated “traditional neighborhood zone.” The desired development form shall be emphasized in the traditional neighborhood zone (TNZ), and strict use or density conditions shall be of secondary consideration.
A. This chapter defines two (2) different neighborhoods of a traditional neighborhood development and anticipates that one (1) neighborhood or a combination of neighborhoods may be employed in a traditional neighborhood zone.
    1. Neighborhood Edge (NE): Neighborhood edge is the less dense form of traditional neighborhood development consisting principally of detached single-family homes. NE may also include a limited number of duplexes and courtyard bungalows. Buildings are situated on larger lots with setbacks on all sides. The permitted building frontage includes porches and front yards. The streetscape consists of the regular, aligned planting of shade trees in a relatively wide planter strip between sidewalk and back of curb. All building forms must be of a scale and appearance compatible with typical single-family homes. Duplexes, courtyard bungalows, and single-family are all acceptable forms in an NE.
    2. Neighborhood General (NG): Neighborhood general is a primarily residential development pattern; however, it is denser than neighborhood edge and may consist of both attached and detached residence types. Multiple-family residential and nonresidential uses are permitted but shall blend into the neighborhood by occupying buildings that are of a scale and appearance compatible with single-family detached residences. Single-family homes are situated on smaller, narrower lots with shallow setbacks. The narrow lots generally require that off-street parking be accessed from the rear by alleys. A diversity of building frontages is appropriate in NG, including front yards, porch yards, door yards, forecourts, stoops, and shopfronts. Parking lot frontages are prohibited except on one (1) street side of corner lots. The NG streetscape consists of the regular, aligned planting of shade trees in a planter strip between sidewalk and back of curb.
B. Access Design: To the extent permitted by topography, all traditional neighborhood zones shall incorporate traditional block design, which includes the following elements:
    1. A regular grid street pattern, unless the city council finds at the time of TNZ approval that it is not feasible due to topographical constraints.
    2. Street cross sections that promote pedestrian activity and social engagement.
    3. Off-street parking placed at the rear of buildings and accessed by driveway, alley or lane. On-street parking is encouraged in all traditional neighborhood forms in order to create a buffer between car traffic and pedestrians, and to introduce traffic calming friction to thoroughfares.
    4. Car-oriented and large-scale commercial and industrial uses are incompatible with any of the traditional neighborhood forms. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-7H-2: ADMINISTRATION:
A. Design Manual and Form-Based Code: Supplemental development standards and definitions are adopted in the document titled, “Traditional Neighborhood Design Manual and Form-Based Code.” The design manual and form-based code are hereby incorporated into this chapter and shall have the same regulatory force and effect hereof, and hereinafter it is referred to as the “design manual.”
B. General Plan: The NE and NG shall be deemed consistent with the city’s general plan if located in an area designated for low, medium, medium high, or high density residential use; no general plan amendment shall be required in such circumstances.
C. Code Applicability: The city ordinances and standards apply to a traditional neighborhood zone and to the design manual unless expressly regulated by this chapter.
D. Parameters: 
    1. Neighborhood(s) Included: A traditional neighborhood zone may include one (1) or both of the two (2) neighborhoods defined in this chapter: neighborhood edge and neighborhood general.
    2. Minimum Land Area: There is no minimum land area for a neighborhood edge traditional neighborhood zone. The minimum land area for a neighborhood general traditional neighborhood zone is ten (10) contiguous acres.
    3. NG Minimum Mix of Forms: In neighborhood general, minimum residential mix of three (3) building forms is required. Single-family form shall comprise at least fifty percent (50%) of the total number of units. Any combination of the following forms shall comprise at least twenty-five percent (25%) of all attached unit forms: duplex, triplex, courtyard bungalow or paseo bungalow.
    4. NE Civic Space: In neighborhood edge, unless overall density exceeds five (5) dwellings per acre, there is no minimum civic space required in a neighborhood edge traditional neighborhood zone. If density is greater than five (5) dwelling units per acre, then a minimum of five percent (5%) usable civic space is required. Civic space must be included in the project phasing plan and approved with the zone change. The civic space shall be built concurrently with the development and shall be fully constructed prior to forty percent (40%) of the dwelling units being constructed. If the project proposes more than one (1) civic space, the city council, with recommendation from the planning commission, shall determine the appropriate phasing of any additional civic space. The designated civic space shall be within three hundred fifty feet (350') of the geographic center of the neighborhood unless otherwise approved during the zone-change process.
    5. NG Civic Space: In neighborhood general a minimum of five percent (5%) of its area shall be designated as usable civic space. The designated civic space shall be within three hundred fifty feet (350') of the geographic center of the neighborhood unless otherwise approved during the zone-change process. Civic space shall be included in the project phasing plan and approved with the zone change. Civic space shall be built concurrently with the development and shall be fully constructed prior to forty percent (40%) of the units being constructed. If the project proposes more than one (1) civic space, the city council, with recommendation from the planning commission, shall determine the appropriate phasing of any additional civic space.
    6. TNZ Integration: Where a TNZ neighborhood is proposed adjacent to an existing single-family subdivision, the TNZ must locate single-family detached homes adjacent to existing single-family units. However, up to twenty percent (20%) of those units adjacent to the existing single-family units may be built as duplexes, if approved during the zone change. For the purpose of this requirement, a TNZ and an existing single-family subdivision are considered adjacent if separated by a sixty-foot (60') right-of-way or less.
    7. Improvements: All improvements not specifically dedicated to the city, or accepted for ownership or maintenance by the city, shall comply with chapter 25 of this title. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-7H-3: REGULATING TEXT:
A. All zone-change applications for a traditional neighborhood zone shall include, at a minimum, a site plan and written text, which demonstrate how the proposed development will comply with this chapter and the design manual. Upon approval of the zone-change application, the site plan and written text shall constitute the regulating text, which shall control implementation of development. For traditional neighborhood zone-change applications for projects in excess of fifty (50) acres, the owner and developer shall enter into a development agreement under terms acceptable to the city. At a minimum, the regulating text for a TNZ shall include the following elements:
    1. The location and overall dimensions of the proposed traditional neighborhood zone, including the size, percentages, and location of the proposed traditional neighborhood form(s) within the proposed zone.
    2. A conceptual block plan, including important connections to adjoining streets and adjacent properties.
    3. The maximum number of residential units requested in the proposed traditional neighborhood zone overall, and in the respective neighborhood forms thereof, and a tabulation of the various residential building forms comprising the proposed residential total.
    4. Proposed Permitted Land Uses and Building Forms, Including Architecture, Elevations and Materials: Multiple-family and commercial buildings shall have specific elevations and materials approved for each building. Representative sample architecture, elevations and materials are adequate for single-family detached homes. Submittals shall include actual samples and colors of proposed materials.
    5. The proposed maximum square footage of nonresidential uses within a given neighborhood form, land use category, and individual building.
    6. The location, size and maintenance plan for civic space(s) and civic building sites.
    7. Proposed Streetscape Design Elements Such as Street Lighting, Permanent Signage, and Street Trees: A landscape plan and a street tree plan indicating species, size and spacing shall be provided.
    8. A detailed description of any form-based neighborhood elements, such as road cross sections, frontages, and setbacks, which the applicant wishes to propose as project enhancements to the standards enumerated in the design manual and form-based code.
    9. A diagram or table depicting existing and planned land uses within a one (1) mile radius of the project boundary in order to assist the city in understanding the context of the proposed TNZ, and assessing the overall fit of the proposed TNZ with its surroundings.
    10. If the project is proposed to be phased, a phasing plan shall be submitted, which includes phasing of all residential, commercial, and civic spaces. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-7H-4: APPLICATION REVIEW PROCESS:
A. Concurrent Review of Zoning and Preliminary Plat: The elements required of an application for a traditional neighborhood zone are essentially the same as those of a preliminary plat, and an application for zone change and preliminary plat may be considered simultaneously. In order to be considered for concurrent review, the application must contain all preliminary plat requirements set forth in section 10-25C-3.
B. Planning Commission Recommendation: The planning commission shall also forward any recommendations for approval, disapproval, or modification of the TNZ request, as reviewed by them, to the city council to be considered as part of the zone change.
C. Advertising: The zone-change request shall be advertised and heard according to the same requirements as any other zone-change request submitted to the planning commission and city council.
D. Approval – Findings: The city council may approve a TNZ zone-change request only after finding that the requirements of this title, and any other ordinances or restrictions affecting the property, have been satisfied. In granting such approval, the city council may impose and enforce such specific conditions as to site development, phasing, building construction or maintenance, and operation as it deems necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city.
E. Amendments and Modifications: Any amendment or modification of the TNZ deemed substantial by the city shall be submitted to the planning commission for recommendation, and to the city council for approval. The applicant must comply with all other steps of the review process enumerated herein for the original zone-change application for an amendment or modification. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-7H-6: USE REGULATIONS – LAND USES:
The table below lists certain land uses. The NE column enumerates the uses permitted (P), permitted with standards (PS), or conditionally permitted (C), in the neighborhood edge form. Likewise, the NG column enumerates the uses permitted (P), permitted with standards (PS), or conditionally permitted (C), in the neighborhood general form. As part of a TNZ written text, a zone-change application pursuant to this chapter may propose land uses similar to those set forth in this chapter. The inclusion of any proposed additional land use category or additional specific permitted use shall be approved by the city council as part of the approval of the zone-change request and shall thereby become part of the regulating text. All permitted uses shall be conducted within fully enclosed buildings except those uses customarily conducted in the outdoors, such as outdoor dining ancillary to a permitted restaurant, community leisure, or recreation. Commercial uses and locations shall be approved as part of the TNZ if it does not comply with title 3, chapter 7, “Home Occupations,” of this code, and must conform to parking and landscaping requirements for commercial zones. Specific commercial uses shall be approved as part of the TNZ process. Proposed land uses must conform to the land use categories below. Commercial uses must be of a scale, intensity, impact, and appearance compatible with the surrounding forms. Any use not specifically permitted, permitted with standards, or conditionally permitted, is prohibited.
+-----------------------------------------------------------------+----+----+
|                                                                 | NE | NG |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------+----+----+
| Residential forms:                                                        |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------+----+----+
| Accessory dwelling unit                                         | PS | PS |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------+----+----+
| Guesthouse                                                      | PS | PS |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------+----+----+
| Bungalow court or paseo                                         | P  | P  |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------+----+----+
| Duplex (twin or stacked)                                        | P  | P  |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------+----+----+
| Live-work unit (not home occupation, with commercial front,     |    | P  |
| and complying with parking standards)                           |    |    |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------+----+----+
| Row/townhouse                                                   |    | P  |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------+----+----+
| Single-family house                                             | P  | P  |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------+----+----+
| Accessory structures, secondary to a single-family dwelling     | P  | P  |
| on the same lot as the dwelling                                 |    |    |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------+----+----+
| Small mixed-use building (8,000 sf maximum)                     |    | P  |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------+----+----+
| Small multiple-family building (12 units and 12,000 sf maximum) |    | P  |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------+----+----+
| Zero lot single-family house                                    |    | P  |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------+----+----+
| Commercial uses, 10,000 sf maximum:                                       |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------+----+----+
| Art gallery                                                     |    | P  |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------+----+----+
| Communication transmission facilities, including wireless,      | PS | PS |
| primary                                                         |    |    |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------+----+----+
| Communication transmission facilities, including wireless,      | C  | C  |
| primary, height over 50'                                        |    |    |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------+----+----+
| Consumer convenience services (barbershop/beauty shop, dry      |    | P  |
| cleaner and other similar low impact services)                  |    |    |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------+----+----+
| Food sales (bakery, delicatessen, ice cream parlor, coffee      |    | P  |
| shop and other similar low impact food sales)                   |    |    |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------+----+----+
| General retail sales, no gas pumps (bookstore, florist, antique |    | P  |
| store, fruit and vegetable store, neighborhood grocery, and     |    |    |
| other similar low impact sales)                                 |    |    |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------+----+----+
| Outdoor sports and recreation                                   |    | P  |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------+----+----+
| Professional medical office – Nonresidential building occupancy |    | P  |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------+----+----+
| Restaurant (general)                                            |    | P  |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------+----+----+
| Community leisure and recreation (private)                      | P  | P  |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------+----+----+
| Community leisure and recreation (public)                       | P  | P  |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------+----+----+
| Civic uses:                                                               |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------+----+----+
| Daycare services, commercial                                    |    | P  |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------+----+----+
| Educational facilities                                          | P  | P  |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------+----+----+
| Government buildings or uses                                    | P  | P  |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------+----+----+
| Religious assembly                                              | P  | P  |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------+----+----+
A. Additional Standards: 
    1. No more than ten percent (10%) of all dwellings in a single-form neighborhood edge traditional neighborhood zone may be comprised of duplex-building forms, and no more than twenty percent (20%) of all dwellings may be comprised of duplex and bungalow court building forms combined.
    2. Standards for zero lot single-family detached homes (not applicable to duplexes sharing a party wall at the zero lot line):
        a. Approved dwelling units may be placed on one (1) interior side property line (a zero setback). The minimum setback from the other side property line shall be ten feet (10').
        b. The plat shall clearly depict and describe the zero lot lines and the related easements.
        c. A perpetual maintenance, eave overhang, and drainage easement at least eight feet (8') wide shall be provided on the lot adjacent to the zero lot-line property line. The easement shall be shown on the plat and recorded on the properties. The residential wall abutting the zero lot-line shall be maintained in its original color and treatment unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the two (2) affected lot owners. Eaves, but no other part of any structure, may protrude across a zero lot-line, and such protrusion shall not exceed eighteen inches (18"). Notwithstanding the required drainage easement, rain gutters must route runoff from the dwelling away from the adjacent lot. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

CHAPTER 8 ADMINISTRATIVE PROFESSIONAL (AP), COMMERCIAL (C), AND MANUFACTURING ZONES (M), AND PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONES (PD-AP, PD-C, PD-M AND PD-MU)


10-8-1:      Yards Unobstructed – Exceptions
10-8-2:      Curb, Gutter and Sidewalk – When Required
10-8-3:      Utility Requirements
10-8-4:      Temporary Buildings
10-8-5:      Temporary Outdoor Events
10-8-6:      Pedestrian Circulation Plan
10-8-7:      Conflict
10-8-8:      Related Provisions
8A           Administrative Professional Zone
    10-8A-1:     Allowed Uses
    10-8A-2:     Height Regulations
    10-8A-3:     Area, Width and Yard Requirements
    10-8A-4:     Site Development Standards
    10-8A-5:     Special Provisions
8B           Commercial Zones
    10-8B-1:     Allowed Uses
    10-8B-2:     Area, Setback and Height Requirements
    10-8B-3:     Special Provisions
8C           Manufacturing Zones
    10-8C-1:     Allowed Uses
    10-8C-2:     Site Development Standards
    10-8C-3:     Special Provisions
8D           Planned Development Zones
    10-8D-1:     Allowed Uses
    10-8D-2:     General Requirements
    10-8D-3:     Preliminary Plat
    10-8D-4:     Conflict
    10-8D-5:     PD-AP – Planned Development – Administrative Professional Standards
    10-8D-6:     PD-C – Planned Development – Commercial Standards
    10-8D-7:     PD-M – Planned Development – Manufacturing Standards
    10-8D-8:     PD-MU – Planned Development – Mixed-Use Standards

10-8-1: YARDS UNOBSTRUCTED – EXCEPTIONS:
Every part of the setback area shall be open to the sky, unobstructed except for:
A. The ordinary projections of belt courses, eaves, chimneys, flues, cantilevered balconies, decks, ornamental features, open fire escapes, or open outside stairways which project into a setback not more than four feet (4');
B. City public transit shelters, with or without public restrooms, may be located within a setback area adjacent to a public street. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-8-2: CURB, GUTTER AND SIDEWALK – WHEN REQUIRED:
The installation of curb, gutter, sidewalk, and pavement of a type approved by the city is required on any future or existing street where such improvements are not already in existence, or where existing improvements are damaged or broken. Said installation may be required as a condition of obtaining a certificate of occupancy unless a current improvement completion assurance has been provided. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-8-3: UTILITY REQUIREMENTS:
In all areas of the city, connection shall be made to public water, electrical and sewer facilities, unless waived by the city engineer or designee upon a demonstration of an equivalent alternative acceptable to the city. All utilities shall be located underground, unless specifically approved by the city engineer or designee. All construction shall comply with state building codes and all city standards. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-8-4: TEMPORARY BUILDINGS:
A. Authorized – Term: A temporary, on-site construction or sales office that does not meet minimum construction standards may be approved by the city during the construction of permanent facilities for the permitted duration. Such temporary approval may be made for a period up to one (1) year. An extension may be granted for good cause shown, for an additional six (6) months, up to a maximum of eighteen (18) months.
B. Cargo Containers: Cargo containers may be approved by the city for temporary use by an applicant, only when a permitted use exists or is under construction, and under the following standards:
    1. For on-site use only during permitted construction or renovation; provided, a building permit has been issued for construction-related activities. For the purpose of permitted cargo containers, a building permit will be considered inactive after one hundred eighty (180) days after the last inspection that shows substantial progress toward completion of the project.
    2. For use during moving or on-site construction activities that do not require a permit for thirty (30) days. One (1) thirty (30) day extension may be granted for good cause shown.
    3. Vertical stacking is prohibited.
    4. Cargo containers may be used in association with a licensed firework business, donation center, or other nonprofit collection center for thirty (30) days in any six (6) month period.
    5. Properties may have temporary cargo containers. No separation is required between cargo containers. Cargo containers must maintain a minimum of ten feet (10') separation between other structures. The cargo container may be allowed on site for up to eighteen (18) months. An extension may be granted for cause, by the city, for an additional six (6) months, up to a maximum of twenty-four (24) months. Cargo containers permitted under this section must comply with the applicable building and zoning regulations.
    6. Cargo containers shall not be located in fire lanes, required parking spaces or landscaping. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-8-5: TEMPORARY OUTDOOR EVENTS:
A. Temporary outdoor events (e.g., promotions, tent sales, exhibits, carnivals, concerts) may be permitted by the city on property zoned commercial, including the planned development commercial zones, for a period not to exceed six (6) continuous days within a six (6) month period.
B. Temporary outdoor events to be held on public property also require review and approval by the city. Applicants shall submit adequate plans and information for the city to determine that the events will not interfere with the safety and general welfare of the community or violate any other requirements or ordinances of the city. Required licenses, permits, and clearances shall be obtained prior to any event taking place. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-8-6: PEDESTRIAN CIRCULATION PLAN:
Each new commercial development shall provide a plan to address safe pedestrian and bicycle circulation. The plan shall address interior circulation, as well as connections to existing sidewalks and adjacent trails. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-8-7: CONFLICT:
These provisions in this chapter apply to all subchapters, unless a specific provision in an article replaces and supersedes the one that is more general and broader in scope in this chapter. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-8-8: RELATED PROVISIONS:
A. Outdoor Lighting – Chapter 14 of this title.
B. Permitted with Standards and Conditional Uses – Chapter 17 of this title.
C. Walls, Fences and Hedges – Chapter 18 of this title.
D. Off-Street Parking Requirements – Chapter 19 of this title.
E. Motor Vehicle Access and Loading – Chapter 20 of this title.
F. Landscape Standards – Chapter 23 of this title.
G. Signs – Title 9, chapter 13 of this code. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

ARTICLE A. ADMINISTRATIVE PROFESSIONAL ZONE
AP


10-8A-1:     Allowed Uses
10-8A-2:     Height Regulations
10-8A-3:     Area, Width and Yard Requirements
10-8A-4:     Site Development Standards
10-8A-5:     Special Provisions

10-8A-1: ALLOWED USES:
Any use not specifically permitted, permitted with standards, or conditionally permitted is prohibited. Only the following uses are allowed in this zone:
A. Uses indicated by the letter “P” below are permitted in the designated zone.
B. Uses indicated by the letters “PS” are permitted uses with required standards in this zone. Uses must comply with the standards and evaluation criteria established in chapter 17 of this title.
C. Uses indicated by the letter “C” are conditional uses in the designated zone.
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+----+
|                                                                     | AP |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Accessory structure, to any of the listed uses                      | P  |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Child care center                                                   | P  |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| City facility                                                       | P  |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Communication transmission facilities, including wireless, primary  | PS |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Communication transmission facilities, including wireless, primary, | C  |
| height over 50'                                                     |    |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Hospital                                                            | P  |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Medical and biological laboratory/research                          | P  |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Medical office                                                      | P  |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Mortuary                                                            | P  |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Nursing home                                                        | P  |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Office, professional                                                | P  |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Pharmacy                                                            | P  |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Personal care service                                               | P  |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Public utility facilities, primary                                  | PS |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Religious facility                                                  | P  |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| School, public or charter                                           | P  |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+----+
(Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-06-002, 6-4-2020)

10-8A-2: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No structure shall be erected to a height less than ten feet (10') or greater than fifty feet (50'). No accessory structure shall be erected to a height greater than fifteen feet (15'). (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-8A-3: AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The minimum lot area, width and yard requirements are as follows:
+-------------+-------------+-----------------+------------------+--------------+--------------+
|  District   | Minimum Lot |   Minimum Lot   |             Minimum Yard Setbacks              |
|             |    Area     | Width/ Frontage |                                                |
+-------------+-------------+-----------------+------------------+--------------+--------------+
| "           | "           | "               | Front and Street |     Side     |     Rear     |
|             |             |                 |       Side       |              |              |
+-------------+-------------+-----------------+------------------+--------------+--------------+
| AP          | 10,000 sf   | 80'             | 20'              | 10'          | 10'          |
+-------------+-------------+-----------------+------------------+--------------+--------------+
|             |             |                 | Must meet setback of adjacent zone if          |
|             |             |                 | that setback is greater than required          |
|             |             |                 | in this table.                                 |
+-------------+-------------+-----------------+------------------+--------------+--------------+
| AP abutting | 10,000 sf   | 80'             | 20'              | 10' plus one | 10' plus one |
| residential |             |                 |                  | additional   | additional   |
|             |             |                 |                  | foot for     | foot for     |
|             |             |                 |                  | every foot   | every foot   |
|             |             |                 |                  | of building  | of building  |
|             |             |                 |                  | height over  | height over  |
|             |             |                 |                  | 15'          | 15'          |
+-------------+-------------+-----------------+------------------+--------------+--------------+
(Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-06-002, 6-4-2020)

10-8A-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Except in the front setback area, a six-foot (6') solid fence or wall shall be placed along a boundary line with any residential zone. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-8A-5: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
Applications for a building with a ground floor (footprint) area of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or more or for development with an aggregate ground floor (footprint) square footage of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or more must include a site plan, colored building elevations of all sides and a three (3) dimensional rendering that demonstrates the application complies with the following standards:
A. Vehicle access and parking lots properly designed for safety, efficiency and mitigation of adverse environmental impacts. Parking lot design must incorporate landscaped and shade trees throughout the lot to mitigate for major heat islands, and to break up large asphalt areas.
B. Building façade must include:
    1. Substantial façade shifts every ten feet (10') in the horizontal plane, and every fifty feet (50') in the vertical plane;
    2. Vertical articulation and variation from floor to floor created with color, materials, pitch dormers, gable ends, cornice detailing, or similar details;
    3. A combination of doors, windows, texture, projections, awnings or canopies on the base floor elevation to reinforce a perception of pedestrian scale.
C. Building colors are limited to natural, muted tones that emulate the local geologic formations common to the area and blend with the predominant colors of the natural surroundings.
D. Protection of Residential Zones: Where any administrative professional zone adjoins any residential zone, as part of the required setbacks, there shall be provided and maintained along such property line a six-foot (6') solid masonry fence and a ten-foot (10') landscape buffer to protect the adjoining residential property. Landscape buffer shall consist of a minimum of one (1) tree every twenty linear feet (20'). Required trees shall be a minimum of one and one-half inch (1-1/2") diameter measured six inches (6") above the soil surface. In addition to the required trees, a minimum of five (5) plants or shrubs shall be planted per every one hundred linear feet (100'). Trees and shrubs may be arranged in either rows or clustered. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-06-002, 6-4-2020)

ARTICLE B. COMMERCIAL ZONES
C-1 (Neighborhood Commercial),C-2 (Highway Commercial),C-3 (General Commercial),C-4 (Central Business District Commercial)


10-8B-1:     Allowed Uses
10-8B-2:     Area, Setback and Height Requirements
10-8B-3:     Special Provisions

10-8B-1: ALLOWED USES:
Any use not specifically permitted, permitted with standards, or conditionally permitted is prohibited. Only the following uses are allowed:
A. Uses indicated by the letter “P” below are permitted in the designated zone.
B. Uses indicated by the letters “PS” are permitted uses with required standards in this zone. Uses must comply with the standards and evaluation criteria established in chapter 17 of this title.
C. Uses indicated by the letter “C” are conditional uses in the designated zone.
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
|                                                          | C-1 | C-2 | C-3 | C-4 |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Alcohol establishments, including the following:                                 |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Bar establishment                                        |     | C   | C   | C   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Off-premise beer retailer                                |     | P   | P   | P   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Microbrewery or micro-winery (with restaurant            |     | P   | P   | P   |
| or bar establishment)                                    |     |     |     |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Nightclub, dance hall (with alcohol)                     |     | C   | C   | C   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Ambulance service                                        |     | P   | P   |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Amusement centers, recreation and entertainment facilities (indoor):             |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Indoor entertainment activities such as paintball,       |     | P   | P   | P   |
| miniature golf, arcade                                   |     |     |     |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Indoor shooting range                                    |     | PS  | PS  |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Nightclub, dance hall (without alcohol)                  |     | P   | P   | P   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Amusement centers, recreation and entertainment          |     | C   | C   | C   |
| facilities (outdoor)                                     |     |     |     |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Animal services, including the following:                                        |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Animal boarding/care for small animals only              |     | P   | P   | P   |
| and boarded for less than 30 days a year; provided,      |     |     |     |     |
| conducted completely within enclosed building            |     |     |     |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Animal hospital and veterinarian clinic, including       |     | PS  | PS  |     |
| overnight care of large animals (no boarding)            |     |     |     |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Automobile and vehicle services, limited to the following uses:                  |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Automobiles and other similar vehicle sales              |     | PS  | PS  |     |
| lots                                                     |     |     |     |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Automobile parts sales (new parts only); provided,       |     | P   | P   | P   |
| conducted within completely enclosed building            |     |     |     |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Automobile rental (vehicles up to 26' in length)         |     | P   | P   |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Automobile repair, storage, including paint,             |     | P   | P   | P   |
| body and fender, brake, muffler, upholstery              |     |     |     |     |
| or transmission work; provided, conducted within         |     |     |     |     |
| completely enclosed building (GVW 14,000 lbs             |     |     |     |     |
| or less)                                                 |     |     |     |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Car wash, recirculating water system manual              | P   | P   | P   | P   |
| or auto spray                                            |     |     |     |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Tire sales and service; provided, conducted              |     | P   | P   | P   |
| within completely enclosed building                      |     |     |     |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Financial, medical and professional services             | P   | P   | P   | P   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Food service establishments, including the following and similar uses:           |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Catering establishment                                   |     | P   | P   | P   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Restaurant                                               | P   | P   | P   | P   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Lodging, temporary, limited to the following uses:                               |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Bed and breakfast                                        |     | P   | P   | P   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Hotel/motel                                              |     | P   | P   | P   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| RV parks, long and short term                            |     | PS  |     |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Timeshare units                                          |     | P   | P   | P   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Hospitals                                                |     |     | P   | P   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Counseling center, mental health, alcohol, drugs         |     | P   | P   | P   |
| (nonresidential, less than 24 hours)                     |     |     |     |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Mental health treatment center, with overnight           |     | C   | C   | C   |
| stay                                                     |     |     |     |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Nursing home                                             |     | P   | P   |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Office                                                   | P   | P   | P   | P   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Religious facility                                       | P   | P   | P   | P   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Residential, limited to the following use:                                       |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Living quarters for manager or security personnel        |     | PS  | PS  | PS  |
| for business which requires 24-hour assistance           |     |     |     |     |
| or security – Up to 600 sf with occupancy limited        |     |     |     |     |
| to 4 people                                              |     |     |     |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Large floor area building or site (20,000 sf             |     | C   | C   | C   |
| or more ground floor aggregate)                          |     |     |     |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Retail shops:                                                                    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Antique store                                            |     | P   | P   | P   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Athletic and sporting goods store                        |     | P   | P   | P   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Department store                                         |     | P   | P   | P   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Drive-through sales (pharmacy, dairy products,           |     | P   | P   | P   |
| etc.)                                                    |     |     |     |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Furniture and large appliances sales (used)              |     | P   | P   |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Furniture sales (new) and repair                         |     | P   | P   | P   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Household appliance sales and service                    |     | P   | P   | P   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Office supply, office machines sales and service         |     | P   | P   | P   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Paint or wallpaper store                                 |     | P   | P   | P   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Pawnshop                                                 |     | P   | P   |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Seed and feed store, retail                              |     | P   | P   |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Supermarket/grocery store                                |     | P   | P   | P   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Thrift shop/secondhand store/consignment store           |     | P   | P   | P   |
| (no outside storage and no drop-off of items             |     |     |     |     |
| during the hours the business is closed)                 |     |     |     |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Vegetable stand                                          |     | P   | P   | P   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Payday lending/title loans                               |     | P   | P   |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Retail sale of goods with some operations outdoors, limited to the following     |
| uses:                                                                            |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Building materials sales                                 |     |     | P   |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Convenience markets with gas pumps/gas station           |     | P   | P   |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Convenience markets with gas pumps located in            |     |     |     | P   |
| the rear of the building                                 |     |     |     |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Farm implement sales (outdoor display)                   |     | P   | P   |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Fence, sales and service                                 |     | P   | P   |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Garden supplies and plant material sales                 |     | P   | P   |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Greenhouse and nursery; soil and lawn service            |     |     | P   |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Landscape rock sales, ancillary to a permitted           |     |     | P   |     |
| use                                                      |     |     |     |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Service businesses, limited to the following uses:                               |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Body piercing, ancillary to a permitted use              |     | P   | P   | P   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Carpet and rug cleaning                                  |     | P   | P   | P   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Child care center                                        | P   | P   | P   | P   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Communication transmission facilities, including         |     | PS  | PS  | PS  |
| wireless, primary                                        |     |     |     |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Communication transmission facilities, including         | C   | C   | C   | C   |
| wireless, primary, height over 50'                       |     |     |     |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Construction trade services, plumbing shop,              |     |     | P   |     |
| electrical shop, etc.                                    |     |     |     |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Crematorium, independent human                           |     | P   | P   |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Educational institutions, schools, college,              |     | P   | P   | P   |
| learning centers, trade schools (no residential          |     |     |     |     |
| or 24-hour facilities)                                   |     |     |     |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Gunsmith                                                 |     | P   | P   | P   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Janitor service and supply                               |     | P   | P   | P   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Locksmith                                                |     | P   | P   | P   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Mortuary                                                 |     | P   | P   | P   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Permanent cosmetics, a secondary use to an establishment | P   | P   | P   | P   |
| employing cosmetologist(s)/barber(s), aesthetician(s),   |     |     |     |     |
| electrologist(s), or nail technician(s) licensed         |     |     |     |     |
| by the state under 58-11a-101 et seq., Utah              |     |     |     |     |
| Code Annotated, 1953, as amended, excluding              |     |     |     |     |
| tattoo establishments and home occupations               |     |     |     |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Personal care service                                    | P   | P   | P   | P   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Personal instruction service                             | P   | P   | P   | P   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Pest control and extermination                           |     | P   | P   | P   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Pet grooming                                             |     | P   | P   | P   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Printing, lithographing, publishing or reproduction      |     |     | P   | P   |
| sales and service                                        |     |     |     |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Psychic, tarot card reader, fortune teller,              |     | P   | P   | P   |
| occult art practitioners, hypnotist                      |     |     |     |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| RV storage                                               |     | PS  | PS  |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Sign sales                                               |     | P   | P   | P   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Storage rental units                                     |     | PS  | PS  |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Tattoo establishment                                     |     | P   | P   | P   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Taxidermist                                              |     | PS  | PS  |     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Transportation, limited to the following uses:                                   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Bus terminal                                             |     | P   | P   | P   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Taxi/shuttle                                             |     | P   | P   | P   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Government, public services and facilities, limited to the following uses:       |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| City, all facilities                                     | P   | P   | P   | P   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
| Public utility facilities, primary                       |     | PS  | PS  | PS  |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
(Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-06-002, 6-4-2020)

10-8B-2: AREA, SETBACK AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS:
+---------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+----------+
|                             |        C-1        |        C-2        |        C-3        |             C-4              |
+---------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+----------+
| "                           | "                 | "                 | "                 |      Setback      | Build-to |
|                             |                   |                   |                   |                   |   Line   |
+---------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+----------+
| Minimum new lot area        | 10,000 sf         | 10,000 sf         | 10,000 sf         | 10,000 sf                    |
+---------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+----------+
| Minimum       | Front       | 20'               | 20'               | 20'               | 0                 | 10'      |
| yard setbacks |             |                   |                   |                   |                   |          |
| from property |             |                   |                   |                   |                   |          |
| line          |             |                   |                   |                   |                   |          |
+---------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+----------+
| "             | Side        | 10'               | 10'               | 10'               | 0                 |          |
+---------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+----------+
| "             | Side facing | 20'               | 20'               | 20'               | 0                 |          |
|               | a street    |                   |                   |                   |                   |          |
|               | on corner   |                   |                   |                   |                   |          |
|               | lot         |                   |                   |                   |                   |          |
+---------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+----------+
| "             | Rear        | 10'               | 10'               | 10'               | None                         |
+---------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+----------+
| Setbacks      | Front       | 20' plus one      | 20' plus one      | 20' plus one      | 10'               | 10'      |
| when abutting |             | additional        | additional        | additional        |                   |          |
| a residential |             | foot for          | foot for          | foot for          |                   |          |
| zone          |             | every foot        | every foot        | every foot        |                   |          |
|               |             | of building       | of building       | of building       |                   |          |
|               |             | height over       | height over       | height over       |                   |          |
|               |             | 20'               | 20'               | 20'               |                   |          |
+---------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+----------+
| "             | Side        | 10' plus one      | 10' plus one      | 10' plus one      | 10' plus one      |          |
|               |             | additional        | additional        | additional        | additional        |          |
|               |             | foot for          | foot for          | foot for          | foot for          |          |
|               |             | every foot        | every foot        | every foot        | every foot        |          |
|               |             | of building       | of building       | of building       | of building       |          |
|               |             | height over       | height over       | height over       | height over       |          |
|               |             | 15'               | 15'               | 15'               | 15'               |          |
+---------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+----------+
| "             | Side facing | 20' plus one      | 20' plus one      | 20' plus one      | 10' plus one      |          |
|               | a street    | additional        | additional        | additional        | additional        |          |
|               | on corner   | foot for          | foot for          | foot for          | foot for          |          |
|               | lot         | every foot        | every foot        | every foot        | every foot        |          |
|               |             | of building       | of building       | of building       | of building       |          |
|               |             | height over       | height over       | height over       | height over       |          |
|               |             | 20'               | 20'               | 20'               | 20'               |          |
+---------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+----------+
| "             | Rear        | 10' plus one      | 10' plus one      | 10' plus one      | 10' plus one      |          |
|               |             | additional        | additional        | additional        | additional        |          |
|               |             | foot for          | foot for          | foot for          | foot for          |          |
|               |             | every foot        | every foot        | every foot        | every foot        |          |
|               |             | of building       | of building       | of building       | of building       |          |
|               |             | height over       | height over       | height over       | height over       |          |
|               |             | 15'               | 15'               | 15'               | 15'               |          |
+---------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+----------+
| Required screening          | Solid 6' masonry  | Solid 6' masonry  | Solid 6' masonry  | Solid 6' masonry  |          |
| from abutting residential   | wall and          | wall and          | wall and          | wall and          |          |
| property                    | 10' landscaping   | 10' landscaping   | 10' landscaping   | 10' landscaping   |          |
|                             | along residential | along residential | along residential | along residential |          |
|                             | property          | property          | property          | property          |          |
|                             | line              | line              | line              | line              |          |
+---------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+----------+
| Minimum/maximum height      | 8'/50'            | 8'/50'            | 8'/50'            | 8'/50'            |          |
+---------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+----------+
| Maximum structure           | 15,000 sf         |                   |                   |                   |          |
| area                        |                   |                   |                   |                   |          |
+---------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+----------+
| Maximum lot coverage        | 40% for all       |                   |                   |                   |          |
|                             | conditional       |                   |                   |                   |          |
|                             | uses              |                   |                   |                   |          |
+---------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+----------+
(Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-06-002, 6-4-2020)

10-8B-3: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
A. Enclosure of Merchandise and Materials: Unless otherwise specifically provided herein, all materials and merchandise shall be stored in an enclosed building.
    1. Merchandise items specifically allowed to be stored out of doors shall be stored within an enclosure surrounded by a solid, sight-obscuring fence or wall of not less than six feet (6') in height, and no material or merchandise shall be stored to a height of more than the height of the enclosing fence or wall (chain link fencing with slats is not considered a solid fence for purposes of this section).
    2. Authorized outdoor sales of playground equipment, outdoor furniture, plants, pots and similar items may not be displayed within the required landscape area, and not within on-site parking spaces required for the business.
B. Solid Waste Storage Facilities: All solid waste storage facilities shall be located at the rear of the main building or else behind a sight-obscuring fence or wall which will prevent the facility from being seen from a public street. Chain link fencing with sight-obscuring slats is not permitted.
C. Forestry Program: Commercial developments along designated major collector roads shall comply with all provisions of the city’s community forestry program. An approved species of tree with at least a one-and-one-half-inch (1½") caliper shall be planted every thirty feet (30') to forty feet (40') in accordance with tree planting criteria. Landscaping and required street trees shall be installed prior to receiving permanent power or release of the improvement completion assurance.
D. New Buildings or Exterior Remodels within I-15 Right-of-Way: New buildings or existing buildings proposing an exterior remodel located within two hundred feet (200') of the I-15 right-of-way shall comply with the following:
    1. Design Standards: 
        a. Buildings backing against the I-15 right-of-way are considered to have two (2) building fronts for aesthetic purposes. Building walls visible from I-15 shall be constructed of identical or similar materials as the building’s front exterior, or shall be landscaped in such a manner that untreated cinder block, concrete or similar materials typical of rear walls are screened or enhanced to give a building-front appearance.
        b. Along the I-15 right-of-way, landscaping shall be provided to beautify the side and rear walls of buildings. Trees shall be planted at least every thirty feet (30') to forty feet (40') along such rights-of-way. In addition to landscaping, aesthetic improvements to the buildings’ rear and sidewalls are encouraged. Signs painted or attached to the side or rear walls shall not cover more than ten percent (10%) of the face of such walls.
    2. Site Plan and Elevation Drawings Required: Prior to the issuance of a building permit for new commercial buildings or proposed exterior remodels to existing buildings within two hundred feet (200') of the I-15 right-of-way, a site plan along with building elevation drawings showing the building view from I-15 (including signage), all consistent with this title, is required.
E. Protection of Residential Zones: Where any commercial zone adjoins any residential zone, as part of the required setbacks, there shall be provided and maintained along such property line a six-foot (6') solid masonry fence and a ten-foot (10') landscape buffer to protect the adjoining residential property. Landscape buffer shall consist of a minimum of one (1) tree every twenty linear feet (20'). Required trees shall be a minimum of one and one-half inch (1-1/2") diameter measured six inches (6") above the soil surface. In addition to the required trees, a minimum of five (5) plants or shrubs shall be planted per every one hundred linear feet (100'). Trees and shrubs may be arranged in either rows or clustered. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-06-002, 6-4-2020)

ARTICLE C. MANUFACTURING ZONES
(M-1, M-2, M-C)


10-8C-1:     Allowed Uses
10-8C-2:     Site Development Standards
10-8C-3:     Special Provisions

10-8C-1: ALLOWED USES:
Any use not specifically permitted, permitted with standards, or conditionally permitted is prohibited. Only the following uses are allowed:
A. Uses indicated by the letter “P” below are permitted in the designated zone.
B. Uses indicated by the letters “PS” are permitted uses with required standards in this zone. Uses must comply with the standards and evaluation criteria established in chapter 17 of this title.
C. Uses indicated by the letter “C” are conditional uses in the designated zone.
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
|                                                        | M-1 | M-2 | M-C |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Ambulance services                                     | P   | P   | P   |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Animal boarding for small animals only and boarded     | P   |     | P   |
| for less than 30 days a year; provided, service        |     |     |     |
| is conducted completely within enclosed building       |     |     |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Animal hospital and veterinarian clinic, including     | P   |     | P   |
| overnight care of small and large animals              |     |     |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Auction establishment (retail goods only and indoor    |     |     | P   |
| only in the M-C Zone), indoor swap meets               |     |     |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Auto salvage yard, storage yards for wrecked or        | C   |     |     |
| partially dismantled vehicles                          |     |     |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Automobile rental                                      |     |     | P   |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Bank or financial institution                          |     |     | P   |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Bar, beer parlor, tavern, lounge, sale of draft        |     |     | C   |
| beer                                                   |     |     |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Boat sales, service, parts sales, and storage          |     |     | P   |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Building truss manufacturing and sales (wood trusses)  | P   | P   |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Bulk plants (Class 1 and 2 flammable liquids and       | PS  | PS  | P   |
| gases)                                                 |     |     |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Living quarters for manager or security personnel      | PS  | PS  | PS  |
| for business which requires 24-hour assistance         |     |     |     |
| or security – Up to 600 sf with occupancy limited      |     |     |     |
| to 4 people                                            |     |     |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Carpenter, cabinet, electrical, plumbing or heating    | P   | P   | P   |
| shops                                                  |     |     |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Child care center                                      | P   | P   | P   |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| City facilities                                        | P   | P   | P   |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Communication transmission facilities, including       | PS  | PS  | PS  |
| wireless, primary                                      |     |     |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Communication transmission facilities, including       | C   | C   | C   |
| wireless, primary, height over 50'                     |     |     |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Construction materials or equipment, sales and         | P   |     | P   |
| storage                                                |     |     |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Contractor’s yard                                      | P   | P   |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Crematorium, medical waste incinerator                 | P   | P   | P   |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Dairy, dairies (processing of milk products)           | P   |     |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Dry cleaning plant                                     | P   |     |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Equipment sales, rental, and service                   | P   |     | P   |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Fabrication                                            | P   | P   | P   |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Fertilizer and soil conditioner manufacturing and      | P   |     |     |
| processing and sales, nonanimal products               |     |     |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Food processing wholesale excluding slaughter of       | P   | P   |     |
| animals and the processing of vinegar, yeast and       |     |     |     |
| fat                                                    |     |     |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Food service establishments, including the following   | P   | P   | P   |
| or similar uses: bakery and catering establishment     |     |     |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Furniture manufacturing, upholstery shop               | P   |     | P   |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Gas station, convenience market with gas pumps         | P   |     | P   |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Government facilities (not otherwise listed)           | P   | P   | P   |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Greenhouse and nursery, garden supplies, and plant     |     |     | P   |
| material sales; soil and lawn service                  |     |     |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Indoor shooting range                                  | PS  |     | PS  |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Laboratory, dental, medical, chemical                  | P   | P   |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Laundry and linen service                              | P   | P   | P   |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Livestock feed processing and storage                  | P   |     |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Locksmith                                              |     |     | P   |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Mail services, retail                                  |     |     | P   |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Manufacturing, general                                 | P   | P   | P   |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Manufacturing, light                                   | P   | P   | P   |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Manufacturing, heavy                                   |     | P   |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Medical cannabis pharmacy, Utah licensed – At least    | P   | P   | P   |
| 600' from a primarily residential zone                 |     |     |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Medical cannabis production establishment, Utah        | P   | P   |     |
| licensed:                                              |     |     |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Cultivation facility                                   | "   | "   | "   |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Independent testing laboratory                         | "   | "   | "   |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Processing facility                                    | "   | "   | "   |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Monument works and sales                               | P   |     | P   |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Moving and storage company                             | P   | P   | P   |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Offices                                                | P   |     | P   |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Paint and wallpaper store                              |     |     | P   |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Pest control and extermination services                | P   |     | P   |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Pet and pet supply store, groomery                     | P   |     | P   |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Pharmaceutical and medical manufacturing not exceeding | P   | P   |     |
| biosafety Level 2                                      |     |     |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Planing mill                                           | P   | P   |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Printing, publishing or lithography service            | P   | P   | P   |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Public utility facilities, primary                     | PS  | PS  | PS  |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Truck terminal                                         | P   | P   |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Vehicle, ATV, RV, or watercraft storage, part sales,   | P   |     | P   |
| or service                                             |     |     |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Recreational enterprise, indoor only (go-cart track,   |     |     | P   |
| climbing walls, ice skating rink, roller skating,      |     |     |     |
| soccer, and other recreational sport/entertainment     |     |     |     |
| type activities, but not including spectator-oriented  |     |     |     |
| arenas)                                                |     |     |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Recycling (of glass, metal, plastic, or paper only)    | P   |     |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Restaurant                                             | P   | P   | P   |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Retail sale of goods with all operations conducted     | P   | P   | P   |
| in an enclosed building – Limited to 20% of the        |     |     |     |
| overall building square footage in M-1 and M-2         |     |     |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Sand and gravel, extraction and crushing               | C   |     |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Sandblasting                                           | P   | P   |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Showroom and retail – Up to 10% of the building        | P   | P   |     |
| area                                                   |     |     |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Sexually oriented businesses                           | P   |     |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Storage rental units                                   | P   |     | P   |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Tattoo establishment and body piercing establishment   |     |     | P   |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Taxidermist                                            | P   |     | PS  |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Telemarketing center                                   | P   |     | P   |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Television or radio station; cable television and      | P   |     | P   |
| satellite dish provider                                |     |     |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Thrift shop/secondhand store/consignment store         |     |     | P   |
| (limited outside storage and no drop-off of items      |     |     |     |
| during the hours the business is closed)               |     |     |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Tire recapping or retreading                           | P   |     |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Tire sales and services                                | P   |     | P   |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Towing, including on-site vehicle storage and impound  | PS  |     |     |
| yard                                                   |     |     |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Utility trailer sales and services                     | P   |     | P   |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Truck sales and repair                                 | P   |     | P   |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Truck terminal                                         | P   | P   | P   |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Truck instructional school                             | P   | P   | P   |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Warehouse storage                                      | P   | P   | P   |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Wholesale business                                     | P   |     |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
| Wind turbines, power generation                        | P   | P   |     |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----+-----+-----+
(Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-8C-2: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The minimum site development standards are as follows:
+-------------------+-----------+------------+-----------+-----------+
|                   |    M-1    |    M-1     |    M-2    |    M-C    |
|                   |           | Ft. Pierce |           |           |
+-------------------+-----------+------------+-----------+-----------+
| Minimum lot area  | 10,000 sf | 40,000 sf  | 40,000 sf | 10,000 sf |
+-------------------+-----------+------------+-----------+-----------+
| Minimum setbacks: |           |            |           |           |
+-------------------+-----------+------------+-----------+-----------+
| Front             | 10'       | 60'        | 40'       | 20'       |
+-------------------+-----------+------------+-----------+-----------+
| Side              | 10'       | 10'        | 10'       | 10'       |
+-------------------+-----------+------------+-----------+-----------+
| Street side       | 10'       | 60'        | 20'       | 20'       |
+-------------------+-----------+------------+-----------+-----------+
| Rear              | None      | 10'        | None      | 10'       |
+-------------------+-----------+------------+-----------+-----------+
| Minimum zone area | 3 acres   | –          | 5 acres   | None      |
+-------------------+-----------+------------+-----------+-----------+
(Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-8C-3: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
A. Storage Enclosed: All storage except vehicles in running order shall be stored in an enclosed building or within an enclosure surrounded by a solid fence or wall of not less than six feet (6') in height, and no material or merchandise shall be stored to a height greater than that of the enclosing fence or wall. A solid masonry wall or solid vinyl fence shall be used parallel to the public street(s) where the storage is visible from the public street. Chain link fencing with slats may only be used for enclosing storage areas in the following situations:
    1. After a minimum of three hundred (300) linear feet of solid fencing or wall has been provided to screen the designated storage area, then the remainder of the storage area may upon approval by the land use authority utilize chain link fencing with slats or other approved alternative screening solutions along the public street frontage;
    2. Along the interior property lines (or interior fence lines); chain link without slats may be used;
    3. Along the public street frontage at approved setback distances in the area known as the St. George Industrial Park, M-1 zone (in section 20, T42S, R15W).
B. If a movable gate is used, it may be constructed of chain link, chain link with slats, wrought iron, solid, or perforated metal.
C. All chain link fencing with vinyl slats shall be maintained in good condition; all fallen, broken, or missing slats shall be replaced. No wooden slats may be used.
D. Drive Aisles, Parking and Storage: 
    1. All accesses, drive aisles, required parking, and fire lanes shall be paved with concrete or asphalt in accordance with St. George standard specifications for design and construction;
    2. All outside storage areas for materials, vehicles, and equipment shall be on a surface improved with gravel at a minimum depth of four inches (4").
E. Solid Waste Storage Facilities: Solid waste storage facilities shall be located so that they are screened from all public streets and not located in the setback.
F. Landscaping: Properties within the M-1, M-2, and M-C zones shall comply with chapter 23, “Landscape Standards,” of this title. In the M-1 and M-2 zones, a minimum of five percent (5%) of the lot area shall be maintained as landscaped area. In all manufacturing zones, a landscape strip, outside the public right-of-way, along the front of the property on public streets, not less than six feet (6') wide, and an average of at least fifteen feet (15') wide, shall be provided and planted with trees and shrubs. At least half of the landscaped area shall consist of live trees, shrubs, and ground cover. This landscape strip shall be in addition to the required five percent (5%) landscaping required above.
G. Protection of Residential Zones: Where any manufacturing zone adjoins any residential zone, as part of the required setback, there shall be provided and maintained along such property line a six-foot (6') solid masonry fence and a ten-foot (10') landscape buffer to protect the adjoining residential property. The landscape buffer shall consist of a minimum of one (1) tree every twenty linear feet (20'). Required trees shall be a minimum of one and one-half inch (1-1/2") diameter measured six inches (6") above the soil surface. In addition to the required trees, a minimum of five (5) plants or shrubs shall be planted per every one hundred linear feet (100'). Trees and shrubs may be arranged in either rows or clustered.
H. Ft. Pierce Industrial Park Additional Special Standards: 
    1. Loading Docks: No loading dock shall be constructed facing on any public street unless such loading dock and every part thereof is at least seventy-five feet (75') inside the right-of-way line of the street on which such loading dock fronts;
    2. Landscaping: Properties within the Ft. Pierce manufacturing zone shall comply with chapter 23, “Landscape Standards,” of this title. In addition, a minimum of five percent (5%) of the lot area shall be maintained as landscaped area. At least half of the landscaped area shall consist of live trees, shrubs, and ground cover. A landscaped area adjacent to the public street shall be provided and planted with trees and shrubs.
I. Building Height: Up to fifty feet (50'). (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-06-002, 6-4-2020)

ARTICLE D. PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONES
(PD-AP, PD-C, PD-M AND PD-MU)


10-8D-1:     Allowed Uses
10-8D-2:     General Requirements
10-8D-3:     Preliminary Plat
10-8D-4:     Conflict
10-8D-5:     PD-AP – Planned Development – Administrative Professional Standards
10-8D-6:     PD-C – Planned Development – Commercial Standards
10-8D-7:     PD-M – Planned Development – Manufacturing Standards
10-8D-8:     PD-MU – Planned Development – Mixed-Use Standards

10-8D-1: ALLOWED USES:
Any use not specifically permitted, permitted with standards, or conditionally permitted is prohibited. Only the following uses are allowed:
A. Uses indicated by the letter “P” below are permitted in the designated zone only if approved as part of the zone change.
B. Uses indicated by the letters “PS” are permitted uses with required standards, only if approved as part of the zone change.
C. Uses indicated by the letter “C” are conditional uses in the designated zone.
+--------------------------------------------------+-------+------+------+-------+
|                                                  | PD-AP | PD-C | PD-M | PD-MU |
+--------------------------------------------------+-------+------+------+-------+
| Accessory structure                              | P     | P    | P    | P     |
+--------------------------------------------------+-------+------+------+-------+
| Child care, in-home babysitting (in residence    |       |      |      | P     |
| only)                                            |       |      |      |       |
+--------------------------------------------------+-------+------+------+-------+
| Child care, family (in residence only)           |       |      |      | P     |
+--------------------------------------------------+-------+------+------+-------+
| Child care center                                | P     | P    | P    | P     |
+--------------------------------------------------+-------+------+------+-------+
| City facility                                    | P     | P    | P    | P     |
+--------------------------------------------------+-------+------+------+-------+
| Communication transmission facilities,           | PS    | PS   | PS   | PS    |
| including wireless, primary                      |       |      |      |       |
+--------------------------------------------------+-------+------+------+-------+
| Communication transmission facilities,           | C     | C    | C    | C     |
| including wireless, primary, height over         |       |      |      |       |
| 50'                                              |       |      |      |       |
+--------------------------------------------------+-------+------+------+-------+
| AP uses as specified in zone change              | P     |      |      |       |
+--------------------------------------------------+-------+------+------+-------+
| C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4 uses as specified in          |       | P    |      | P     |
| zone change                                      |       |      |      |       |
+--------------------------------------------------+-------+------+------+-------+
| M-1 and M-2 uses as specified in zone            |       |      | P    |       |
| change for PD-M                                  |       |      |      |       |
+--------------------------------------------------+-------+------+------+-------+
| Home occupation                                  |       |      |      | P     |
+--------------------------------------------------+-------+------+------+-------+
| Light manufacturing business                     |       | P    | P    | P     |
+--------------------------------------------------+-------+------+------+-------+
| Limited temporary outdoor display of merchandise |       | P    |      |       |
+--------------------------------------------------+-------+------+------+-------+
| Multiple-family dwelling                         |       |      |      | P     |
+--------------------------------------------------+-------+------+------+-------+
| Parks                                            | P     | P    | P    | P     |
+--------------------------------------------------+-------+------+------+-------+
| Personal care service                            | P     | P    |      | P     |
+--------------------------------------------------+-------+------+------+-------+
| Personal instruction service                     | P     | P    | P    | P     |
+--------------------------------------------------+-------+------+------+-------+
| Public utility facilities, primary               | PS    | PS   | PS   | PS    |
+--------------------------------------------------+-------+------+------+-------+
| Religious facility                               | P     | P    |      | P     |
+--------------------------------------------------+-------+------+------+-------+
| School, public or charter                        | P     | P    |      | P     |
+--------------------------------------------------+-------+------+------+-------+
| Storage rental units                             |       | PS   | PS   |       |
+--------------------------------------------------+-------+------+------+-------+
| Townhouse and condominiums                       |       |      |      | P     |
+--------------------------------------------------+-------+------+------+-------+
(Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-06-002, 6-4-2020)

10-8D-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
Planned development AP, C and M shall comply with subsection A of this section, at the time of the initial zone-change application. Planned development MU shall comply with subsections A and B of this section concurrently at the time of its first submittal of an application.
A. Planned Development Initial Zone-Change Application Requirements: An applicant may request the planning commission and city council to consider an initial planned development zone-change application under this subsection which is not accompanied by the secondary application requirements in subsection B of this section, with a development agreement under terms acceptable to the city. Each zone-change application submitted pursuant to subsection A of this section shall include the following:
    1. A detailed narrative of the proposed development of the entire property.
    2. A detailed list of proposed land uses.
B. Planned Development Secondary Zone-Change Application Requirements: Each zone-change application submitted pursuant to this subsection shall include the following:
    1. Initial Documents Required: All requests shall be accompanied by a colored site development plan, materials, and a written text for the entire property proposed to be developed.
    2. Description of the Proposed Use of Land: The projected use of land, including percentages of land devoted to various types of land use, such as building coverage, parking area, landscaped area, etc.
    3. Height and Elevations: The type, character and proposed height of all buildings.
    4. Density: The proposed density in terms of dwelling units per gross acre of land and proposed floor area of nonresidential uses per acre.
    5. Schools, Churches and Open Spaces: The location and boundaries of any proposed school site, church, park or other common or open spaces.
    6. Phasing Plan: A phasing plan, if the development is proposed to be developed in phases.
    7. Topography: Topography at contour intervals of two feet (2').
    8. Landscape Plan: A landscape plan showing the general location of lawn area and trees (this may be a part of the site or plot plan).
    9. Area Reserved for Landscaping: The location and amount of land area reserved for landscaping.
    10. Utilities: Demonstration that all utilities are underground and transformer equipment is screened from streets and from adjacent properties.
    11. Refuse Storage Areas: Refuse storage areas screened so that materials stored within these areas are not visible from access streets, freeways and adjacent properties.
    12. Lighting Plan: A general lighting plan indicating location and luminosity of lights to be installed on the site, to be more than the lighting ordinance set forth in this title allows.
    13. Turning Space: Safe and convenient turning space for cars, sewer vehicles, refuse collection vehicles, firefighting equipment, etc., at the end of private drives and dead-end streets.
    14. Signs: All signs shall be submitted and approved as part of the PD approval.
C. Signs and Advertising: The requirements of the sign ordinance set forth in title 9, chapter 13 of this code apply, unless a variation is specifically approved, and shall not exceed the following:
    1. Freestanding Signs: Freestanding signs shall be limited to the standards set forth in section 9-13-4B for major commercial projects within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of a freeway exit.
    2. Monument Signs: Limited to one (1) monument per building.
D. Lighting shall comply with the lighting ordinance set forth in this title. Variations may be approved if located along the I-15 freeway and not adjacent to a residential zone. A variation may be considered for properties adjacent to a residential zone if, in the opinion of the city council, additional lighting is needed for security, and any impacts to residential are mitigated. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-8D-3: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
For all planned development projects that are proposed to be subdivided, applicant may prepare and submit a preliminary plat at the same time as the zone-change application for the planned development. In order to be considered for concurrent review, the application must contain all preliminary plat requirements set forth in chapter 25 of this title, as amended. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-8D-4: CONFLICT:
These provisions in sections 10-8D-1 through 10-8D-3 apply to sections 10-8D-5 through 10-8D-8, unless a specific provision in sections 10-8D-5 through 10-8D-8 replaces and supersedes the one that is more general and broader in scope. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-8D-5: PD-AP – PLANNED DEVELOPMENT – ADMINISTRATIVE PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS:
A. Minimum Zone Requirements: Each planned development administrative professional zone application shall include a minimum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
B. Height Regulations: No structure shall be erected to a height less than ten feet (10') and no structure shall be greater than forty feet (40'). The city council, after recommendation from the planning commission, may approve increased building height up to sixty feet (60') upon making a finding, as part of a zone change approval, that the increase in height will fit harmoniously into the neighborhood, minimizing any negative impacts, after considering the following:
    1. Proposed setbacks provide an appropriate buffer to neighboring properties;
    2. Increased landscaping enhances the project and reduces any negative impacts;
    3. Site layout and design enhance the project and reduce any negative impacts;
    4. The massing and building scale is appropriate for the location;
    5. The proposed height increase is appropriate for the area; and
    6. The increase in height is consistent with any applicable master plan.
C. Area – Coverage – Density – Yard – Common Area and Landscaping Requirements: The minimum lot area, maximum lot coverage, yard and common open space/landscaping requirements are as follows:
+-----------+-------------+-------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+
| Lot Area  | Maximum Lot |                              Minimum Yard Setbacks                              |
|  Minimum  |  Coverage   |                                                                                 |
+-----------+-------------+-------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+
| "         | "           |    Front and Street     |           Side            |           Rear            |
|           |             |          Side           |                           |                           |
+-----------+-------------+-------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+
| 10,000 sf | 50%         | 25' from public         | Adjacent to single-family | Adjacent to single-family |
| lot       |             | street or the greater   | zone: 30'                 | zone: 30'                 |
|           |             | of 20' or the average   |                           |                           |
|           |             | of existing immediately | Otherwise:                | Adjacent to a public      |
|           |             | adjacent homes          |                           | street: 25' or            |
|           |             |                         | On a common parcel:       | 20' with a 6' privacy     |
|           |             | 20' from back of        | 10' if height is          | wall along street         |
|           |             | sidewalk of private     | less than 30';            | right-of-way              |
|           |             | street                  | 20' if height >           |                           |
|           |             |                         | 30'                       | Otherwise:                |
|           |             | 10' from back of        |                           | For each building:        |
|           |             | curb of private         | On a separate parcel:     | 10' if height is          |
|           |             | street w/o sidewalk     | 8' if height is           | ≤ 20'; 20' if height      |
|           |             |                         | < 20'; 9' if height       | > 20'                     |
|           |             |                         | is < 25'; 10' if          |                           |
|           |             |                         | height ≥ 25'              |                           |
+-----------+-------------+-------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+
D. Solid Waste Storage Facilities: All solid waste storage facilities shall be located at the rear of the main building or else behind a sight-obscuring fence or wall that will prevent the facility from being seen from a public street. Chain link fencing with sight-obscuring slats is not permitted.
E. Protection of Residential Property: A solid masonry wall and a minimum ten-foot (10') wide planting strip along the adjoining property line is required for any PD-administrative professional development that adjoins any lot or parcel of ground in any residential zone. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-06-002, 6-4-2020)

10-8D-6: PD-C – PLANNED DEVELOPMENT – COMMERCIAL STANDARDS:
A. Minimum Zone Requirements: Each planned development commercial zone application shall include a minimum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
B. Height Regulations: No structure shall be erected to a height less than ten feet (10') and no structure shall be greater than fifty feet (50'). The city council, after recommendation from the planning commission, may approve increased building height upon making a finding, as part of a zone change approval, that the increase in height will fit harmoniously into the neighborhood, minimizing any negative impacts, after considering the following:
    1. Proposed setbacks provide an appropriate buffer to neighboring properties;
    2. Increased landscaping enhances the project and reduces any negative impacts;
    3. Site layout and design enhance the project and reduce any negative impacts;
    4. The massing and building scale is appropriate for the location;
    5. The proposed height increase is appropriate for the area; and
    6. The increase in height is consistent with any applicable master plan.
C. Area, Coverage, Width, and Yard Requirements: The area, coverage, width, and yard requirements are as follows:
+-----------+-------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| Lot Area  | Maximum Lot |                            Minimum Yard Setbacks                            |
|  Minimum  |  Building   |                                                                             |
|           |  Coverage   |                                                                             |
+-----------+-------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| "         | "           |    Front/Street Side    |          Side           |          Rear           |
|           |             |          Yard           |                         |                         |
+-----------+-------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 10,000 sf | 50%         | Adjacent to residential | Adjacent to residential | Adjacent to residential |
| lot       |             | zone: 30'               | zone: 30'               | zone: 30'               |
|           |             |                         |                         |                         |
|           |             | Otherwise:              | Otherwise:              | Otherwise:              |
|           |             | 20' commercial          | 10' external; 0'        | 10' commercial          |
|           |             |                         | internal setback        |                         |
|           |             | Exception:              | between PD-C-zoned      |                         |
|           |             | Commercial: parking     | buildings               |                         |
|           |             | per G2                  |                         |                         |
+-----------+-------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+
D. Solid Waste Storage Facilities: All solid waste storage facilities shall be located at the rear of the main building or else behind a sight-obscuring fence or wall that will prevent the facility from being seen from a public street. Chain link fencing with sight-obscuring slats is not permitted.
E. Protection of Residential Property: A minimum six-foot (6') high solid masonry wall and a minimum ten-foot (10') wide planting strip along the adjoining property line is required for PD-commercial development that adjoins any lot or parcel of ground in any residential zone. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-06-002, 6-4-2020)

10-8D-7: PD-M – PLANNED DEVELOPMENT – MANUFACTURING STANDARDS:
A. Minimum Zone Requirements: Each planned development manufacturing zone application shall include a minimum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
B. Height Regulations: No structure shall be erected to a height less than ten feet (10') and no structure shall be greater than fifty feet (50'). The city council, after recommendation from the planning commission, may approve increased building height upon making a finding, as part of a zone change approval, that the increase in height will fit harmoniously into the neighborhood, minimizing any negative impacts, after considering the following:
    1. Proposed setbacks provide an appropriate buffer to neighboring properties;
    2. Increased landscaping enhances the project and reduces any negative impacts;
    3. Site layout and design enhance the project and reduce any negative impacts;
    4. The massing and building scale is appropriate for the location;
    5. The proposed height increase is appropriate for the area; and
    6. The increase in height is consistent with any applicable master plan.
C. Area, Coverage, Width, and Yard Requirements: The area, coverage, width, and yard requirements are as follows:
+------------------+-------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+------------------+
| Lot Area Minimum |    Maximum Lot    |                        Minimum Yard Setbacks                         |
|                  | Building Coverage |                                                                      |
+------------------+-------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+------------------+
| "                | "                 |    Front/Street Side    |          Side           |       Rear       |
|                  |                   |          Yard           |                         |                  |
+------------------+-------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+------------------+
| 10,000 sf lot    | 50%               | Adjacent to residential | Adjacent to residential | Adjacent to      |
|                  |                   | zone: 30'               | zone: 30'               | residential      |
|                  |                   |                         |                         | zone: 30'        |
|                  |                   | Otherwise:              | Otherwise:              |                  |
|                  |                   | 20' manufacturing       | 10' external            | Otherwise:       |
|                  |                   |                         | 0' internal setback     | 0' manufacturing |
|                  |                   | Exception:              | between PD-M-zoned      |                  |
|                  |                   | Manufacturing: parking  | buildings               |                  |
+------------------+-------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+------------------+
D. Solid Waste Storage Facilities: All solid waste storage facilities shall be located at the rear of the main building or else behind a sight-obscuring fence or wall that will prevent the facility from being seen from a public street.
E. Protection of Residential Property: A minimum six-foot (6') high solid masonry wall and a minimum ten-foot (10') wide planting strip along the adjoining property line is required for PD-commercial development that adjoins any lot or parcel of ground in any residential zone. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-06-002, 6-4-2020)

10-8D-8: PD-MU – PLANNED DEVELOPMENT – MIXED-USE STANDARDS:
In addition to the provisions in sections 10-8D-1 through 10-8D-3, the following provisions apply for projects that combine commercial and residential uses within the same building or project:
A. Minimum Zone Requirements: Each planned development commercial/residential mixed-use application shall include a minimum of one-half (½) acre.
B. Height Regulations: No structure shall be erected to a height less than ten feet (10') and no structure shall be greater than fifty-five feet (55'). The city council, after recommendation from the planning commission, may approve increased building height up to seventy feet (70') upon making a finding, as part of a zone change approval, that the increase in height will fit harmoniously into the neighborhood, minimizing any negative impacts, after considering the following:
    1. Proposed setbacks provide an appropriate buffer to neighboring properties;
    2. Increased landscaping enhances the project and reduces any negative impacts;
    3. Site layout and design enhance the project and reduce any negative impacts;
    4. The massing and building scale is appropriate for the location;
    5. The proposed height increase is appropriate for the area; and
    6. The increase in height is consistent with any applicable master plan.
C. Area, Coverage, Density, Yard, Common Area and Landscaping Requirements: The minimum lot area, maximum lot coverage, yard and common open space/landscaping requirements are as follows:
+-------------+----------+------------------+---------------+-----------------+------------------+
|  Lot Area   | Maximum  |   Minimum Area   |               Minimum Yard Setbacks                |
|  Minimum/   | lot area |   Common Open    |                                                    |
|   Maximum   | coverage | Space/Landscaped |                                                    |
|   Density   |          |       Area       |                                                    |
+-------------+----------+------------------+---------------+-----------------+------------------+
| "           | "        | "                |   Front and   |      Side       |       Rear       |
|             |          |                  |  Street Side  |                 |                  |
+-------------+----------+------------------+---------------+-----------------+------------------+
| 1/2 Acre/40 | 70%      | 20%              | Adjacent to   | Adjacent to     | Adjacent to      |
| DUA         |          |                  | single-family | single-family   | single-family    |
|             |          |                  | zone: 30'     | zone: 30'       | zone: 30'        |
|             |          |                  |               |                 |                  |
|             |          |                  | Otherwise:    | Otherwise: 0' – | Otherwise:       |
|             |          |                  | 0 – 10' max   | 10'             | 0' commercial    |
|             |          |                  |               | 0' internal     | 0' manufacturing |
|             |          |                  |               | setback between |                  |
|             |          |                  |               | PD-C-zoned      |                  |
|             |          |                  |               | buildings       |                  |
+-------------+----------+------------------+---------------+-----------------+------------------+
D. Mixed commercial and residential use is permitted in the PD-MU zone only as set forth herein:
    1. All development projects seeking a PD-MU zone shall be new construction, and shall submit a detailed site plan pursuant to section 10-8D-2 showing the entire development project and showing the added specificity requirements of this section. In granting such approval, the land use authority may impose and enforce such specific conditions as to the site plan, orientation of the buildings to the public street, phasing, building construction, and maintenance as it deems necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city. All development projects shall comply with the site plan as approved and adopted by the land use authority.
    2. The entire ground floor of any building in the project shall only have commercial uses, except as provided in this section.
    3. Residential use shall be located above the ground floor commercial use. Allowed residential density shall be determined by the detailed site plan and subject to all approvals in subsection D6 of this section.
    4. The requirement that the ground floor be limited to only commercial use may be altered to allow residential use or a parking structure, if all of the following conditions are met:
        a. The view of the ground floor is obstructed from the public street by the building’s location in the interior of the project, or its obstruction from street view by other buildings in the project;
        b. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the ground floor area within the project shall be for commercial uses; and
        c. For buildings that are perpendicular to the street so that the majority of the building is not adjacent to the street, the end of the building adjacent to the street must have commercial uses on the ground floor, but may have residential use or a parking structure on the remainder of the ground floor that is not oriented toward the public street, if the project complies with the other conditions provided in this section.
    5. If the project is built in phases, each phase shall be all commercial or may include a mix of commercial and residential use. No phase shall be solely residential, unless fifty percent (50%) of the required commercial area has been built in previous phases.
    6. All projects must meet the design standards set forth below:
        a. Minimum height of ground level commercial use shall be twelve feet (12') floor to ceiling;
        b. The front building façade and main entrance to all buildings shall be oriented toward and parallel to the public street. The setbacks for buildings adjacent to a public street shall be a minimum of zero feet (0') to a maximum of twenty feet (20') from the property line except:
            (1) The setbacks may be increased as necessary to allow room for outdoor seating areas, landscaping, or other similar pedestrian and customer amenities,
            (2) Interior buildings may be allowed without frontage on a public street if it is not possible to fit a building parallel to the street, all other requirements have been met, and the depth and size of the property and best use of the property would prevent all buildings from having frontage on a public street;
        c. All buildings adjacent to a public street shall have primary frontage oriented toward the public street, and shall have a design typical of a commercial building front with integrated style features compatible with other street-facing buildings in the project, including a significant entryway;
        d. Building façades shall have architectural variations such as:
            (1) Contrasting building materials and textures,
            (2) Variations in rooflines, colors, reveals and belt courses,
            (3) Recessed windows and doors, strongly expressed window mullions, and awnings,
            (4) Varying building setbacks from property lines, alcoves, outdoor sitting areas, and small public plazas,
            (5) Corner towers, cupolas, corner clock towers, corner spires, balconies and colonnades;
        e. Buildings located on corners shall have the front façade wrap around the corner to the full depth of the building;
        f. Awnings will be allowed; provided, that the building is designed to allow awnings, and/or awnings are part of the initial design. Awnings shall have a minimum eight-foot (8') head clearance and shall not project away from the building more than one-half (½) the distance from the building to the street, or no more than six feet (6'), whichever distance is less. Awnings shall be constructed of metal and/or high quality fire-resistant architectural fabrics. Vinyl awnings are prohibited;
        g. Parking lots shall be located in the interior of a project and not adjacent to a public street, except that access driveways with parking spaces on one (1) or both sides, with a maximum width of seventy feet (70'), are permitted. For buildings fronting a public street, all parking shall be located to the rear or side of buildings, or may be located below-grade (underneath building). Buildings located in the interior of the project may have the parking area on any side of the building, as per the approved site plan. Underground parking is permitted only if such parking is accessible from the side or rear of the development and not from the primary street. All projects must comply with the parking requirements for commercial and residential uses specified in chapter 19 of this title;
        h. Parking structures are permitted only if the parking structures do not front the public street and are not taller than the proposed buildings;
        i. Minimum Ground Floor Glass: The ground floor of the building elevation fronting the street on all mixed-use buildings shall contain not less than forty percent (40%) nonreflective glass surface (i.e., windows);
        j. Landscaped Open Space: Mixed-use developments shall provide a minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the total site area in landscaping, which may include recreation facilities such as playgrounds, outdoor pools, tennis courts, and basketball courts. No more than one-half (½) of the total required landscape area may consist of recreation facilities. Other than the minimum landscape area requirements, which are set above, the landscape standards in chapter 23 of this title shall apply;
        k. Solid Waste Storage Facilities: All solid waste storage facilities shall be located at the rear of the main building or else behind a sight-obscuring fence or wall that will prevent the facility from being seen from a public street. Chain link fencing with sight-obscuring slats is not permitted;
        l. Protection of Residential Property: A minimum six-foot (6') high solid masonry wall and a minimum ten-foot (10') wide planting strip along the adjoining property line is required for development that adjoins any lot or parcel of ground in any residential zone. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-06-002, 6-4-2020)

CHAPTER 9 RESERVED

CHAPTER 10 AIRPORT VICINITY ZONES
(ASBP, AVI, C-RM)


10-10-1:     Airport Vicinity Zones
10-10-2:     Airport Vicinity Zone Restrictions
10-10-3:     Area and Setback Requirements
10-10-4:     Site Development and Design Standards
10-10-5:     Development Proposal Requirements and Process
10-10-6:     Related Provisions

10-10-1: AIRPORT VICINITY ZONES:
Any use not specifically permitted, permitted with standards, or conditionally permitted is prohibited. Only the following uses are allowed:
A. Uses indicated by the letter “P” below are permitted in the designated zone.
B. Uses indicated by the letters “PS” are permitted uses with required standards in this zone. Uses must comply with the standards and evaluation criteria established in chapter 17 of this title.
C. Uses indicated by the letter “C” are conditional uses in the designated zone.
D. No structures or uses are permitted in the runway protection zone (RPZ), defined as two thousand feet (2,000') in length from the beginning and end of the runway, and extending one thousand feet (1,000') wide.
E. Zone names are:
    1. Airport supporting business park (ASBP);
    2. Airport vicinity industrial (AVI);
    3. Mixed-use commercial (C-RM).
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
|                                                          | ASBP | AVI | C-RM |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Airfreight and express delivery services                 | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Amusement center (e.g., paintball, miniature golf,       |      |     | P    |
| etc.)                                                    |      |     |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Animal hospital, including care of large animals         |      |     | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Animal hospital, small animals only and provided         |      |     | P    |
| conducted within completely enclosed building            |      |     |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Arcade                                                   |      |     | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Athletic and sporting goods store, excluding sale        |      | P   | P    |
| or repair of motor vehicles, motorboats or motors        |      |     |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Athletic club/health club/spa                            | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Auction establishment, indoors only (retail goods        |      | P   | P    |
| only)                                                    |      |     |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Automobiles and other similar vehicle sales lots         | PS   |     |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Automobile parts sales (new parts only)                  | P    |     | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Automobile rental                                        | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Automobile repair shop (provided conducted within        | P    | P   | P    |
| enclosed building)                                       |      |     |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Bakery                                                   | P    |     | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Bank or financial institution                            | P    |     | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Barbershop/beauty shop                                   | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Bed and breakfast                                        |      |     | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Beer parlor, sale of draft beer                          | P    | C   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Body piercing, incidental to a permitted use             |      |     | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Bookstore                                                | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Bowling alley                                            | P    |     | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Building materials sales                                 | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Bulk plants                                              | C    | C   |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Bus terminal                                             | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Business office                                          | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Cabinet shop                                             | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Call centers/internet sales/telemarketing                | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Candy manufacture                                        | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Car wash                                                 | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Carpenter, electrical, plumbing or heating shops         | P    | P   |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Carpet and rug cleaning                                  | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Catering establishment, food service delivery            | P    | P   | P    |
| and flight kitchen                                       |      |     |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Child care center                                        |      | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Clinics, medical or dental                               | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Communication transmission facilities, including         | PS   | PS  | PS   |
| wireless, primary                                        |      |     |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Communication transmission facilities, including         | C    | C   | C    |
| wireless, primary, height over 50'                       |      |     |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Construction equipment sales and rentals                 | PS   | P   |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Contractor’s yard                                        |      | P   |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Convenience markets                                      | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Courier and delivery services                            | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Department store                                         |      |     | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Educational institutions                                 |      |     | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Emergency service (and crew rest) facility               | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Employment agency                                        | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Farm and construction equipment sales, rental            |      | P   |      |
| and service establishments                               |      |     |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Farm implement sales                                     |      | P   |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Fence, sales and service                                 |      | P   |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Financial, medical, and professional office              | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Florist shop                                             | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Food processing wholesale excluding slaughter            |      | P   |      |
| of animals and the processing of vinegar, yeast          |      |     |      |
| and fat                                                  |      |     |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Foundry, lightweight casting, nonferrous without         |      | P   |      |
| causing noxious odors or fumes                           |      |     |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Freight-forwarding service and distribution center       | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Furniture sales and repair, indoor only                  |      |     | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Furniture upholstery shop                                | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Garden supplies and plant material sales                 |      | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Government buildings or uses, nonindustrial              | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Government facilities (not otherwise listed)             | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Greenhouse and nursery; soil and lawn service            | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Grocery store                                            | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Gunsmith                                                 |      | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Health club/spa                                          | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Hospitals                                                |      |     | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Hotel/motel                                              | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Household appliance sales and service                    | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Ice cream parlor                                         | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Ice manufacturing and storage                            | P    | P   |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Insulation sales and service                             |      | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Internet sales and telemarketing                         | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Janitor service and supply                               | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Laboratory, dental or medical                            | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Laundry and linen service                                | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Laundry or dry cleaners, laundromat                      | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Library                                                  |      |     | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Liquor store                                             | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Living quarters for manager or security personnel        | PS   | PS  | PS   |
| for business which requires 24-hour assistance           |      |     |      |
| or security – Up to 600 sf with occupancy limited        |      |     |      |
| to 4 people                                              |      |     |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Locksmith                                                | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Lodge or social hall                                     |      |     | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Lumberyard                                               |      | P   |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Machine shop, general                                    | P    | P   |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Manufacturing establishments                             | P    | P   |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Medical/dental office or clinic                          | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Mental health treatment center                           |      |     | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Microbrewery with restaurant                             | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Monument works and sales                                 | P    | P   |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Mortuary                                                 |      |     | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Motorcycle, boat, or RV sales and service                |      |     | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Moving and storage company                               | P    | P   |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Museum (*except aviation related)                        | *    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Newsstand                                                | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Nursery, plants                                          |      | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Nursing home                                             |      |     | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Office supply, office machines sales and service         | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Offices                                                  | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Optometrist, optician                                    | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Paint or wallpaper store                                 | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Park and playground                                      | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Pawnshop                                                 |      |     | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Permanent cosmetics, a secondary use to an establishment | P    | P   | P    |
| employing cosmetologist/barber(s), aesthetician(s),      |      |     |      |
| electrologist(s), or nail technician(s) licensed         |      |     |      |
| by the state under 58-11a-101 et seq., Utah Code         |      |     |      |
| Annotated, 1953, as amended, excluding tattoo            |      |     |      |
| establishments and home occupations                      |      |     |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Pest control and extermination                           | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Pet and pet supply store                                 |      | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Pharmacy                                                 | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Pool hall                                                |      | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Post office                                              | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Printing                                                 | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Printing, lithographing, publishing or reproduction      | P    | P   | P    |
| sales and service                                        |      |     |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Professional office                                      | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Public utility facilities (not including power           | PS   | PS  | PS   |
| transmission lines)                                      |      |     |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Publishing or lithography shops                          | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| RV parks, short-term                                     |      | P   |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| RV storage                                               | P    | P   |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Real estate agency                                       | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Reception center or wedding chapel                       |      |     | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Recreation center                                        |      |     | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Religious facility                                       |      |     | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Rental agency for home and garden equipment              | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Research and development                                 | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Residential – Mixed-use up to 22 du/ac                   |      |     | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Restaurant                                               | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Retail goods establishments (predominately indoor        | P    | P   | P    |
| sales)                                                   |      |     |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Retail services establishments                           | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Roller skating rink                                      |      |     | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Rubber welding                                           |      | P   |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Sand and gravel – Extraction and crushing                | PS   | PS  |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Sandblasting (interior use only)                         |      | P   |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Seed and feed store, retail                              |      | P   |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Service station, automobile (excluding painting,         | P    | P   | P    |
| body fender and upholstery work)                         |      |     |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Sheet metal shop and re-tinning; provided, all           |      | P   |      |
| operations conducted within completely enclosed          |      |     |      |
| building                                                 |      |     |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Sign manufacture or sign painting                        | P    | P   |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Sign sales                                               | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Storage rental units                                     | PS   | PS  |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Supermarket/grocery store                                | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Tattoo establishment                                     |      | P   |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Tavern                                                   |      |     | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Testing laboratory                                       | P    | P   |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Theater, indoor                                          |      |     | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Tire sales and service                                   |      | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Tool design (precision) repair and manufacture           | P    | P   |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Tour operators                                           | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Trailer sales and service                                |      | P   |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Travel agency                                            | P    | P   | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Truck sales and repair                                   | P    |     |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Truck terminal                                           | P    | P   |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Used car lot (except as provided in “automobile          |      | P   |      |
| conversion” use listed above)                            |      |     |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Vegetable stand                                          | P    |     | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Veterinary office/clinic – Small animals                 |      |     | P    |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Warehouse storage                                        | P    | P   |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Welding shop                                             |      | P   |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
| Wholesale business                                       | P    | P   |      |
+----------------------------------------------------------+------+-----+------+
(Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-10-2: AIRPORT VICINITY ZONE RESTRICTIONS:
To prevent airport hazards, in addition to land use regulations imposed by underlying zoning districts the following restrictions apply:
A. Height Hazards Prohibited: Height hazards identified in CFR Title 14, part 77, and part 121 are prohibited.
B. Electrical and Visual Hazards Prohibited: No use or structure within the zone may:
    1. Create any electrical interference with navigational signals for radio communication between the airport and an aircraft; or
    2. Make it difficult for pilots to distinguish airport lights; or
    3. Result in glare in the eyes of the pilots using the airport; or
    4. Impair a pilot’s visibility in the vicinity of the airport, such as smoke or dust; or
    5. Create a hazard to, or endanger the landing, takeoff or maneuvering of, aircraft using the airport.
C. Overnight Camping: Overnight camping is restricted as follows:
    1. Recreational Vehicles Only: Overnight camping is restricted to camping only within validly registered recreational vehicles (RVs), in areas allowed for recreational vehicle camping;
    2. For a period no longer than twenty-eight (28) consecutive days;
    3. Tents Prohibited: Camping is not otherwise allowed;
    4. Fires Prohibited: No fire or open flame shall be permitted anywhere at the RV campsite.
D. New development, including a change or expansion of an existing allowed use, shall:
    1. Disclose notice of the airport vicinity zone, the presence of the St. George Airport, and the fact that there is noise associated with aircraft overflights, and note these disclosures on all plats and permits, and shall record title notice with the county recorder;
    2. Grant an avigation easement, conveying to the city the right of overflight and other activities and operations associated with aviation, including noise, aircraft engine emissions, and visual impacts;
    3. Comply with the FAA imaginary surface height limitations.
E. Development of the following uses is not permitted within the traffic pattern area:
    1. Religious facilities;
    2. Concert halls;
    3. Convalescent homes and rest homes;
    4. Convention centers;
    5. Hospitals;
    6. Libraries;
    7. Mobile home parks;
    8. Non-airport-related museums;
    9. RV parks;
    10. Reception centers;
    11. Residential uses;
    12. Schools.
F. Development within the approach area shall not include the following uses:
    1. Religious facilities;
    2. Concert halls;
    3. Convalescent homes and rest homes;
    4. Convention centers;
    5. Hospitals;
    6. Hotels and motels;
    7. Libraries;
    8. Mobile home parks;
    9. Museums;
    10. RV parks;
    11. Reception centers;
    12. Residential uses;
    13. Schools;
    14. Shopping malls;
    15. Stadiums;
    16. Theaters. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-10-3: AREA AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
A. The minimum lot area and setbacks are as follows:
+--------------------------------+--------+--------+----------+
|                                |  ASBP  |  AVI   |   C-RM   |
+--------------------------------+--------+--------+----------+
| Minimum lot area               | 1 acre | 1 acre | 1/4 acre |
+--------------------------------+--------+--------+----------+
| Minimum yard setbacks from street curb:                     |
+--------------------------------+--------+--------+----------+
| Front                          | 25'    | 20'    | 15'      |
+--------------------------------+--------+--------+----------+
| Side                           | 10'    | 10'    | 10'      |
+--------------------------------+--------+--------+----------+
| Side facing a street on corner | 20'    | 20'    | 15'      |
| lot                            |        |        |          |
+--------------------------------+--------+--------+----------+
| Rear                           | 10'    | 10'    | 10'      |
+--------------------------------+--------+--------+----------+
B. When abutting a residential zone, or in the C-RM zone when the use is residential, there shall be a minimum setback of ten feet (10') with an additional setback for buildings or structures over fifteen feet (15') in height based on a one-to-one (1:1) ratio; each additional foot in height requires an additional one-foot (1') setback from the property line. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-10-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS:
A. Maximum Lot Coverage: The maximum coverage for any lot is:
+----------------------+------+-----+-----------------------+
|                      | ASBP | AVI |         C-RM          |
+----------------------+------+-----+-----------------------+
| Maximum lot coverage | 50%  | 75% | 75% (commercial use)  |
|                      |      |     | 50% (residential use) |
+----------------------+------+-----+-----------------------+
B. Pedestrian-Oriented Commercial Uses: For pedestrian-oriented commercial uses in the commercial residential mixed-use zone, the entire area between the curb and the setback line shall be landscaped to create a consistent streetscape, such that facing “blocks” of contiguous properties have uniform setbacks, paving, street trees and other urban design features. This may consist of a combination of plant materials, sidewalks, and access drives as necessary for the development of the property.
C. Residential Uses: For residential uses in the commercial residential mixed-use zone, the entire front yard setback line shall be landscaped using any combination of planting areas and dryscape, subject to the approval of the city. For residential and mixed residential-commercial use projects, no part of the front setback may be used for parking.
D. Outside Storage: There shall be no outside storage of materials used in sales or in business operation within the airport supporting business park (ASBP) zone. All businesses shall be completely enclosed in the ASBP zone. Within the airport vicinity industrial (AVI) zone, all solid waste storage facilities shall be located at the rear of the main building and behind a sight-obscuring solid masonry wall which will prevent the facility from being seen from a public street.
E. Building Heights: The primary restriction for building heights will be the FAA Part 77 surfaces. Building heights within the airport vicinity boundaries shall not exceed Part 77 surface elevations. Development proposals may be required to include a Part 77 height conformity analysis as part of the project approvals.
F. Exterior Colors and Materials: Building colors are limited to natural, muted tones that emulate the local geologic formations common to the area and blend with the predominant colors of the natural surroundings. Window glazing shall be nonreflective, energy-efficient glass with light to medium gray tint. Within the airport supporting business park (ASBP) zone at least thirty percent (30%) of the building’s front façade shall consist of stone, brick, or similar masonry product in order to improve building appearance.
G. Noise Attenuation: Noise-sensitive uses located within the 55 DNL noise-contour area (see Exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified in this title) shall be noise attenuated as follows:
    1. Residential uses shall provide triple-pane exterior windows, and insulation in exterior walls to achieve an insulation rating of R-21, and a rating of R-38 in the roof/ceiling.
    2. Commercial uses shall provide an insulation rating of R-21 for exterior walls, and R-19 in ceiling/roof insulation, along with providing double-pane windows in exterior walls.
    3. Noise-sensitive uses that are outside of the fifty-five (55) DNL noise-contour areas shall use construction techniques that provide noise attenuation within each structure to substantially reduce the effects of outside noise levels within the structure.
H. C-RM mixed-use developments shall comply with the standards set forth in section 10-8D-8. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-10-5: DEVELOPMENT PROPOSAL REQUIREMENTS AND PROCESS:
A. General Requirements: 
    1. Documents Required: All development proposals, except those for noncommercial airport hangars, shall be accompanied by a colored site development plan and a written text for the entire property proposed to be developed, identifying how the project complies with all standards for development within the zone.
    2. Review: For any properties within any district within the airport overlay zone the applicant shall file the proposed project with the planning staff for review. The planning staff shall coordinate the review with the airport manager’s office and contact interested department personnel of the city or other agencies for review purposes. Staff shall furnish to the applicant any comments regarding the development plan that may help the applicant in preparing the submission. The staff shall hold such meetings with the applicant as may be necessary for proper review.
B. Application Requirements – Contents of Written Text: The written text of each application shall include the following: All properties, except for on airport noncommercial hangars, within the airport overlay zones shall address subsections B1 through B5 of this section. Properties within the airport supporting business park and airport vicinity industrial (and mixed-use commercial) zones must also address subsections B6 through B13 of this section.
    1. Use of Land: The projected use of land, including percentages of land devoted to various types of land use, such as building coverage, parking area, landscaped area, etc.
    2. Height and Elevations: The text shall indicate the type, character and proposed height of all buildings. The plot plan, elevations and perspective drawings may be prepared as necessary by the applicant to help the planning commission and city council to better understand the proposal.
    3. Density: The proposed development density in terms of dwelling units per gross acre of land for residential uses or building square footage for nonresidential uses shall be indicated.
    4. The location of any proposed conditional uses, especially any school sites, religious facilities, parks or other common or open spaces shall be identified.
    5. Topography: Topography at contour intervals of two feet (2') shall be submitted.
    6. Phasing Plan: A phasing plan, if construction is proposed in phases.
    7. Landscape Plan: A landscape plan showing the general location of lawn area and trees.
    8. Area Reserved for Landscaping: The amount of land area reserved for landscaping shall be indicated, with square footage of irrigated planting areas versus dryscape area.
    9. Utilities: All utilities shall be underground unless otherwise approved by the city council and upon recommendation of the water and power director. Transformer equipment shall be screened from streets and from adjacent properties.
    10. Refuse Storage Areas: Refuse storage areas shall be screened so that materials stored within these areas shall not be visible from access streets, freeways and adjacent properties.
    11. Lighting Plan: The plans submitted shall include a general lighting plan indicating location of lights to be installed on the site.
    12. Parking and Site Access: Number and size of parking spaces and width of vehicle access lanes shall be shown (this may be a part of the site or plot plan). Safe and convenient turning space shall be provided for cars, sewer vehicles, refuse collection vehicles, firefighting equipment, etc., at the end of private drives and dead end streets.
    13. Signs: Overall sign program to demonstrate compliance with the city sign code. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-10-6: RELATED PROVISIONS:
A. Outdoor Lighting – Chapter 14 of this title.
B. Permitted with Standards and Conditional Uses – Chapter 17 of this title.
C. Walls, Fences and Hedges – Chapter 18 of this title.
D. Off-Street Parking Requirements – Chapter 19 of this title.
E. Motor Vehicle Access and Loading – Chapter 20 of this title.
F. Landscape Standards – Chapter 23 of this title.
G. Signs – Title 9, chapter 13 of this code. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

CHAPTER 11 OPEN SPACE
(OS)


10-11-1:     Allowed Uses
10-11-2:     Height Regulations
10-11-3:     Area, Width and Yard Requirements
10-11-4:     Related Provisions

10-11-1: ALLOWED USES:
Any use not specifically permitted, permitted with standards, or conditionally permitted is prohibited. Only the following uses are allowed:
A. Uses indicated by the letter “P” below are permitted in the designated zone.
B. Uses indicated by the letters “PS” are permitted uses with required standards in this zone. Uses must comply with the standards and evaluation criteria established in chapter 17 of this title.
C. Uses indicated by the letter “C” are conditional uses in the designated zone.
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------+----+
|                                                                         | OS |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Agriculture                                                             | P  |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Barns and corrals for agriculture and livestock – At least 100' from    | P  |
| any dwelling                                                            |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Cemetery                                                                | P  |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Urban hens and rabbits – Up to 20 animals per acre (min 1 acre parcel); | P  |
| provided, the coop or pen is at least 100' from any dwelling and        |    |
| up to 1 rooster per acre is kept at least 50' from any residential      |    |
| zone                                                                    |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| City facility                                                           | P  |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Communication transmission facilities, including wireless, primary      | PS |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Communication transmission facilities, including wireless, primary,     | C  |
| height over 50'                                                         |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Hogs to be raised by resident for purposes of meeting requirements      | PS |
| of a youth club – Maximum of 2 hogs per 37,500 sf for a maximum         |    |
| of 6 months                                                             |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Hog pen/shelter – Up to 8' tall and 100 sf – Allowed only in rear       | PS |
| yard at least 100' from any dwelling; required effective manure         |    |
| management                                                              |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Livestock grazing limited to 4 weaned animals per acre or 8 weaned      | P  |
| animals per acre for no more than 30 days per year                      |    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------+----+
(Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-06-002, 6-4-2020)

10-11-2: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No structure shall be erected to a height less than ten feet (10') or greater thirty-five feet (35'). (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-11-3: AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The area, width and yard requirements are as follows:
+----------+--------------+-----------+------------------+-------+------+
| District | Area Minimum | Lot Width |      Minimum Yard Setbacks      |
|          |   Lot Size   |  Minimum  |                                 |
+----------+--------------+-----------+------------------+-------+------+
| "        | "            | "         | Front and Street | Sides | Rear |
|          |              |           |       Side       |       |      |
+----------+--------------+-----------+------------------+-------+------+
| OS       | 5,000 sf     | 100'      | 25'              | 10'   | 10'  |
+----------+--------------+-----------+------------------+-------+------+
(Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-11-4: RELATED PROVISIONS:
A. Outdoor Lighting – Chapter 14 of this title.
B. Permitted with Standards and Conditional Uses – Chapter 17 of this title.
C. Walls, Fences and Hedges – Chapter 18 of this title.
D. Off-Street Parking Requirements – Chapter 19 of this title.
E. Motor Vehicle Access and Loading – Chapter 20 of this title.
F. Landscape Standards – Chapter 23 of this title.
G. Signs – Title 9, chapter 13 of this code. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

CHAPTER 12 RESERVED

CHAPTER 13 OVERLAY ZONES


13A          Hillside Development Overlay Zone (HDOZ)
    10-13A-1:    Density and Disturbance Standards
    10-13A-2:    Slope and Slope Areas Determined
    10-13A-3:    HDOZ Site Development Permit Standards
    10-13A-4:    Property Mitigation
    10-13A-5:    Street Design
    10-13A-6:    Building Setbacks and Additional Design Standards
    10-13A-7:    Verification of Compliance
    10-13A-8:    Expiration of Hillside Development Permit
    10-13A-9:    Hillside Review Board
    10-13A-10:   Appeals
13B          Development in Geologic Hazard or Adverse Construction Condition Overlay Zone
    10-13B-1:    General Requirements
    10-13B-2:    Development in Geologic Hazard Areas (UGS 1-4)
    10-13B-3:    Development in Adverse Construction Condition Areas
13C          Development in Flood and Erosion Hazard Overlay Zone
    10-13C-1:    Special Flood Hazard Areas
    10-13C-2:    Requirements
    10-13C-3:    Additional Requirements for Development in the Flood Hazard Area – Flood Hazard Development Permit
    10-13C-4:    Additional Requirements for Development in the Flood Hazard Area – Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
    10-13C-5:    Building Permit Requirements
    10-13C-6:    Drainage Encroachment
    10-13C-7:    Floodways
13D          Resort Overlay Zone
    10-13D-1:    Allowed Uses
13E          St. George Arts District Overlay Zone, Landmark Sites, and the Historic Preservation Commission
    10-13E-1:    St. George Arts District Overlay Zone
    10-13E-2:    Arts District Sign Regulations
    10-13E-3:    Historic Preservation Commission
    10-13E-4:    Landmark Sites
    10-13E-5:    Review Process

ARTICLE A. HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONE (HDOZ)


10-13A-1:    Density and Disturbance Standards
10-13A-2:    Slope and Slope Areas Determined
10-13A-3:    HDOZ Site Development Permit Standards
10-13A-4:    Property Mitigation
10-13A-5:    Street Design
10-13A-6:    Building Setbacks and Additional Design Standards
10-13A-7:    Verification of Compliance
10-13A-8:    Expiration of Hillside Development Permit
10-13A-9:    Hillside Review Board
10-13A-10:   Appeals

10-13A-1: DENSITY AND DISTURBANCE STANDARDS:
A. The hillside development overlay zone (HDOZ) limits development densities and provides specific development incentives to transfer underlying zone densities from hillsides (sending areas), to less steep slopes or more safe development areas (receiving areas), within a development.
B. For those portions of a proposed development with natural slopes twenty percent (20%) or less, development density follows the density and development standards in the underlying zone.
C. For those portions of a proposed development with natural slopes from twenty-one percent (21%) to thirty percent (30%), development activity shall not disturb more than thirty percent (30%) of the parcel within this slope category.
D. For those portions of a proposed development with natural slopes from thirty-one percent (31%) to forty percent (40%), development activity shall not disturb more than five percent (5%) of the area within this slope category.
E. A proposed development may not disturb slopes in excess of forty percent (40%).
F. The applicant may:
    1. Transfer all development density from steeper slope categories (sending areas), to areas within the development with natural slopes of twenty percent (20%) or less (receiving areas); and
    2. Develop additional bonus density, calculated from each slope category, as follows:
        a. Natural slopes twenty percent (20%) or less transferred on a one-to-one (1:1) unit basis; plus
        b. One (1) additional density unit for each density unit transferred from natural slopes of twenty-one percent (21%) to thirty percent (30%); plus
        c. Two (2) additional density units for each density unit transferred from natural slopes of thirty-one percent (31%) to forty percent (40%).
    3. Unit calculation for the receiving area shall be based on the requirements of the sending area zone.
G. Density transfers to the receiving area may occur without a zone change within the receiving area even though the resulting density or configuration may exceed the density limits of the receiving area zone. Other than density, the receiving area’s zoning requirements apply to development in the receiving area. For instance, lot sizes may vary, but single-family zoning districts only allow single-family detached dwellings.
H. If the applicant proposes to develop within the twenty-one percent (21%) to forty percent (40%) slope area, the applicant cannot employ partial density transfers from the sending area and must propose a design, site development plans, and a grading plan that blends and harmonizes all aspects of the proposed development into the natural topography, and that minimizes road cuts and fills.
I. Non-disturb areas within a residential lot as shown on the slope analysis map shall not be used to calculate minimum lot size.
J. Disturbance standards do not apply to the city for limited city facilities: trails, parks, and utilities. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-13A-2: SLOPE AND SLOPE AREAS DETERMINED:
A. Slope shall be determined for each significant portion of a development parcel.
B. Procedure: The applicant shall map the location of the natural slope by using the following procedure:
    1. Preparation of Contour Maps: The applicant shall submit an accurate, current contour map, prepared and certified by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor, which shows all land contours at intervals no greater than five feet (5'), drawn at a one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') scale maximum.
    2. Verification through Field Surveys: The city engineer or designee may require the applicant to submit a field survey to verify the accuracy of the contour map.
C. Determination of Slope Areas: Using the contour map, natural slopes shall be calculated using points identified as natural slopes of twenty percent (20%), thirty percent (30%), and forty percent (40%), and shall be located on the contour map and connected by a continuous line. That area bounded by said lines and intersecting property lines shall be used for determining project density. Small washes or outcrops, which have slopes distinctly different from surrounding property, and are not part of the contiguous topography, may be excluded from the slope determination. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-13A-3: HDOZ SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT STANDARDS:
A. An application to develop in the HDOZ on slopes of twenty-one percent (21%) or greater shall include the following:
    1. Site Development Plans: Site development plans must be prepared by a licensed engineer, or licensed landscape architect, and must include:
        a. A grading or earthmoving plan showing:
            (1) Topography: Existing and proposed contours and cross sections showing the topography of the existing ground extending at least one hundred feet (100') outside of all boundary lines of the site, or sufficient to show on- and off-site drainage. Property contours shall be shown at two-foot (2') intervals for plateaus and five-foot (5') intervals for steep slopes.
            (2) The slope of proposed cuts and fills.
            (3) The height of any cut or fill does not exceed ten feet (10') when measured vertically from the finished grade to the intersection of the slope with the natural undisturbed ground.
            (4) The combined height of cuts and fills does not exceed twenty feet (20').
            (5) A mitigation plan showing proposed retaining, terracing and landscaping or other techniques to stabilize, amend and mitigate the cuts and fills.
        b. Detailed plans of all surface and subsurface drainage systems and facilities, walls, cribbing or other erosion protection devices, to be constructed in connection with, or as part of, the proposed project, together with a map showing the drainage area and estimated runoff of the area served by any drainage systems or facilities.
        c. Detailed plans of all drainage systems and facilities that store, control, treat, or convey storm water.
        d. Detailed plans showing that all surface and subsurface drainage shall be consistent with the the city’s MS4 permit and compatible with the city flood control master plan and storm water drainage system. Residential plans must show that each lot conveys its drainage to the street, and that there are no shared systems, facilities, or responsibilities with other lot owners to convey it, unless the proposed drainage is in common area with a property owners’ association to own and maintain it.
        e. Streets, Buildings, Easements: The location of any existing and proposed streets, buildings or structures, easements and drainage channels on the property.
        f. Elevation Drawings: Detailed site plans and elevation drawings showing location of all structures and how and to what extent hillside cuts will be covered and/or retained by proposed development.
        g. Landscape and Vegetation Plan: A landscape plan, prepared by a licensed landscape contractor or a landscape architect, in conjunction with the overall site plan, shall be submitted for approval. The plan shall outline areas being excavated and filled and describe in detail how the developer will restore or replant these areas. The plan shall specify types of retention being used, together with sprinkler plans and water-usage methods suitable to the soils of the project.
        h. Terrain Details: Special notes and details of the existing terrain shall be noted on the required topographic information.
        i. Proposed Earthmoving Details: The dimensions, elevations and contours of any proposed earthmoving shall be shown.
        j. Material Disposal: A description shall be included of the methods to be employed in disposing of soil and other material removed, including the location of the disposal site.
        k. Timetable: A schedule shall be included showing when each stage of the project will be completed, including the estimated starting and completion dates.
    2. Drainage Control Plan and Report: A drainage control plan and report prepared by a licensed professional civil engineer registered in the state shall be submitted with each application. The design of the drainage control system shall be based upon the following criteria:
        a. Separate from Sewer System: All drainage systems shall be separate and independent from the sanitary sewer system.
        b. Design: Drainage and flood control shall be designed in conformance with the city flood control master plan where applicable.
        c. Natural Drainage Channels: Property development shall not cause a natural drainage channel to be filled in, obstructed or diverted without prior city approval. When modification to a natural drainage channel is proposed within the development, such changes will be addressed in the drainage study and shown on the improvement plans including offers to dedicate rights-of-way or record drainage easements for structures and/or improvements needed to carry storm runoff in the event approval is given for the proposed modifications.
        d. Approval Required for Change: The point of location where the natural drainage channel enters and leaves the property may not be changed without approval of the city engineer or designee.
        e. Drainage Basin Upstream of Development: All of the drainage basins upstream of the development shall be considered to be fully developed in conformance with the city’s current land use master plan. Effects on the downstream property owners relative to increased flood potential and nuisance water shall also be considered in the design, including acquisition of easements or agreements where necessary, or construction or modification of improvements where needed.
        f. Use of Existing Facilities: The developer shall provide the necessary means to assure drainage within the property being developed by making use of existing facilities or natural washes and constructing master planned improvements.
        g. General Requirement: Each new development shall manage its storm water runoff and maintain its storm water management system in such a manner that no net increase in storm runoff above the natural state will occur on the downstream properties. In other words, the pre-project flows must not be exceeded by the post-project flows throughout the life span of the project.
        h. Street Usage: Streets are significant and important in urban drainage, and full use shall be made of streets for storm runoff up to reasonable limits, recognizing that the primary purpose of streets is for traffic. Reasonable limits of the use of streets for transportation of storm runoff shall be governed by the below listed design criteria:
        +--------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
        |  Street Classification   |              Maximum Encroachment              |
        +--------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
        | Hillside access/hillside | No curb overtopping. Flow may spread to crown. |
        | local                    |                                                |
        +--------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
        | Local road               | No curb overtopping. Flow spread must leave    |
        |                          | at least 1 lane free of water.                 |
        +--------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
        | Minor collector          | No curb overtopping. Flow spread must leave    |
        |                          | 1 lane free of water in each direction (total, |
        |                          | 2 lanes free of water).                        |
        +--------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
            (1) When the above encroachment is exceeded, an independent storm water system shall be designed and constructed based on a ten (10) year storm.
            (2) One Hundred (100) Year Storm: The storm water from a one hundred (100) year frequency storm shall be adequately conveyed either within the limits of the street right-of-way or in storm drain easements without creating flood hazards to buildings or dwellings.
        i. Underground Pipe Systems: When an underground pipe system is required, it shall be designed to carry a ten (10) year storm. Major hydraulic structures shall be designed to carry a twenty-five (25) year storm. The minimum storm drain size shall be twelve inches (12").
        j. Retention Basins on Hillsides: Unless specifically permitted, retention basins on hillsides are not allowed.
        k. Detention Basins: Detention shall be allowed where it is compatible with all required reports. Detention basins shall be used for the purpose of eliminating the effects of the peak runoff of storms and releasing water flow at the pre-project, or approved rate.
        l. Cross-Gutter Drains: Cross-gutter drains on streets shall be avoided wherever possible. They are not allowed on major collector, midblock, and higher order streets.
        m. Drainage Plan Consistency: Drainage plans must be consistent with all other reports, e.g., geotechnical, soils, landscaping.
        n. Groundwater Sources: When springs or other groundwater sources are found on the developer’s property, the construction of an underground pipe system to eliminate the nuisance of this water is required. Minimum pipe size shall be twelve inches (12"). Overland flow will not be allowed for water that is continuously present.
        o. Building Construction: All buildings shall comply with the standards set forth in section 10-13C-4 as applicable.
        p. Erosion Elimination: Necessary measures shall be taken to prevent erosion and scour at all points throughout the development. It shall be mitigated at all points of discharge and at the face of any cut or fill slope throughout the development.
        q. Control During Grading or Construction: During grading or construction on any property (including off-site construction), the developer shall control both water used for construction and storm runoff in such a manner as to not affect any adjoining properties, nor add silt or debris to any existing storm drain, wash, channel or roadway.
    3. Drainage Plan: The drainage plan shall meet city drainage plan specifications.
    4. Drainage Report (Hydrology Study): The drainage report shall comply with city specifications.
    5. Geology and Soils Report: A geology and soils report prepared by a licensed professional engineer trained and experienced in the practice of geotechnical engineering that contains the following information:
        a. Slope Stability Analysis: Slope stability analysis; conclusions and recommendations concerning the effects of material removal; introduction of water, both on and off site, including, where applicable, on mesa tops; seismic activity; and erosion on slope stability.
        b. Foundation Investigation: Foundation investigation; conclusions and recommendations concerning the effects of soil conditions on foundation and structural stability, including bearing capacity, sheer strength, and shrink/swell potential of soils.
        c. Spring Location: The location and yield of springs and seeps.
        d. Structural Features: Structural features including any geological limitations.
        e. Surface Hazards: Existence of surface hazards including potential for rockfalls and toppling failures to cliffs, slopes and overhangs above the subject property.
        f. Effect of Geologic Conditions: Conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed development, together with recommendations identifying the means proposed to minimize any hazard to life or property, or adverse impact on the natural environment.
B. HDOZ Permit Expiration: A HDOZ permit expires after two (2) years, if no grading permit has been issued or at least fifty percent (50%) of the construction on the site for which the permit was granted has not occurred. An extension of six (6) months may be granted if the city finds that it is warranted for good cause shown. Requests for extension shall be filed not less than thirty (30) calendar days prior to the expiration date. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-13A-4: PROPERTY MITIGATION:
Cash or an irrevocable letter of credit to assure hillside restoration shall be provided prior to issuance of a hillside development permit for projects disturbing more than one (1) acre, or where determined necessary by the city engineer or designee on projects involving less than one (1) acre. Such financial guarantee shall be provided in an amount sufficient to ensure necessary soil stabilization, including grading, planting and maintenance, in the event the applicant fails to complete the hillside restoration in accordance with the approved plan within one (1) year from the issuance of the permit. The financial guarantee shall cover the cost, as estimated by an approved landscape architect, or qualified contractor, or a civil or a geotechnical engineer, and approved by the city engineer or designee, to restore the hillside to an acceptable level of appearance and stability. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-13A-5: STREET DESIGN:
The following standards apply to public and private streets within the zone:
A. Street Grades: The maximum allowed street grade is fifteen percent (15%).
B. Intersections: Roads shall intersect at ninety-degree (90°) angles.
C. Intersection Spacing: Intersections should be spaced far enough apart so that the traffic stopped to make left turns at one intersection does not interfere with traffic movements at the adjacent intersections.
    1. On low-volume streets such as access roads to minor collectors or minor collectors to minor collectors, the minimum spacing distance is one hundred twenty-five feet (125');
    2. For minor collectors to major collectors, the minimum spacing distance is two hundred fifty feet (250').
D. Design Speed: The design of geometric features such as horizontal and vertical alignment will depend on the design speed selected for each street. The design speed is primarily determined by the street function and classification and is the maximum speed for safe and comfortable operation of a vehicle. Other than a major collector, all streets in hillside areas are classified as low speed streets (thirty-five (35) miles per hour or less).
+------------------------------+--------------+--------------+
| Street Design Classification | Design Speed | Posted Speed |
+------------------------------+--------------+--------------+
| Minor collector              | 30           | 30           |
+------------------------------+--------------+--------------+
| Local road                   | 25 – 30      | 25           |
+------------------------------+--------------+--------------+
| Hillside local               | 25           | 25           |
+------------------------------+--------------+--------------+
| Hillside access              | 25           | 25           |
+------------------------------+--------------+--------------+
E. Clear Sight Distance at Intersections: Adequate, clear sight distance is required at intersections, as follows:
+-----------------------------------+-----------+-----------+
| Posted Speed of Higher Order Road | Minimum Y | Desired Y |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+-----------+
| 20                                | 210       | 240       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+-----------+
| 25                                | 260       | 300       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+-----------+
| 30                                | 310       | 380       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+-----------+
| 35                                | 365       | 475       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+-----------+
F. Vertical Curves and Intersection Relationship: The vertical alignment of residential streets shall comply with latest editions of AASHTO geometric design of highways and streets. See table below for listing of pertinent design criteria:
+--------------+-----------------+---------------+
| Design Speed | Crest “K” Value | Sag “K” Value |
+--------------+-----------------+---------------+
| 20           | 10              | 20            |
+--------------+-----------------+---------------+
| 25           | 20              | 30            |
+--------------+-----------------+---------------+
| 30           | 30              | 40            |
+--------------+-----------------+---------------+
| 35           | 40              | 50            |
+--------------+-----------------+---------------+
L = KA (for minimum sight distance on a vertical curve).
L = Length of vertical curve for proper sight distance.
A = Algebraic difference in grade.
Vertical alignment with the intersection is also of special nature, and design alternatives may be required. As a guideline, the approach area where vehicles stop while waiting to enter an intersection shall not exceed four (4%) to five percent (5%) from the gutter line of the street being intersected for a distance of fifty feet (50'), though a range of fifty feet (50') to one hundred feet (100') is more desirable. This applies to all intersections, except those intersections where both intersecting streets are minor collectors. The landing area for a minor collector shall be designed for a grade of two percent (2%) to three percent (3%) for a distance of one hundred feet (100').
G. Safe Stopping Sight Distance: The minimum sight distance to be provided before a stop is required is included in the table below:
+--------------+----------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Design Speed | Computed | Recommended Distance | Add-On for 15% Grade |
+--------------+----------+----------------------+----------------------+
| 20           | 106.7    | 125                  | 20                   |
+--------------+----------+----------------------+----------------------+
| 25           | 146.5    | 150                  | 36                   |
+--------------+----------+----------------------+----------------------+
| 30           | 195.7    | 200                  | 64                   |
+--------------+----------+----------------------+----------------------+
| 35           | 248.4    | 250                  | 95                   |
+--------------+----------+----------------------+----------------------+
H. Horizontal Curves: The minimum centerline radius for horizontal curves on low-speed residential streets is:
+--------------------------------+----------------------+
| Street Classification or Speed | Curve Radius in Feet |
+--------------------------------+----------------------+
| Private streets                | 50 – 100             |
+--------------------------------+----------------------+
| 20 mph                         | 100 – 150            |
+--------------------------------+----------------------+
| 25 mph                         | 185                  |
+--------------------------------+----------------------+
| 30 mph                         | 310                  |
+--------------------------------+----------------------+
I. Street Cross-Section Standards: The requirements for street cross-section configurations are based on the following factors:
    1. Traffic capacity;
    2. Design speed;
    3. Projected traffic;
    4. Designs to reduce scarring.
J. Alternate road cross sections, such as grade separated streets, may be used if applicable safety and traffic standards are met.
K. Elimination of sidewalk on one side of the road may be approved when elimination of one (1) sidewalk can appreciably reduce the amount of hillside disturbance. Other considerations may also warrant its elimination. When one (1) sidewalk is eliminated, the remaining sidewalk shall be increased by one foot (1') in width.
L. The following table sets forth the requirements for street standards for single-family residential development.
+---------+-----------------------+-----------+-----------+----------+----------------+---------------+
| Maximum | Street Classification | Width ROW | Width TBC | Pavement | Width Sidewalk |      ADT      |
|  Grade  |                       |           |           |  Width   |                |               |
+---------+-----------------------+-----------+-----------+----------+----------------+---------------+
| 12%     | Minor collector       | 60'       | 50'       | 45'      | 5'             | 1,500 – 3,500 |
+---------+-----------------------+-----------+-----------+----------+----------------+---------------+
| 15%     | Local road            | 50'       | 40'       | 35'      | 4'             | 750 – 1,500   |
+---------+-----------------------+-----------+-----------+----------+----------------+---------------+
| 15%     | Hillside local        | 45'       | 35'       | 30'      | 4'             | 150 – 750     |
+---------+-----------------------+-----------+-----------+----------+----------------+---------------+
| 15%     | Hillside access       | 41'       | 31'       | 26'      | 4'             | 0 – 150       |
+---------+-----------------------+-----------+-----------+----------+----------------+---------------+
(Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-13A-6: BUILDING SETBACKS AND ADDITIONAL DESIGN STANDARDS:
A. Front Setback along Streets: Along streets where the slope of the adjacent property to the street is over fifteen percent (15%), the minimum setback is twenty feet (20').
B. Setbacks: All setbacks shall conform to the underlying zone criteria except as provided herein. No structure or accessory structure shall be constructed within the setback area as defined below. However, a see-through wrought iron fence with at least fifty percent (50%) of the fence open, landscaping, and a nonvertical swimming pool are permitted in the setback area.
    1. Ridgelines: All ridgelines as shown on the ridgeline map shall be subject to the setback provisions contained herein. Setbacks from ridgelines not identified on the ridgeline map shall be a minimum of thirty feet (30'), or greater if recommended in the geotechnical reports.
    2. Plateaus: On plateaus, the setback from the ridgeline shall be a minimum of fifty feet (50') unless a greater setback is recommended in the geotechnical reports.
C. Cuesta: Where a ridgeline occurs on a cuesta, the minimum setback shall be one hundred feet (100') measured normal (perpendicular) to the closest point of the ridge, unless a greater setback is recommended in the geotechnical report.
D. Additional Design Standards: 
    1. Retaining walls shall be colored to blend into the surrounding natural geology.
    2. Retaining wall height is limited to the heights set forth in chapter 18 of this title and the standards for rock wall construction.
    3. Building exterior colors shall be earth tone and blend with the surrounding natural landscape.
    4. In residential zones, “no disturbance” areas shall be held as the “common area” of a project. Common areas shall be owned and maintained by the homeowners’ association or may be deeded to the city when accepted by the city.
    5. In nonresidential zones, any “no disturbance” area shall be identified on the final site plan or final plat.
    6. Any required no disturbance area shall be identified on the ground with temporary fencing or other approved means to prevent accidental disturbance of the area during construction and such fencing shall be installed prior to issuance of a grading permit.
    7. The building site shall be located on the flattest portion of the parcel.
    8. No structure shall extend over any natural ridgeline. The structure shall be in contact with the ground at all edges. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-13A-7: VERIFICATION OF COMPLIANCE:
For developments on a development parcel of more than one (1) acre containing slopes greater than twenty percent (20%) or in a rock fall hazard area, certification by a Utah registered engineer that the development has been completed in compliance with the approved hillside development permit, including satisfaction of any conditions contained in the permit, is required. The improvements required by the hillside development permit are essential for the life, health and safety of the future users and occupants of the property. All essential improvements shall be completed prior to approval of permanent electric power service. Failure to complete all essential improvements shall result in the suspension of the building permit. The financial assurance shall not be released until such certification has been received by the city engineer or designee of satisfaction of all conditions contained in the permit. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-13A-8: EXPIRATION OF HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
For development with a preliminary plat, the hillside development permit expires at the same time as the preliminary plat. For all other development, the hillside development permit expires with the expiration of the approved site-construction drawings. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-13A-9: HILLSIDE REVIEW BOARD:
A. Established: There is hereby established a hillside review board for the city.
B. Powers and Duties: The hillside review board shall have the following responsibilities:
    1. Review proposed development within the hillside development overlay zone and make a recommendation for approval, conditional approval, or denial to the planning commission and city council.
    2. Provide advice and support as needed to the city staff, planning commission and city council in connection with reviewing requests for zone changes or other development applications within the hillside development overlay zone.
C. Membership, Appointment: The hillside review board shall consist of five (5) members as follows:
    1. Two (2) persons who are experts in any of the following fields: landscaping, architecture, civil engineering, geology, real estate or similar applicable areas of expertise; and three (3) citizens of the city representing the public at large. If it is not possible to fill the member positions of the field of expertise, these positions shall be assumed by citizens at large.
    2. All members shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. The board shall select a chairperson and determine a meeting schedule.
D. Membership, Terms, Vacancies: The members of the hillside review board, appointed as provided above, shall serve for two (2) years on overlapping terms. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired portion of the term.
E. Quorum – Vote Required: A quorum of the hillside review board shall be three (3) members; and a majority vote of a quorum shall be required for a decision of any matter before the board, but the minimum number of yes votes required for a decision shall never be less than three (3). If a quorum is not present, no meeting shall be held, and any items of business shall be continued to the next meeting of the board. (Ord. 2020-06-002, 6-4-2020)

10-13A-10: APPEALS:
The applicant may appeal a decision in accordance with chapter 3 of this title. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-06-002, 6-4-2020. Formerly 10-13A-9)

ARTICLE B. DEVELOPMENT IN GEOLOGIC HAZARD OR ADVERSE CONSTRUCTION CONDITION OVERLAY ZONE


10-13B-1:    General Requirements
10-13B-2:    Development in Geologic Hazard Areas (UGS 1-4)
10-13B-3:    Development in Adverse Construction Condition Areas

10-13B-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Overlay Areas with Geologic Hazards: Development is not permitted in overlay areas with geologic hazards without compliance with all requirements in this chapter, and approval of the land use authority. Applications and development that do not meet the requirements of this chapter shall be denied. Geologic hazards include: surface fault rupture, earthquake ground shaking, liquefaction, landslide, and rockfall.
B. Overlay Areas with Adverse Construction Conditions: Development is not permitted in overlay areas with adverse construction conditions without compliance with all requirements in this chapter, and approval of the land use authority. Applications and development that do not meet the requirements of this chapter shall be denied. Adverse construction conditions include: expansive soil and rock, collapsible soil, gypsiferous soil and rock, shallow bedrock, caliche, wind-blown sand, breccia pipes and paleokarst, soil piping and erosion, and shallow ground water. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), the Utah Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and its Utah Geological Survey (UGS) hazard maps for the St. George area, as amended, are adopted. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-13B-2: DEVELOPMENT IN GEOLOGIC HAZARD AREAS (UGS 1-4):
A. Geologic Hazard Areas (UGS 1 – 4: subsections A1 through A4 of this section): For any development in the city with a geologic hazard listed below, applicant shall submit a report prepared by a qualified, licensed geologist specializing in engineering geology, or a licensed civil engineer, trained and experienced in the practice of geotechnical engineering. All development in the geologic hazard overlay shall be reviewed by the hillside review board.
    1. Surface fault rupture and earthquake: well-defined Holocene, and well-defined fault areas, red and purple lines/categories (extending five hundred feet (500') on the downthrown side and two hundred fifty feet (250') on the upthrown side of each red/purple fault line).
    2. Liquifaction: Very High category.
    3. Landslide: Very High category.
    4. Rockfall: High category.
B. General Requirements for Development in a Geologic Hazard Area: 
    1. Submit a site-specific report prepared by a qualified, licensed geologist specializing in engineering geology, or a licensed civil engineer, trained and experienced in the practice of geotechnical engineering with the following minimum requirements:
        a. Identify all geologic hazard areas (UGS 1 – 4: subsections A1 through A4 of this section);
        b. Identify any other geologic hazards, not listed above (UGS 1 – 4: subsections A1 through A4 of this section), which present an unacceptable risk to development;
        c. Demonstrate which areas of the development are suitable for the proposed use;
        d. Recommend specific measures necessary to make the land suitable for the proposed use;
        e. Recommend the optimal placement of all structures, roadways, utilities, trails and infrastructure in relation to the geologic hazard area;
        f. Slope stability analysis: conclusions and recommendations concerning the effects of material removal, introduction of water, both on and off site, including, where applicable, on mesa tops, seismic activity, and erosion on slope stability;
        g. Foundation investigation: conclusions and recommendations concerning the effects of soil conditions on foundation and structural stability, including bearing capacity, sheer strength, and shrink/swell potential of soils;
        h. Spring location: the location and yield of springs and seeps which shall be shown on the site plan;
        i. Structural features: structural features including any geological limitations;
        j. Surface hazards: existence of surface hazards including potential for rockfalls and toppling failures to cliffs, slopes and overhangs above the subject property; and
        k. Effect of geologic conditions: conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed development, together with recommendations identifying the means proposed to minimize any hazard to life or property, or adverse impact on the natural environment.
    2. The city shall review the applicant’s report. If the applicant’s report is deemed adequate by the city engineer or designee, development may proceed if the report recommendations are followed. If the report is deemed incomplete or inadequate by the city engineer or designee, the development application shall be denied. If denied, the applicant may request an independent review, and the city engineer or designee may order a review by independent, qualified professionals. The professionals selected by the city shall review and prepare written findings and comments on the applicant’s report. The cost of the independent, qualified professionals shall be paid to the city by applicant. Applicant may develop if the independent review and written findings and comments are implemented, in addition to any nonconflicting recommendations in the initial report of applicant. The city engineer or designee is the land use authority for the decision. The report shall be specifically identified on the plat and available to all owners and interested parties.
    3. All development shall be outside the geologic hazard areas in subsections A3 and A4 of this section, unless:
        a. The city has accepted applicant’s report, prepared by a qualified, licensed geologist specializing in engineering geology or a licensed professional engineer trained and practicing in the field of geotechnical engineering, and it recommends development, and shows hazards can be adequately mitigated for the proposed land use;
        b. If the city has not accepted applicant’s report, the applicant also adopts and implements the independent review and writing findings and comments, in addition to any nonconflicting recommendations in applicant’s report;
        c. All report recommendations adopted by the city are conditions of development.
    4. Hold the city harmless from all claims resulting from any damage related to development within a geologic hazard area by executing a “geologic hazard disclaimer of liability and agreement” and by placing a “notice of hazard” on the final plat.
    5. Interested parties may appeal the decision of the land use authority as set forth in chapter 3 of this title.
C. Compliance: No structure or land shall be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.
D. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions: This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easement, covenant or deed restriction; however, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, the more stringent restriction shall prevail.
E. Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions are minimum requirements in addition to applicable provisions of this title. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-13B-3: DEVELOPMENT IN ADVERSE CONSTRUCTION CONDITION AREAS:
For any development in the city in an overlay area with an adverse construction condition, applicant shall submit a site-specific report prepared by a qualified, licensed engineer trained and experienced in the practice of geotechnical engineering identifying all adverse construction conditions. The report shall recommend development-design mitigations to prevent damage due to the adverse construction conditions. The city shall review the applicant’s report. If the applicant’s report is deemed adequate by the city engineer or designee, development may proceed if the report recommendations are followed. If the report is deemed incomplete or inadequate by the city engineer or designee, the development application shall be denied. If denied, the applicant may request an independent review, and the city engineer or designee may order a review by independent, qualified professionals. The professionals selected by the city shall review and prepare written findings and comments on the applicant’s report. The cost of the independent, qualified professionals shall be paid to the city by applicant. Applicant may develop if the independent review and written findings and comments are implemented, in addition to any nonconflicting recommendations in the initial report of applicant. The city engineer or designee is the land use authority for the decision. The report shall be specifically identified on the plat and available to all owners and interested parties. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

ARTICLE C. DEVELOPMENT IN FLOOD AND EROSION HAZARD OVERLAY ZONE


10-13C-1:    Special Flood Hazard Areas
10-13C-2:    Requirements
10-13C-3:    Additional Requirements for Development in the Flood Hazard Area – Flood Hazard Development Permit
10-13C-4:    Additional Requirements for Development in the Flood Hazard Area – Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
10-13C-5:    Building Permit Requirements
10-13C-6:    Drainage Encroachment
10-13C-7:    Floodways

10-13C-1: SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS:
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in a scientific and engineering report entitled “the flood insurance study” for the city of St. George, Utah, dated August 19, 1987, with an accompanying flood insurance rate map (FIRM), is hereby adopted as an overlay zone by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter, and any amendments, alterations or additions to said study or the FIRM hereafter at any time made by FEMA shall immediately and automatically be adopted by reference and, in their amended form, become a part of this chapter. The study and FIRM, as either or both may be revised from time to time, shall be kept on file at the city office, 175 East 200 North, St. George, Utah. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-13C-2: REQUIREMENTS:
A. Compliance: No structure shall be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.
B. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions: This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easement, covenant or deed restriction; however, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, the more stringent restriction shall prevail.
C. Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions are minimum requirements in addition to applicable provisions of this title. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-13C-3: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR DEVELOPMENT IN THE FLOOD HAZARD AREA – FLOOD HAZARD DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
A. In addition to the general requirements for development, above, all development in the flood hazard area shall meet the following additional requirements in this section.
B. Flood hazard development permit application prepared by a registered professional engineer shall be submitted before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard. Application for a flood hazard permit shall be made on forms furnished by the city engineer or designee and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of any development or substantial improvement, together with any existing structures, fill, storage of materials and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required:
    1. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, or the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures;
    2. Elevation in relation to HCN (horizontal control network) to which any structure has been floodproofed;
    3. Certification by a registered professional engineer that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing criteria of FEMA and this chapter; and
    4. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. Descriptions shall include details of erosion protection, floodplain cross sections, profiles, and any other relevant information, prepared by a registered professional engineer;
C. Land Use Authority: 
    1. City Engineer: The city engineer or designee is the land use authority to administer and implement this chapter and maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter;
    2. Authority: The city engineer or designee shall review flood hazard development permit applications to determine if:
        a. All necessary permits have been obtained from federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required,
        b. The proposed development is located in the floodway,
        c. The encroachment provisions of this chapter are met for any proposed development in the floodway;
D. Use of Other Base Flood Data: In areas where no base flood elevation data has been provided in accordance with section 10-13C-1 establishing the areas of special flood hazard, and the city engineer or designee determines flood hazards exist, the city shall advise property owners that flood conditions exist, and the city engineer or designee may use reasonable base flood elevations, floodway or related data available from other sources as criteria for any new construction, substantial improvements or other development that may be necessary to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
    1. Information to Be Obtained and Maintained: 
        a. Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement,
        b. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
            (1) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure has been floodproofed,
            (2) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in section 10-13C-4;
    2. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter;
    3. Alteration of Watercourses: 
        a. Notify affected communities and the state department of public safety prior to any alteration or relocation of the water course and submit evidence of such notification to FEMA,
        b. Require that maintenance be provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse, so the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished;
    4. Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries: Make interpretations, where needed, with the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard;
E. Appeal Procedure: Persons contesting specific applications of this chapter may appeal those applications in accordance with chapter 3 of this title. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-13C-4: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR DEVELOPMENT IN THE FLOOD HAZARD AREA – PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
A. Application: In addition to the general requirements for development or zone changes in a flood hazard area, all development in the flood hazard area shall meet the following additional requirements for flood hazard reduction: The general standards set out in subsections B through E of this section are required. In areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section 10-13C-1, or hazard determination has been made by the city engineer or designee pursuant to section 10-13C-3D, the specific standards of subsection F of this section are also required.
B. Anchoring: 
    1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure and make it capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads;
    2. All manufactured homes shall be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement and be capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, the use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. Specific requirements are:
        a. Over-the-top ties shall be provided at each of the four (4) corners of the manufactured home, with two (2) additional ties per side at intermediate locations; with manufactured homes less than fifty feet (50') long requiring one (1) additional tie per side;
        b. Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the home with five (5) additional ties per side at intermediate points; with manufactured homes less than fifty feet (50') long requiring four (4) additional ties per side;
        c. All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of carrying a force of four thousand eight hundred (4,800) pounds; and
        d. Any additions to the manufactured home shall be similarly anchored;
    3. Construction Materials and Methods: 
        a. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;
        b. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
C. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
D. Utilities: 
    1. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
    2. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems, and minimize or eliminate discharge from the systems into flood waters; and
    3. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during flooding.
E. New Development: 
    1. All new development proposals, including subdivisions, located within an erosion hazard area shall be consistent with the need to minimize erosion damage. Proposals within these areas shall comply with the following requirements:
        a. Meet all applicable provisions of this title;
        b. Meet all applicable provisions of the International Building Code with regard to wall and footing setbacks for slopes, grading, drainage and compaction of fills;
        c. Provide an engineering study, prepared by a professional civil engineer licensed to practice in the state, which includes a hydraulic analysis, a historical and geological evaluation of potential erosion hazards, and an analysis of long-term channel degradation, movement and bank erosion. The study shall also include recommendations for erosion protection measures, if any. The study shall include the engineer’s professional opinion that when the erosion protection measures, if any, are implemented, the proposed development will not be adversely affected by erosion and that the erosion protection measures, if any, will not adversely affect reaches or development upstream, downstream, and across river over a one hundred (100) year planning period;
        d. Provide for the perpetual maintenance of the erosion protection, at no cost to the city or other public agency;
        e. Provide a maintenance and access easement to any erosion protection. Access to erosion protection shall be located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
        f. Obtain necessary section (404) permit from the United States Army Corps of Engineers, and stream alteration permits from the office of the Utah State Engineer prior to any construction activity at no cost to the city; and
        g. Hold the city harmless from all claims resulting from erosion or any other flood-related damage to development within an “erosion hazard area” by executing a “flood and erosion hazard disclaimer of liability and agreement” and by placing a “notice of hazard” on the final plat if applicable;
    2. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
    3. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage by providing drainage through each lot, unless joint drainage facilities are owned and maintained by an owners’ association; and
    4. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres (whichever is less), or as may be otherwise required by the city engineer or designee.
F. Construction Requirements: 
    1. Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one foot (1') above the level of the base flood elevation, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
        a. Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight from the passage of water;
        b. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;
        c. Be certified by a registered professional engineer that the standards of this subsection are satisfied;
        d. Require within an AO and AH zone on the FIRM that all new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures:
            (1) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM (at least two feet (2') if no depth number is specified), or 
            (2) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be completely floodproofed to that level to meet the floodproofing standard specified in this subsection F1 of this section; and
        e. Require within zones AO and AH adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures;
    2. Residential Construction: 
        a. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to two feet (2') or more above the base flood elevation;
        b. Require within any AO and AH zone on the FIRM that all new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM (at least two feet (2') if no depth number is specified);
        c. Require within zones AO and AH adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures;
        d. Require within an A zone on the FIRM that all new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basements) elevated at least one foot (1') above the highest adjacent grades; and
        e. Require within zone A on the FIRM adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures;
    3. Manufactured Homes: 
        a. Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with subsection B of this section;
        b. All manufactured homes or those to be substantially improved shall conform to the following requirements:
            (1) Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved on a site:
                (A) Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision,
                (B) In a new manufactured home park or subdivision,
                (C) In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or
                (D) In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as the result of a flood,
            Shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to one foot (1') above the level of the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement, and
            (2) Manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions that are not subject to the provisions in subsection F1 of this section shall be elevated so that either the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation, or the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements that are no less than thirty-six inches (36") in height above grade and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement;
    4. Recreational Vehicles: Recreational vehicles shall either:
        a. Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days;
        b. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
        c. Meet the permit requirements, elevation, and anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces that are applicable to manufactured homes. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-13C-5: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Drainage and Flood Protection Plan: Prior to issuance of a building permit in any area designated by the city as flood prone, a drainage and flood protection plan shall be submitted for approval by the city engineer or designee. Any or all information as outlined in section 10-13C-3 shall be provided before the building permit applicant.
B. Improvements Completed Prior to Occupancy: Prior to occupancy of said building, all flood control improvements, including applicable sections of master planned flood control improvements, shall be completed with approval by the city engineer or designee. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-13C-6: DRAINAGE ENCROACHMENT:
It shall be unlawful to place any fill, landscaping, walls, fences or material of any kind in any watercourse, whether natural or manmade, which redirects the flow of drainage to create a nuisance or damage to neighboring property. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-13C-7: FLOODWAYS:
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 10-13C-1 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
A. All encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B. If subsection A of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of section 10-13C-4F.
C. Land within a floodway shall not be included in the calculation of the area of a parcel for the purposes of determining density or minimum lot size. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

ARTICLE D. RESORT OVERLAY ZONE


10-13D-1:    Allowed Uses

10-13D-1: ALLOWED USES:
A. In addition to uses allowed in the underlying zone, within a resort overlay zone, overnight or short-term rental within a development that includes the following minimum criteria is an allowed use:
    1. At least one hundred (100) dwelling units, or fifty (50) dwelling units for single-family developments with density under four (4) du/ac;
    2. Written consent from one hundred percent (100%) of the property owners within the recorded plat;
    3. All final plats and covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs) which have been recorded shall include a note indicating that short-term residential rental properties are a permitted use; and
    4. The owner or property manager of each short-term residential rental property shall obtain a short-term residential rental property business license as required in this code prior to commencing the use and shall maintain such license throughout the use.
B. At a minimum, all developments with five (5) or more units shall provide usable recreation or playground areas in a central location as follows:
    1. One thousand (1,000) square feet for the first five (5) units;
    2. An additional two hundred (200) square feet for each unit over five (5) units;
    3. The average width and length of each usable recreation or playground area shall not be less than twenty feet (20'); and
    4. All of the required area shall be usable common space accessible to the entire community;
    5. The number of amenities required depends on the size of the development. All amenities shall be approved by the land use authority in accordance with the following:
    +--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    |                Units                 |              Amenities              |
    +--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | 0 – 4                                | 0                                   |
    +--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | 5 – 50                               | 1                                   |
    +--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | 51 – 100                             | 2                                   |
    +--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | 101 – 200                            | 3                                   |
    +--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | 201 – 300                            | 4                                   |
    +--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | For projects in excess of 300 units, add 1 amenity for each 100 additional |
    | units or fraction thereof.                                                 |
    +--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    6. The type of amenities required depends on the nature, size, and density of the development. If multiple amenities are required, the type shall vary. All amenities shall be approved by the land use authority in accordance with the following:
        a. All required amenities shall be fully constructed prior to construction of fifty percent (50%) of the total project units, or in accordance with an executed development agreement with terms acceptable to the city;
        b. In addition to amenities, a minimum of thirty percent (30%) of the lot area shall be maintained in landscaped area, and at least fifty percent (50%) of the front setback area shall be maintained as landscaped area;
        c. Table of Amenities: 
        +--------------------------------------------------+
        | Pool – At least 400 square feet                  |
        +--------------------------------------------------+
        | Internal health or fitness facilities            |
        +--------------------------------------------------+
        | Secured, programmed, children’s play areas       |
        +--------------------------------------------------+
        | In-ground hot tub                                |
        +--------------------------------------------------+
        | Community garden                                 |
        +--------------------------------------------------+
        | Perimeter trail                                  |
        +--------------------------------------------------+
        | Sport court                                      |
        +--------------------------------------------------+
        | Indoor, keyed bicycle storage for units          |
        +--------------------------------------------------+
        | Community library, office, or meeting facilities |
        +--------------------------------------------------+
        | Exterior social area – At least 400 square feet  |
        +--------------------------------------------------+
(Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

ARTICLE E. ST. GEORGE ARTS DISTRICT OVERLAY ZONE, LANDMARK SITES, AND THE HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION


10-13E-1:    St. George Arts District Overlay Zone
10-13E-2:    Arts District Sign Regulations
10-13E-3:    Historic Preservation Commission
10-13E-4:    Landmark Sites
10-13E-5:    Review Process

10-13E-1: ST. GEORGE ARTS DISTRICT OVERLAY ZONE:
A. The St. George arts district overlay zone is established, which shall be an overlay zone over the existing zoning districts shown on the official city zoning map. In cases of conflict between this article and other provisions of this title, this article shall apply.
B. The boundaries of the district and overlay zone are set forth as follows:BEGINNING at the control point in the intersection of 100 South and 100 West Streets and is according to the official St. George city plat located in Township 42 South, Ranges 15 and 15 West SLB&M, and running thence S 89°53'01"E 784.07 feet m/l along the Survey Control Line; thence N 0°08'44"E 377 feet m/l along the lot line between Lots 3 and 4, Block 15, Plat “A”; thence easterly 264 feet m/l to the west line of Lot 8 of said Block 15, Plat “A”; thence northerly 19 feet m/l along said west line to the north line of Southern Utah Title Company property; thence easterly 191 feet m/l along said north line to the 100 East Street Control Line; thence N 0°08'44"E 1449 feet m/l to the St. George City Survey Control Point at the intersection of 200 North and 100 East Streets; thence N 89°51'44"W 323 feet m/l along the Survey Control Line; thence N 0°08'44"E 178.20 feet m/l along the center block line between Lots 1 and 2 of Block 2, Plat “D”, St. George City Survey to the center point of said Block 2; thence westerly 295 feet m/l along the east-west centerline of said Block 2, Plat “D” to the Main Street Survey Control Line; thence S 0°08'44"W 178.20 feet m/l to the 200 North and Main Street Survey Control Point; thence N 89°51'44"W 458 feet m/l along the 200 North Control Line to an extension of the lot line of Lots 2 and 3 of Block F-3, Plat “A”; thence northerly along said line between Lots 2 and 3 to the south line of Diagonal Street; thence N 48°16'24"W along said southerly line of Diagonal Street to the northwesterly corner of Lot 4 of said Block F-3, Plat "A”; thence S 0°08'09"W 69.77 feet along the west line of said Block F-3, Plat “A” to an extension of the south line of Hanover Court property; thence westerly 190 feet m/l along said line extended to a point on said line 100 feet from the east line of Block 39, Plat “A”; thence southerly 347 feet m/l parallel to and 100 feet west of said east block line to the south line of 200 North Street; thence westerly 32 feet m/l to the northwest corner of Lot 8, Block 31, Plat “A”; thence southerly 346.5 feet m/l along the line between Lots 7 and 8, 1 and 2 to the north line of Red Hills Investment Inc. property; thence Easterly 191 feet m/l to the 100 West Street Control Line; thence S 0°08'09"E 214.29 feet m/l along said Control Line; thence S 0°08'56"W 1236.85 feet along said 100 West Street Control Line to the point of beginning.
C. Design Guidelines: The following are the design guidelines for buildings located in the district:
    1. Signs: All signs within the district shall be part of an overall design scheme and shall conform to the sign standards.
    2. Underground Utility Lines: All utility lines shall be located underground.
D. Rehabilitation Guidelines for Significant Historic Buildings: Rehabilitation of significant historic buildings shall comply with the guidelines set forth herein and, in addition, all applicable statutes, codes and ordinances, as amended from time to time, relating to the use, maintenance, construction and occupancy of the property.
    1. Standards: All improvements to landmark sites shall be in accord with the general and specific standards for historic preservation as prepared by the Secretary of the Interior, and in harmony with the architectural character of the neighborhood.
    2. Additions: Whenever possible, new additions or adaptive reuse to structures shall be done in such a manner that if such additions or changes were to be removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the structure would not be impaired.
    3. Parking and Access: Off-street parking, loading facilities and pedestrian access shall be designed so as not to create conflicting movement. All other areas other than driveways, parking areas, walks and terraces shall be appropriately landscaped and provided with appropriate trees and shrubbery.
    4. Accessory Structures: Accessory structures shall be improved to harmonize with any redevelopment of the primary structure.
    5. Restoration of Exterior Façades: Restoration of all exterior façades, including the side and rear façade, shall be in keeping with the objectives herein. Roofline, windows and exterior facing materials shall all be considered. Adjoining buildings in separate or the same ownership shall be rehabilitated so as to carry out a unified concept.
    6. Harmony of Materials, Techniques and Colors: Materials, techniques and colors must conform to and harmonize with original materials and techniques. To this end, the emphasis should be, where practical, on correct period sash, doors, cornices, wall materials and signs and the removal of present-day anachronisms, such as defacing or out-of-scale contemporary features. The general requirements shall apply particularly to visible surfaces on the exterior. New work adjoining old must be carefully blended to minimize the separation, unless, in the opinion of qualified architectural experts, it is better to make the joining areas obvious and thereby emphasize the qualities of the original work.
    7. Patching: When repairing or replacing masonry details, decorations or parapet walls, care should be taken to prevent an obvious and unsightly patch. Materials, joints, etc., should match the original as closely as possible in composition, color and texture. For additional information on repairing masonry walls, see the Preservation Brief No. 2, prepared by the Technical Preservation Services Division of the United States Department of the Interior.
    8. Fake Details and Decorations: Fake “historic” details, decorations and other additions should be avoided.
    9. Anchoring: Sagging details, decorations, cornices, string courses, lintels, arches, pilasters, and parapet walls should be firmly reanchored. The original height of the parapet wall should not be modified.
    10. Repair or Replacement of Architectural Details: Deteriorated building details should be repaired rather than replaced whenever possible. Repair or replacement of missing architectural decorations and details should be based on accurate duplications, substantiated by historical, physical or pictorial evidence rather than on conjectural design. In the event replacement is necessary, the new material should match the original material in composition, design, color and texture.
    11. Painting: Heavy or numerous coats of paint, or paint in the wrong color, that obscures architectural decorations and details should be removed before repainting. Refer to Preservation Brief No. 10, Exterior Paint Problems on Historic Woodwork, by the Technical Preservation Services Division of the United States Department of the Interior.
    12. Fixtures: Hardware and lighting fixtures, where practical, shall be selected with care to conform to authentic work of the period, and to match remaining originals where such exist.
    13. Ornaments: If the original or significant detail no longer exists or is too deteriorated to save, it is recommended that a contemporary design be undertaken which is compatible with the rest of the building in scale, design, materials, color and texture. An alternative might be to undertake an accurate restoration based on historical research and physical evidence. Where an original or significant detail no longer exists and no evidence exists to document its early appearance, it is generally preferable to undertake a contemporary detail that retains the historic “flavor” of the building.
    14. Materials: 
        a. Original building wall material should not be covered with any form of inappropriate siding. Where this has already occurred, the inappropriate siding should be removed and the original wall material restored;
        b. Masonry facings shall be cleaned and painted as necessary. Sandblasting is forbidden without prior approval of the historic preservation commission. All repointing, when necessary, shall be done according to the specifications set by Preservation Brief No. 2, Repointing Mortar Joints in Historic Brick Buildings, by the Heritage Conservation and Recreation Service, United States Department of the Interior;
        c. Recommended materials for rehabilitation of masonry buildings include traditional bond pattern, such as running bond or Flemish bond, not stack bond. Clay facing tile may be used if the face size of the tile is that of standard brick and if the bond pattern is typical of contributing buildings in the neighborhood;
        d. The imitation of stone veneer or brick, using stucco, prefabricated plastic, plywood and/or fiber panels is not acceptable, unless documented through historic or pictorial evidence;
        e. Asphalt or wood shingled awnings and diagonal sided panels are not acceptable;
        f. Vinyl or aluminum panels imitating clapboard or wood siding are not acceptable;
        g. Glazing shall be clear, nonreflective, and untinted. Double-glazed insulating glass or materials such as acrylic or high-impact polycarbonate panels are permissible;
        h. Wall surfaces that have not been painted should remain unpainted.
    15. Color: 
        a. Color for all rehabilitation work must blend with the existing exterior residential color palette. If any new brick is used for rehabilitation work, it must be similar in texture, effect and color to the original brick. Stucco color for exterior walls shall be similar in tone to the muted pastels typical of historic pioneer stucco buildings or shall blend with the natural tones of the surrounding geology reflected on the exterior of adjacent buildings;
        b. White and off-white may be used on decorative elements such as lintels, sills and cornices. Bright colors are not appropriate for major architectural elements such as building walls. However, when used sparingly in fine lines, such as on the wood trim of a storefront, a brighter color than that of the building face will be allowed to enhance a particular color scheme;
        c. Metallic finishes generally are not allowed, except when used in such treatments as painted-gold or bronze-toned lettering on storefront glass;
        d. A simple color scheme of up to no more than three (3) exterior colors is required.
    16. Mechanical Equipment: 
        a. Radio, television, telephone and/or other telecommunication equipment, such as antennas or satellite “dishes” and ancillary systems, cables, junction boxes and the like, shall be placed behind or within suitable visual barriers in such a way that it is not visible from the streets;
        b. Heating and air conditioning equipment, including cooling units, blowers, exhaust fans, ducts and/or ancillary systems, support units, brackets, wiring, junction boxes and the like, shall be properly screened or installed behind or within suitable visual barriers.
    17. New Construction: The guidelines in this section are to be used by those planning new construction. Their purpose is to reinforce and enhance the historic architectural character of the neighborhood by encouraging compatible new construction. The guidelines do this by describing and illustrating certain design concepts found in the historic architecture of the neighborhood; concepts which can be applied in the design of new structures.
    18. Considerations: The historic preservation commission will consider design concepts other than those recommended in these guidelines when necessary to promote design concepts found in the historic architecture of the neighborhood. However, in order for a design to be considered for exceptional review, it must not include the use of elements that are designated as inappropriate in the guidelines.
    19. Siting: The ground floor of new structures should relate to the pedestrian’s human scale and continue to display the siting of neighboring structures.
    20. Scale: 
        a. Of the many criteria that must be considered when designing new buildings for the neighborhood, by far the most important is the scale of the new building and its relationship to the scale of the neighborhood;
        b. Just as the relationship of a new structure to the buildings on its block is important, so is it important that the elements within its façade be appropriately scaled. The scale of these elements should recall those of neighboring structures.
    21. Width of Building: Building widths have a major impact upon the perception of the scale of a building. The apparent widths of the front façades of new buildings should correspond to typical widths of the buildings on the same block. A long façade should be broken into separate elements to suggest façade widths or bays similar to those of neighboring buildings.
    22. Windows: Original windows in the older buildings are predominantly wood double-hung type. A sash pattern of one over one (1/1), that is, one (1) undivided framed pane above a similar pane, is the most common type. In new construction, one over one (1/1) type is required, unless the majority of windows in adjacent structures facing the streetscape clearly indicates otherwise. The pattern of a one over one (1/1) window may be achieved by the use of fixed glass, with three (3) conditions:
        a. The window frame replicates the proportions of a typical double-hung window sash;
        b. No unpainted clear aluminum is used for the frame; and
        c. The window frame is of similar cross-sectional size to that of double-hung windows typical of the neighborhood.
    23. Ornament: The ornamental details shall be compatible and in scale with those used in the streetscape.
    24. Color: Approved color schemes appropriate for the neighborhood are required.
        a. Muted background colors are required for the majority of the building surfaces;
        b. Up to two (2) complementary accent colors may be used in addition to the background color;
        c. Finished Wood Surfaces: The rustic or bare wood look is not allowed;
        d. The natural color of stone or brick may not be painted;
        e. Roofs must be a neutral or muted brown or gray. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-13E-2: ARTS DISTRICT SIGN REGULATIONS:
Within the city’s arts district, the city’s sign regulations shall apply with the following special provisions, additions and exceptions. Where a conflict exists, the special provisions contained herein shall take precedence over the regulations in the general sign ordinance. The following provisions shall apply only to property within the district:
A. Commercial Zones: Permitted signs are as follows:
    1. Wall – Projecting Signs: Wall or projecting signs; provided, that the area does not exceed ten percent (10%) of the front wall face of the building; and further provided, that:
        a. Wall signs, either attached or painted, shall not rise above the roofline nor project more than eighteen inches (18") from the wall.
        b. Projecting signs shall not project more than four feet (4') from the building. Signs projecting over the public right-of-way must have a minimum ground clearance of ten feet (10'). Guy wires or secondary supports shall not be used.
        c. Awning signs must have a minimum ground clearance of eight feet (8'), and shiny, Day-Glo fluorescent, or brilliant luminescent colors are not permitted.
    2. Freestanding Pole Sign – Low-Profile Sign:  One (1) freestanding pole sign or low-profile monument type sign may be allowed for each parcel of property or commercial complex; provided, the following standards are met:
        a. Low-profile monument type signs which are wood carved, sandblasted or engraved metal and do not exceed six feet (6') in height and are no more than sixteen (16) square feet in area for an individual business, or twenty-four (24) square feet for multiple businesses.
        b. Pole signs; provided, the support pole is located on private property and the sign does not exceed twenty feet (20') in height, nor exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area if the sign is rectangular or square shaped, nor exceed thirty-six (36) square feet in area. Sign face may project over the public right-of-way; provided, there is a minimum clearance of ten feet (10') from ground to the sign, and sign face does not project closer than eight feet (8') to back of curb.
    3. Entrance, Exit Signs: Entrance or exit signs and property signs according to the city sign ordinance.
B. Prohibited Signs: 
    1. Roof signs, or any sign projecting above the roofline.
    2. Off-premises signs.
    3. Flashing signs, including any sign or device in which the artificial light is not maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times when in use.
    4. Signs made of cardboard, paper, canvas or similar impermanent material.
    5. Bubble-shaped awnings and awnings with a shiny or wet look are not appropriate in the district.
    6. Other prohibited signs identified in the city sign ordinance (e.g., portable signs, etc.).
C. Additional Provisions: 
    1. Color of Signs: Painted signs should be in subdued earth tone colors only. Day-Glo or fluorescent colors are not permitted. Neon signs are permitted if appropriate for the building or use. EMS signs are not permitted.
    2. Letter Style – Integration: 
        a. The lettering style shall be simple and in keeping with the architectural character of the building.
        b. All permanent signs shall be integrated into the architectural design of the building on which they are placed and into the overall sign layout of the project in character and quality. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-13E-3: HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION:
A. Commission Created: There is hereby created and established an historic preservation commission which shall consist of seven (7) members who are residents of the city and who shall be appointed by the mayor.
B. Composition of Commission: The mayor shall select at least two (2) members of the commission from the professions of history, architecture, architectural history, archaeology, planning, urban planning, American studies, American civilization, cultural geography or cultural anthropology, as those professions are defined by National Park Service regulations.
C. Terms of Office: The members of the commission shall serve overlapping terms of four (4) years. Initially, one (1) member shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year, one (1) member shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years, one (1) member shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years, and two (2) members shall be appointed for a term of four (4) years. Thereafter, all appointments shall be made for a term of four (4) years. Members may be reappointed for consecutive terms. If a member represented a designated profession and ceases to be a member of that profession, or if a vacancy occurs for some other reason, a new appointment shall be made by the mayor for the unexpired term.
D. Compensation: Members of the commission shall serve without pay but shall be reimbursed by the city for necessary expenses incurred in connection with their duties.
E. Organization – Officers – Rules – Meetings: At their first meeting, the appointed commissioners shall elect officers who shall serve for terms of one (1) year. The commission may establish any rules necessary for the orderly conduct of its business. All meetings of the commission shall be open to the public. The commission shall meet at least twice each year and shall keep minutes of its resolutions, proceedings and actions which shall be made available for public inspection.
F. Powers and Duties: 
    1. Survey of Historic Resources: The commission shall conduct or cause to be conducted a survey of historic, architectural and archaeological resources within the community. Such survey shall result in an inventory which is able to be readily integrated into statewide comprehensive historic preservation planning and be compatible with the Utah inventory of historic and archaeological sites. The resulting inventory shall be open to the public and shall be updated at least every ten (10) years;
    2. Other Duties: The commission shall review and comment to the State Historic Preservation Officer on all proposed national register nominations for properties within boundaries of the city. In addition, it shall provide information to government officials and citizens of the area regarding historic and archaeological resources and history of the community. The commission shall be considered as an interested individual property owner for the purpose of making application to the planning commission for recommendation of landmark sites under this chapter. Enforcement of all state laws relating to historic preservation shall be supported by the commission with violations being brought to the attention of the appropriate authority.
G. Public Hearing: Upon recommendation by the commission that property be nominated for inclusion on the national register, or upon recommendation by the planning commission that a site be designated as a landmark site pursuant to this chapter, the city council shall hold a public hearing preceded by giving sufficient written notice to the owners and occupants of the affected property and by publication in a newspaper of general circulation at least five (5) but not more than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the public hearing. The notice shall designate whether the subject property is nominated for inclusion on the national register or whether it is being proposed as a landmark site because of its historical, architectural and cultural significance. The owners, occupants and any party known to be affected by a proposed historic landmark shall be given written notification of such recommendation or nomination as herein provided by utilizing the most current city and county records to obtain current addresses.
H. Notice of Alteration: While a site nominated for the National Register of Historic Places shall be subject to federal and state regulations affecting the same, properties designated as landmark sites pursuant to this chapter may be demolished, materially altered, remodeled, relocated or put to a different use only after one hundred twenty (120) days’ written notice of the owner’s proposed action has been given to the commission. During this one hundred twenty (120) day period, the commission may negotiate with the owner of the landmark and with any other parties in an effort to find a means of preserving the property. The commission may reduce the waiting period required by this section in any case where the owner would suffer extreme hardship, not including loss of profit, unless a reduction in the required period were allowed. On the other hand, where application for landmark site designation has been submitted to the planning commission and before decision by the city council, the commission may cause an additional waiting period to be imposed prohibiting demolition, material alteration, remodeling or relocation until there has been action of nonrecommendation by the planning commission or action by the city council.
I. Maintenance: Neither the owner nor occupant of a structure nominated for inclusion on the national register or designated as a landmark site pursuant to this chapter shall permit such structure or landmark to fall into a state of disrepair which may result in the deterioration of any exterior appurtenance or architectural feature so as to produce or tend to produce, in the judgment of the commission, a detrimental effect upon the life and character of the landmark or structure in question, including, but not limited to:
    1. The deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports;
    2. The deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members;
    3. The deterioration of exterior chimneys;
    4. The deterioration or crumbling of exterior plaster or mortar;
    5. The ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs and foundations, including broken windows or doors; or
    6. The deterioration of any feature so as to create or permit the creation of any hazardous or unsafe conditions.
J. Penalty: Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor or lesser offense, as determined by the city attorney and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1. Any person who filed with the commission and who refused to furnish, upon demand by the commission, any information relating to such application or request, or who willfully makes any false statement in such application or request, shall be also liable for such misdemeanor or lesser offense. For the purpose of this chapter, each day during which there exists any violation of any provision herein shall constitute a separate violation of such provision. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-13E-4: LANDMARK SITES:
A. Designation of Landmark Sites: 
    1. City Council Designates: Upon application of the property owner, the city council may designate certain areas or structures as landmark sites if the property satisfies the criteria in this section.
    2. Criteria for Designating a Property as a Landmark Site: Any building, structure, or site may be designated as a city landmark site if it meets the criteria in subsections A2a through A2c of this section, and at least one (1) of the other criteria set forth in subsections A2d through A2h of this section:
        a. It is located within the boundaries of St. George City.
        b. The building or structure was constructed before 1970.
        c. There are no major alterations or additions that have obscured or destroyed significant historic features, such as: changes in pitch of the main roof, enlargement or enclosure of windows on the principal façades, addition of upper stories or the removal of original upper stories, covering the exterior walls with nonhistoric materials, moving the resource from its original location to one that is dissimilar to the original, or additions which significantly detract from or obscure the original form and appearance of the building or structure when viewed from the public way.
        d. It is currently listed in the National Register of Historic Places, or it has been officially determined eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places under the provisions of 36 CFR 60.6. Properties listed on or determined to be eligible for the national register must still retain their integrity.
        e. It is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of the history of the city, state or nation.
        f. It is associated with lives of persons significant in the history of the city, state or nation.
        g. It embodies the distinctive characteristics of a rare or unique type, period or method of construction, or represents the work of an architect or builder recognized as a master in his/her field, or possesses high artistic values or style, or represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction.
        h. It has yielded or may be likely to yield information important in prehistory or history (archaeological sites, for example).
B. Conditional Uses for Landmark Sites: Landmark sites shall be granted a conditional use permit only if the following conditions are satisfied:
    1. The requested use is for low impact professional office or commercial use.
    2. Substantial investment is made to upgrade the property and enhance its historic significance.
    3. Any renovation maintains or enhances the historic, architectural and aesthetic features of the property.
    4. The proposed use shall generate only minimal traffic or parking demand as determined by the city council.
    5. The city council may impose such other conditions for granting a conditional use permit as it deems necessary to protect the character of the landmark site.
C. Construction Permits: Any construction upon a landmark site that materially changes the exterior appearance of, adds to, reconstructs, or alters a landmark site shall require a permit from the city council. Applications for such permits shall be made to the historic preservation commission who shall recommend the granting or denial of the permit to the city council. The city council shall have final authority to grant or deny a permit to construct that is consistent with standards set forth herein.
D. Demolition Prohibited: No structure or building within a landmark site designation shall be demolished or removed unless the structure poses an immediate hazard to human health and safety.
E. Removal of Landmark Site Designation: If a property owner no longer wants its area or structure designated as a landmark site, the designation shall be removed by recording a removal document in the property records of the county on a form acceptable to the city. Recording a removal document immediately terminates any conditional use permit associated with the area or structure. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-13E-5: REVIEW PROCESS:
A. Review Recommendation Committee: The historic preservation commission shall act as the St. George arts district overlay zone design review recommendation committee.
B. Exterior Proposals: The historic preservation commission shall review the exterior design proposals for landmark sites and significant historic buildings within the district. Exterior proposals shall include:
    1. Any rehabilitation, reconstruction or addition to the exterior of a landmark site or significant historic building.
    2. Any demolition or relocation of a landmark site or significant historic building.
    3. Any new construction within the St. George arts district overlay zone, except for minor additions to existing nonhistoric buildings.
C. Recommendation of Commission: The historic preservation commission shall be asked to review items submitted to the community development department pertaining to the St. George arts district overlay zone and provide a recommendation to the community development department on such proposals.
D. Design Review: For projects requiring review by the historic preservation commission as set forth above, the site plan, exterior design of buildings, architectural treatment, and other items related to design objectives, shall be subject to the review of the historic preservation commission.
E. Approval Required: The site plan and exterior design of all buildings and development proposed for the district shall be subject to approval by the community development department after recommendation of the historic preservation commission. No building permit shall be issued in the overlay zone without such approval.
F. Denial – Further Consideration: An applicant who has been denied a permit by the community development department for lack of approval pursuant to subsection E of this section may apply for a certificate of appropriateness as provided in subsection G of this section, or may ask the community development department for further consideration of the application by the city council. In such event, a decision by the city council shall be final.
G. Certificate of Appropriateness: A property owner may be relieved of the restrictions imposed by this article by applying for a certificate of appropriateness, setting forth in the application therefor the reasons why: 1) a particular building is no longer suitable for present purposes; and 2) why he cannot earn a reasonable return from use or rental of the building if altered or demolished and reconstructed within the limitations of this article and the guidelines adopted hereunder. Determination of whether a building is appropriate for exclusion from the application of this article shall be made by the community development department upon recommendation by the historic preservation commission. If an applicant thereafter desires further consideration of the award or denial of a certificate of appropriateness, he may request consideration thereof by the city council, and its decision upon hearing shall be final. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

CHAPTER 14 OUTDOOR LIGHTING


10-14-1:     General Provisions

10-14-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Applicability: All outdoor lighting shall conform to the requirements of this chapter, excluding lighting for detached single-family dwellings.
B. General Standards: 
    1. Light Shielding and Direction: Unless specifically exempted below, all outdoor lighting shall be fully shielded and downward directed in compliance with the following:
        a. No artificial light source shall project direct artificial light into the nighttime sky;
        b. No artificial light source shall be placed at a location, angle, or height that creates a light trespass;
        c. The shielding shall be made of completely opaque material such that light escapes only through the bottom. Shielding that is translucent, transparent, has perforations or slits of any kind, or allows light to escape through it in any other manner is not permitted; and
        d. Shielding may be attained by light fixture design, building design, or other site design features such as fencing, walls, or other screening; provided, it is in strict compliance with subsections B1a through B1c of this section.
C. Property Lighting: 
    1. Spot or flood lighting from a building or other structure is prohibited;
    2. The overall height of any light, on a pole or building, used to illuminate the property shall not exceed thirty feet (30');
    3. All parking lot lighting shall use full cutoff fixtures along property lines.
D. Specific Standards: In addition to the general standards of subsection B of this section, the following are specific standards that apply to certain lighting types and circumstances:
    1. Canopy Lighting: All direct artificial light sources shall be shielded or recessed and shall not produce more than an average of twenty-five (25) foot-candles under the canopy;
    2. Property Lighting: All artificial outdoor light sources shall not exceed one (1) foot-candle at property line and an average of ten (10) foot-candles of the property area;
    3. Flickering or flashing lights shall not be permitted;
    4. Property and Canopy Lighting: Dimming controls shall be installed, which allow the lighting to dim below the required average foot-candles.
E. Exemptions: The following light sources are exempt from the requirements of this chapter:
    1. Federal and state flag lighting;
    2. Seasonal Lighting: Outdoor lighting; provided, it is in compliance with the following:
        a. Lighting shall not create a hazard or glare nuisance; and
        b. The lighting shall be temporary (less than ninety (90) days in a calendar year) and not permanently installed;
    3. Low-Output Light Source: An artificial light source having an output equal to or less than one hundred five (105) lumens; provided, that the cumulative lumen output of all low-output light sources shall not exceed a ratio of one and one-half (1½) lumens per square foot of cumulative illuminated area. This ratio shall be calculated by combining the total lumen output of each low-output light source divided by the square footage of the area intended to be illuminated;
    4. Motion Sensor Controlled Light Source: An artificial light source that has a light output equal to or less than nine hundred (900) lumens and is controlled by a motion sensor; provided, it is in compliance with the following:
        a. The motion sensor is set to turn the artificial light source off no more than ten (10) minutes after the last detection of motion; and
        b. The artificial light source is sufficiently shielded in a manner that prevents light trespass;
    5. Tower Lighting: Tower lighting required by the FAA or the FCC; provided, that it shall not exceed the minimum requirements of those agencies. Collision markers shall have a dual mode for day and night to minimize impact to the night sky and migrating birds;
    6. Traffic control devices and city facilities.
F. Procedures for Compliance: 
    1. Applications: Any application for a permit or approval required under this title shall contain evidence that the proposed project complies with this section. The contents of the submittal are as follows:
        a. Plans indicating the location of all artificial light sources on the premises;
        b. A photometric plan of estimated foot-candle levels with maximum and average illumination is required;
        c. A description of each artificial light source device and supporting structure. This description may include, but is not limited to, device specifications from the manufacturer, drawings, and details;
        d. The required plans and descriptions shall be complete and shall be presented in a manner that clearly demonstrates compliance with this section in a manner that achieves the least light pollution while accomplishing an important public safety objective. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

CHAPTER 15 RESERVED

CHAPTER 16 NONCONFORMING USES AND NONCOMPLYING STRUCTURES


10-16-1:     General Provisions
10-16-2:     Repairs and Alterations
10-16-3:     Additions, Enlargements and Moving
10-16-4:     Restoration of a Damaged Building or a Building Housing a Nonconforming Use

10-16-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Except as provided in this section, a nonconforming use or noncomplying structure may be continued by the present or a future property owner.
B. A nonconforming use may be extended through the same building; provided, no structural alteration of the building is proposed or made for the purpose of the extension. The addition of a solar energy device to a noncomplying structure does not alone constitute a structural alteration for the purposes of this subsection.
C. It is the property owner’s burden to establish the legal existence of a nonconforming use or noncomplying structure.
D. A party claiming that a valid, nonconforming use has been abandoned has the burden of establishing the abandonment.
E. A nonconforming use is presumed abandoned if:
    1. A majority of the primary structure associated with the nonconforming use has been voluntarily demolished without prior written agreement with the municipality regarding an extension of the nonconforming use; or
    2. The use has been discontinued for one (1) year or more; or
    3. The primary structure associated with the nonconforming use remains vacant for a period of one (1) year or more.
Once the presumption of abandonment has been proven, the property owner must prove that any claimed abandonment has not occurred. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-16-2: REPAIRS AND ALTERATIONS:
Repairs or structural alterations may be made to a nonconforming building, or a building housing a noncomplying use; provided, they do not increase the extent of nonconformity or noncompliance. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-16-3: ADDITIONS, ENLARGEMENTS AND MOVING:
A structure occupied by a nonconforming use shall not be added to, remodeled, replaced, or enlarged in any manner, or moved to another location, where such addition, remodel, replacement, enlargement or relocation would increase the nonconformity or noncompliance except as follows:
A. Additions, remodels, replacements or enlargements which are minor may be approved by the city manager or designee if a determination is made that the change will not increase the negative impact of the nonconformity.
B. All other changes must first obtain a recommendation for approval from the planning commission and approval from the city council. In approving such request, it must be determined that the proposed change does not impose any unreasonable burden upon the lands located in the vicinity of the nonconforming use or structure and that the negative impact of the nonconformity is not increased. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-16-4: RESTORATION OF A DAMAGED BUILDING OR A BUILDING HOUSING A NONCONFORMING USE:
A noncomplying structure, or a building housing a nonconforming use, that is damaged or destroyed by fire, flood, wind, earthquake or other calamity or act of God, or the public enemy, may be restored, and the occupancy or use of such building, structure or part thereof that existed at the time of such damage or destruction may be continued or resumed; provided, such restoration is started within a period of one (1) year from the date of destruction, and is diligently pursued to completion. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

CHAPTER 17 PERMITTED WITH STANDARDS AND CONDITIONAL USES


17A          Permitted with Standards – General Provisions
    10-17A-1:    Application Requirements
    10-17A-2:    General Standards
    10-17A-3:    Accessory Dwelling Unit – Specific Standards
    10-17A-4:    Apiaries/Beekeeping – Specific Standards
    10-17A-5:    Automobiles and Other Similar Vehicle Sales Lots – Specific Standards
    10-17A-6:    Communication Transmission Facilities, Including Wireless, Primary – Specific Standards
    10-17A-7:    Guesthouse – Specific Standards
    10-17A-8:    Indoor Shooting Range – Specific Standards
    10-17A-9:    Public Utility Facilities – Specific Standards
    10-17A-10:   Residential Treatment Facility – Specific Standards
    10-17A-11:   RV Parks, Long and Short Term
    10-17A-12:   RV Storage – Specific Standards
    10-17A-13:   Short-Term Residential Rental – Specific Standards
    10-17A-14:   Storage Rental Units – Specific Standards
17B          Conditional Use Permit Review
    10-17B-1:    Application Requirements
    10-17B-2:    Land Use Authority
    10-17B-3:    Review Criteria
    10-17B-4:    Conditional Use Permit Standards
    10-17B-5:    Modification of Conditional Use Permit
    10-17B-6:    Expansion and Growth of Conditional Use
    10-17B-7:    Revocation of Conditional Use Permit
    10-17B-8:    Expiration
    10-17B-9:    Requirements for Specific Conditional Use Permits

ARTICLE A. PERMITTED WITH STANDARDS – GENERAL PROVISIONS


10-17A-1:    Application Requirements
10-17A-2:    General Standards
10-17A-3:    Accessory Dwelling Unit – Specific Standards
10-17A-4:    Apiaries/Beekeeping – Specific Standards
10-17A-5:    Automobiles and Other Similar Vehicle Sales Lots – Specific Standards
10-17A-6:    Communication Transmission Facilities, Including Wireless, Primary – Specific Standards
10-17A-7:    Guesthouse – Specific Standards
10-17A-8:    Indoor Shooting Range – Specific Standards
10-17A-9:    Public Utility Facilities – Specific Standards
10-17A-10:   Residential Treatment Facility – Specific Standards
10-17A-11:   RV Parks, Long and Short Term
10-17A-12:   RV Storage – Specific Standards
10-17A-13:   Short-Term Residential Rental – Specific Standards
10-17A-14:   Storage Rental Units – Specific Standards

10-17A-1: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
Each permitted with standards applicant shall submit a complete application upon forms provided by the city, which, at a minimum, shall include:
A. A description of the proposed use;
B. A site plan and supporting materials;
C. A design schematic;
D. The size and location of the site;
E. Traffic generation, timing and nature of traffic impacts and the existing condition and capacity of the streets in the area;
F. Utility demand and available capacity, including storm water retention;
G. Emergency vehicle access and anticipated average and peak day demand;
H. Location and amount of off-street parking;
I. Internal vehicular and pedestrian circulation system, including delivery vehicles, loading and unloading;
J. Fencing, screening, and landscaping to separate the permitted with standards use from adjoining property and uses;
K. Generation and screening of trash, and automated garbage collection (dumpsters);
L. Hours of operation, delivery and use; and
M. Odor and noise plan if applicable. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-17A-2: GENERAL STANDARDS:
All uses identified as permitted with standards are allowed if they meet the following general standards and, where applicable, the specific standards in this article:
A. Noise Control Plan: When applicable, the applicant shall submit a noise control plan. The building or site shall be equipped with an effective noise control system or plan, which must at all times prevent unreasonable interference with neighbors’ use and enjoyment of their property and include the following:
    1. A detailed description of any noise control systems that will be utilized, including operational schedules and materials used to mitigate noise;
    2. Contingency measures if any aspect of the control plan fails or is not followed, or if it is otherwise shown that the standard is not met; and
    3. Identification of the responsible parties tasked with implementing each aspect of the noise control plan.
B. Odor Control Plan: When applicable, the applicant shall submit an odor control plan. The building or site shall be equipped with an effective odor control system or plan, which must at all times prevent unreasonable interference with neighbors’ use and enjoyment of their property and include the following:
    1. A detailed description of any odor control systems that will be utilized, including operational schedules and maintenance intervals;
    2. Contingency measures if any aspect of the odor control plan fails or is not followed, or if it is otherwise shown that the standard is not met;
    3. Identification of the responsible parties tasked with implementing each aspect of the odor control plan;
    4. If applicable, the premises shall be kept clean by the regular removal of waste and by the use of spray and disinfectants to prevent the accumulation of flies, the spread of disease or offensive odor. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-17A-3: ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT – SPECIFIC STANDARDS:
An accessory dwelling unit shall meet the following additional standards:
A. Ownership: An accessory dwelling unit shall not be sold separately or subdivided from the principal dwelling unit or lot unless compliant with subdivision regulations.
B. Occupancy: The city shall only permit an accessory dwelling unit when an owner-occupant lives on the property within either the principal or accessory dwelling unit. Short-term rental of an accessory dwelling unit is not permitted.
C. The total number of residents that reside in an accessory dwelling unit may not exceed the number allowed for a “family” as defined in this title.
D. Number of Accessory Units per Parcel: An accessory dwelling unit (ADU) shall be allowed only on parcels containing a single-family dwelling. Only one (1) accessory dwelling unit or guesthouse shall be allowed on a lot or parcel.
E. Not a Unit of Density: Accessory dwelling units are not considered a unit of density and therefore are not included in the density calculation for residential property.
F. Parking: An additional off-street parking space is required. Tandem parking is not allowed for accessory dwelling units.
G. Size and Location Requirements: 
    1. If located within a single-family dwelling:
        a. No accessory dwelling unit shall occupy more than forty percent (40%) of the gross square footage of the single-family dwelling. The square footage of an attached garage shall not be included in the gross square footage unless the accessory dwelling unit is located in a basement that includes habitable space below the garage.
        b. Entrance Locations: Entrances to accessory dwelling units that are located within a single-family dwelling are permitted in the following locations:
            (1) An existing entrance to the single-family dwelling.
            (2) On the side or rear of the building. Stairs leading to an ADU in the basement are permitted to encroach into the side yard.
            (3) Exterior stairs leading to an entrance above the first level of the principal structure must not be visible from the street.
    2. If located in a detached accessory building:
        a. The accessory dwelling unit must meet the setbacks for the main structure for the zone.
        b. The accessory dwelling unit and all accessory structures combined on the parcel must not cover more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the rear lot area. (The rear lot area is the area lying between the rear lot line and rear wall of the single-family dwelling extended to the side lot lines.)
        c. A detached accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed a gross floor area of eight hundred (800) square feet.
        d. Height: The maximum height of a detached accessory building containing an accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed the height of the single-family dwelling on the property or exceed twenty-five feet (25') in height, whichever is more.
    3. Design: Architectural design, materials, and construction shall match the primary residential structure.
    4. Application Requirement: Any homeowner who resides in a single-family dwelling and whose property is in a residential zone and desires an accessory dwelling unit is required to obtain an accessory dwelling permit. The accessory dwelling permit shall be in addition to any building permits that may be necessary to create the accessory dwelling unit. The applicant shall submit the following as part of the application for an accessory dwelling permit:
        a. A site plan drawn accurately to scale that shows property lines and dimensions, the location of existing buildings and building entrances, any proposed building and its dimensions from buildings and property lines, and the location of parking stalls.
        b. Detailed floor plans drawn to scale with labels on rooms indicating uses or proposed uses.
        c. Written verification that the applicant is the owner of the property and has permanent residency in the existing single-family dwelling where the request is being made. A recorded deed restriction acknowledging that the single-family dwelling will remain owner-occupied, in order for an accessory dwelling unit to be rented.
        d. Rental dwelling business license. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-06-002, 6-4-2020)

10-17A-4: APIARIES/BEEKEEPING – SPECIFIC STANDARDS:
The city authorizes apiaries in specific zones, subject to the below requirements intended to mitigate problems that may otherwise be associated with beekeeping:
A. Property owners in zones in which apiaries are allowed uses may maintain two (2) hives, or equivalent capacity, per twelve thousand (12,000) square feet of property. In no case shall the total number of hives located on a property exceed eight (8) hives, or equivalent capacity.
B. Hives shall not be located on property owned by a person other than the owner of the hive.
C. Commercial apiaries are only permitted in agricultural zones (A-1, A-5, A-10 and A-20).
D. Hives shall be located in the side yard or rear yard.
E. All hives shall be situated such that the general flight pattern of bees in each colony is in a direction that deters bee contact with humans and domesticated animals. If any portion of a hive is located within twenty-five feet (25') of any property line or public right-of-way, as measured from the nearest point on the hive to the property line, a flyaway barrier of at least six feet (6') in height shall be constructed and maintained around the hive, except as necessary to provide access to the hive. A flyaway barrier shall consist of a solid wall, fence, dense vegetation, or combination thereof that extends at least ten feet (10') beyond the hive in each horizontal direction so that the bees are forced to fly at an elevation of at least six feet (6') above ground level over property lines or public rights-of-way within the prescribed vicinity of the hive.
F. Hives shall be located at least five feet (5') from any property line and at least six inches (6") above the ground, as measured from the ground to the lowest portion of the hive. Hives shall not exceed six feet (6') in height above ground level, as measured from the ground to the tallest point of the hive.
G. Every hive shall be conspicuously marked with the beekeeper’s name, address, telephone number, and state registration number.
H. Each beekeeper shall ensure that a convenient source of fresh water is available to the colony at all times. The water shall be in a location that minimizes any nuisance created by bees that might otherwise seek water on neighboring properties.
I. Hives shall not be located within five hundred feet (500') of a public or private school property.
J. Hives shall be operated and maintained in accordance with the Utah Bee Inspection Act, as the same may be amended, restated, and/or replaced, from time to time.
K. Notwithstanding compliance with the various requirements of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to maintain an apiary on any property in a manner that creates a nuisance or threatens public health or safety. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-17A-5: AUTOMOBILES AND OTHER SIMILAR VEHICLE SALES LOTS – SPECIFIC STANDARDS:
Automobiles and other similar vehicle sales lots shall meet the following additional criteria: Sales lots for automobiles, RVs, boats, trailers, motorcycles, ATVs, and similar vehicles shall be fully improved to comply with current city standards, including fully paved display area, permanent sales office built to the current building code, landscaping, streetlights and permanent signage. Sales lots of automobiles and similar vehicles shall meet the following additional standards:
A. Minimum Parking Requirements and Customer Parking: Every sales lot for automobiles and similar vehicles shall have a minimum number of parking spaces specifically designated for customer parking. Customer parking spaces shall be clearly striped and marked by an upright pole sign placed at the top of each customer parking space stating that the space is designated for customer parking. These spaces shall not be used for parking vehicles which are for sale, or for the display of any merchandise. The minimum number of customer parking spaces shall comply with the parking requirements set forth in chapter 19 of this title.
B. Parking Vehicles Which Are for Sale: All automobiles and other vehicles which are for sale shall be parked in the automobile showroom or in a parking space which is specifically designated for displaying merchandise for sale. All vehicles for sale shall be parked and stored solely within the automobile lot. The maximum number of automobiles which an automobile sales lot is permitted to display for sale shall be based on the number of approved stalls for noncustomer parking. Noncustomer parking stalls shall not be required to be striped.
C. Minimum Lot Width: Minimum lot width for one (1) side shall be one hundred feet (100') of frontage on a public street.
D. Building Required: A permanent, enclosed building is required on the site of the auto sales lot, which is devoted exclusively to the auto sales business. The building shall be large enough to accommodate the office of the dealership and shall provide restroom facilities. The building or structure shall provide a safe place to keep the books and other records of the business.
E. Display Pads: Display pads for cars may project into the fifteen-foot (15') landscaped area up to ten feet (10') and shall be limited to two (2) display pads (each pad no larger than necessary to accommodate one (1) car in any directional orientation) per one hundred (100) linear feet of display frontage.
F. Landscape Replacement: Landscape square footage removed for the display pads shall be replaced with the same square footage elsewhere on the site and noted on the plans.
G. Streets Designated for Automobile Sales Lots: Automobile sales lots shall only be permitted in the zone where it is an allowed use, and only on the following specified streets within the zone:
    1. Blackridge Drive;
    2. Bluff Street;
    3. Convention Center Drive;
    4. Desert Color Parkway (north of the Southern Parkway underpass, approximately three thousand four hundred (3,400) feet in length to the north end of the former “Welcome Center” parcel);
    5. Hilton Drive;
    6. Parcel located at 150 East 1160 South;
    7. Red Hills Parkway from 1000 East to the Washington City boundary;
    8. St. George Boulevard (excluding the arts district overlay zone);
    9. 700 South from the east side of I-15 to River Road;
    10. Sunland Drive;
    11. Sunset Boulevard.
H. Minimum Landscape Requirements: All car lots shall comply with minimum landscape requirements as set forth in this code for commercial developments.
I. Limited to sales of vehicles of less than twelve thousand (12,000) pounds gross vehicle weight. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-17A-6: COMMUNICATION TRANSMISSION FACILITIES, INCLUDING WIRELESS, PRIMARY – SPECIFIC STANDARDS:
A. A six-foot-four-inch (6'4") in height solid masonry fence is required to fully enclose the facility. The fence and the facility shall not be located in the front yard setback, within any required landscape or buffer area, or within required parking area. All power lines on the lot leading to an antenna structure and accessory structures shall be underground. Guyed facilities are not permitted.
B. The front yard setback shall be landscaped in accordance to the commercial standards set forth in sections 10-23-1 through 10-23-3.
C. Lots created and intended for the sole purpose to provide a public utility may be subdivided with less than the required amount of square footage per the zone.
D. Accessory structures must comply with the required setback and height requirements of the zoning district in which they are located, and be located inside the fenced area.
E. The height of any antenna structure or communication transmission pole shall not exceed fifty feet (50'), unless the zone permits antenna structures greater than fifty feet (50'), and a conditional use permit is issued in compliance with chapter 17B of this title. No antenna structure shall exceed one hundred feet (100') in height in any zone.
F. Monopole with Antennas and Antenna Support Structures: The maximum visible width of antennas and antenna mounting structures on a monopole shall not exceed eight feet (8') in height or thirteen feet (13') in width as viewed looking directly at the monopole at the same elevation as the antennas and antenna mounting structure. No such antenna shall be located within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a residential zone. The climbing pegs shall be removed from the lower twenty feet (20') of the monopole.
G. Lattice Tower: A lattice tower is not allowed within any residential, administrative professional, or commercial zone, including all similar planned development zones.
H. Antennas and Mounting Structures on or over Public Right-of-Way: Antennas and mounting structures are not permitted to encroach on or over the public sidewalk, or on or over a public right-of-way.
I. Nonmaintained, Nonoperational or Abandoned Facilities: The communication company and the landowner shall remove any nonmaintained, nonoperational or abandoned communication pole, communication tower, antenna, and incidental infrastructure within thirty (30) calendar days of cessation of use.
J. Permits: Prior to construction or installation, applicant shall obtain the proper building permits, encroachment permits and such other permits as required by law.
K. The foregoing notwithstanding, outside of the St. George arts district overlay zone, the following facilities are a permitted use:
    1. Collocation of antennas on existing nontower structures in industrial, commercial, agricultural, open space, or gravel and grazing zones; provided, the additional antennas are no more than ten feet (10') higher than the existing structure, and the color of the antennas blend with the surroundings, and not more than three (3) providers are locating on the structure. The total height of the structure shall not exceed the permitted height in the zone.
    2. Wall-mounted antennas which do not extend above the wall line of the building or extend more than four feet (4') horizontally from the wall.
    3. Wireless communication facilities located on city property, subject to complying with standards contained herein, and obtaining a lease agreement with the city.
    4. Any provider who is authorized to collocate on an existing tower or nontower structure, or install a new tower as provided above, shall be allowed to install any necessary accessory equipment shelters and related equipment at or near the base of the tower or structure, or within the structure, so long as the accessory equipment shelter and related equipment are either located completely within the existing structure or are located within the approved fence area. The equipment shelter shall comply with the development standards (i.e., setbacks, height limitations, bulk, etc.) of the zone. No previously approved landscaping (trees or shrubs) shall be removed in order to locate the accessory building or equipment unless it is replaced with the equivalent quantity and type of landscaping on site. This shall be done in a manner as to achieve the original intent, or to achieve sufficient screening of any proposed new shelter and/or equipment if the original intent would no longer be applicable.
L. Additional standards for the following types of antennas:
    1. Wall-Mounted Antennas: The following criteria apply to wall-mounted antennas:
        a. Wall-mounted antennas shall not extend above the wall line of the building or extend more than four feet (4') horizontally from the face of the building.
        b. Antennas, equipment and the supporting structures shall be painted to match the color of the building or structure of the background against which they are most commonly seen. Antennas and the supporting structures on buildings must be architecturally compatible with the building. Whip antennas are not allowed on a wall-mounted antenna structure.
        c. An antenna mounted directly on an existing parapet wall, penthouse or mechanical equipment room, with no portion of the antenna extending above the roofline of such structure, is a wall-mounted antenna.
    2. Roof-Mounted Antennas: 
        a. Allowed on top of existing penthouses or mechanical equipment rooms; provided, the antennas and antenna support structures are enclosed by a structure that screens the antenna from public view. The screening structure, antennas and antenna-mounting structures shall not extend more than eight feet (8') above the existing roofline of the penthouse or mechanical equipment room.
        b. For antennas not mounted on a penthouse or mechanical equipment room, the antennas shall be mounted at least five feet (5') from the exterior wall of a building.
        c. For antennas mounted between five (5) and ten feet (10') from the exterior wall, the maximum height of a roof-mounted antenna is directly proportional to the distance the antenna is set back from the exterior wall up to a maximum height of ten feet (10') above the roofline of the building to which the antenna is attached. Antennas shall be mounted at least five feet (5') behind any parapet wall.
        d. For antennas mounted behind a parapet wall, the maximum height of the antenna is directly proportional to the distance the antenna is set back from the wall up to a maximum height of ten feet (10') as measured from the top of the parapet wall.
        e. Roof-mounted antennas on a pitched roof shall be allowed; provided, the antennas and antenna-support structures do not extend higher than the peak of the roof measured by a horizontal line from the peak extending over the roof.
        f. Area Limitation for Wall- and Roof-Mounted Antennas: A combination of both roof- and wall-mounted antennas are allowed on a building. The total area for all wall- and roof-mounted antennas and supporting structures combined shall not exceed forty (40) square feet for each exterior wall of the building or a total of one hundred sixty (160) square feet per building. Up to three (3) carriers may utilize each building side as a permitted use subject to compliance with this chapter.
M. Wireless telecommunication facilities must meet the following additional standards: A site-location development master plan shall be submitted by each company providing wireless services or a landowner in joint application with a wireless company desiring placement of wireless telecommunication facilities. The development master plan shall show the general location of all proposed sites and show the coverage area provided by the location. The master plan is intended to show approximate service areas. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-17A-7: GUESTHOUSE – SPECIFIC STANDARDS:
A guesthouse shall meet the following additional standards:
A. A guesthouse shall be used only by the occupants of the principal dwelling or their nonpaying guests. Short-term rental of a guesthouse is not permitted.
B. The guesthouse shall not be leased or rented independently of the main dwelling. A deed restriction in a form approved by the city prohibiting the lease or rental shall be recorded against the property, with proof to the community development director or designee, prior to issuance of a building permit for the guesthouse.
C. A guesthouse shall only be permitted on a lot containing an area of eight thousand (8,000) square feet or larger which has an existing owner-occupied single-family dwelling unit, or where a building permit has been issued and construction is in process for the single-family dwelling unit. A guesthouse may be constructed on lots of less than eight thousand (8,000) square feet in an approved planned development (PD) zone; provided, a guesthouse is an allowed use within the project’s PD text, and other standards in section 10-17A-1 are met.
D. Only one (1) guesthouse or accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted per lot of record.
E. The guesthouse shall be located outside of all setback areas. The guesthouse shall meet the setback requirements for the main dwelling.
F. The guesthouse shall not have less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor area or more than four hundred (400) square feet of floor area.
G. There shall be no kitchen or cooking facilities within a guesthouse. A microwave, compact refrigerator (less than seven and three-quarters (7¾) cubic feet and thirty-six inches (36") or less in height), and wet bar sink (twelve inches (12") wide or less) is permitted.
H. Architectural design, materials, and construction shall match the primary residential structure.
I. Utilities shall not be metered separately for a guesthouse.
J. Building lot coverage including the guesthouse and other accessory structures shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the rear lot area if the guesthouse is located in the rear yard. (The rear lot area is the area lying between the rear lot line and rear wall of the single-family dwelling extended to the side lot lines.)
K. The guesthouse shall not exceed a height of fifteen feet (15') for gable roofs, and twelve feet (12') for shed roofs (flat roofs), as measured from the adjacent grade to the highest part of the roof.
L. Separation distance from the main dwelling and guesthouse shall conform to the requirements of the adopted building and fire codes.
M. A site plan shall be submitted to the community development department to determine compliance with the requirements herein prior to issuance of a building permit. A fee as established by the city council shall be paid for the site plan review. The site plan shall be drawn to scale, clearly showing the location of all existing and proposed structures, walls, parking, driveways, and walkways.
N. Guesthouses shall be of new construction only; existing accessory structures (shed, garage, workshop, gazebo, etc.) may not be converted to a guesthouse.
O. A guesthouse may not be used as, attached to, or converted into a garage.
P. A guesthouse may be used as a pool house.
Q. A guesthouse may not be placed in the front yard setback or side yard setback areas. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-17A-8: INDOOR SHOOTING RANGE – SPECIFIC STANDARDS:
An indoor shooting range shall meet the following additional standards:
A. Hours of operation shall be limited to six o’clock (6:00) A.M. to ten o’clock (10:00) P.M.
B. Indoor shooting ranges shall have walls, ceilings, and floors that are impenetrable to the ammunition discharged by firearms being used within it or have internal baffling built so that the ammunition discharged cannot hit the walls or ceiling.
C. Indoor shooting ranges shall be constructed and insulated in such a manner that prevents sound from the discharge of firearms within the facility to exceed a maximum limit of sixty-five (65) dBA at the property line.
D. Magazine (ammunition) storage shall be fully enclosed by construction materials as approved by the building department and fire department per applicable codes. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-17A-9: PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITIES – SPECIFIC STANDARDS:
Public utilities are permitted with the following standards:
A. A six-foot-four-inch (6'4") in height solid masonry fence is required to fully enclose the facility. The fence shall not be located in the front yard setback.
B. The front yard setback shall be landscaped in accordance to the commercial standards set forth in sections 10-23-1 through 10-23-3.
C. Lots created and intended for the sole purpose to provide a public utility may be subdivided with less than the required amount of square footage per the zone.
D. Any accessory structure shall be inside the fenced area. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-17A-10: RESIDENTIAL TREATMENT FACILITY – SPECIFIC STANDARDS:
Residential treatment facilities shall meet the following additional standards:
A. The facility is licensed by the Utah Department of Human Services.
B. The facility operator must provide prior written notice to the police department of each convicted felon to be treated in such facility.
C. Provide at least thirty percent (30%) of the area as open green space or playground and one (1) parking space per staff member on the highest shift plus one (1) parking space for each five (5) persons housed in the facility. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-17A-11: RV PARKS, LONG AND SHORT TERM:
Recreational vehicle parks for both long-term and short-term use shall meet the following additional standards:
A. Minimum Size: Each recreational vehicle park shall have one (1) common owner, and a minimum size of five (5) acres.
B. Access Roads: A hard-surfaced (concrete or asphalt) roadway of at least twenty-five feet (25') in width and constructed to city specifications must serve each recreational vehicle in the park (twelve feet (12') wide for one-way streets).
C. Access: Access to all RV parks shall be from a dedicated and approved public street at an approved point or points. No RV space shall have direct access from a public street.
D. Off-Street Parking: Hard-surfaced parking spaces shall be provided for each recreational vehicle located in the RV park and at least one (1) additional automobile for each RV space or lot.
E. Recreation Space: For each RV park having ten (10) or more units, at least four thousand (4,000) square feet of common, usable recreation area is required, along with an additional one hundred (100) square feet for each unit in excess of ten (10).
F. Density: The maximum density for a recreational vehicle park shall not exceed sixteen (16) units per gross acre.
G. Spaces: Each recreational vehicle space shall have a minimum width of twenty feet (20'). All recreational vehicles shall be able to park in designated spaces, and no portion of a driveway or roadway may be used for recreational vehicle parking.
H. Permitted: Only recreational vehicles, travel trailers, motor homes, park models and park trailers may be located in an RV park.
I. Minimum Yard Clearances for Recreational Vehicle Park Subdivision: 
    1. Front or side yard on a public street: twenty-five feet (25');
    2. Side yard bordering adjacent property: ten feet (10');
    3. Rear yard bordering adjacent property: ten feet (10');
    4. All RVs shall maintain at least a ten-foot (10') spacing between units;
    5. A six-foot-four-inch (6'4") high solid fence shall be erected along all side and rear property lines when a recreational vehicle park is located adjacent to any use, except another recreational vehicle park.
J. Utilities Required: Each recreational vehicle parking space shall have connections available for water, sewer and electricity. All utility connections shall be located underground. All recreational vehicle parks shall be connected to a public sewer system for all sewer connections or dump stations.
K. Service Building: All recreational vehicle parks shall contain a service building containing all sanitary facilities required by the Utah State Department of Health Code of Recreational Vehicle, Camp or Trailer Court Sanitation Regulations, and shall provide a dump station for dependent recreational vehicles.
L. Outdoor Living Space: Each recreational vehicle parking space shall be provided with a minimum of three hundred (300) square feet of “outdoor living” space located adjacent to the vehicle parking space. Said outdoor living space shall be maintained in a clean and weed-free manner and shall be kept free from garbage or debris of any kind.
M. Additions and Awnings: All structures are regulated by the International Building Code in effect at the time of construction. No addition or enclosure shall exceed four hundred twenty-five (425) square feet of total floor area. The maximum allowed size of a dwelling unit within an RV park shall not exceed eight hundred twenty-five (825) square feet of total floor area.
N. Minimum Separation: In no case shall the RV or the addition be closer to an adjacent RV than ten feet (10'), nor closer than five feet (5') to an interior property line. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-17A-12: RV STORAGE – SPECIFIC STANDARDS:
A. Storage facilities located adjacent to residential zones shall be screened with and surrounded by a solid block wall no less than six feet four inches (6'4") in height, and landscaping such as high-growing shrubs or trees placed close together (planted less than five feet (5') on center) that will effectively screen and shield the storage units from public view when abutting the adjacent residential zone.
B. Lighting shall be no higher than a canopy, or, if there is no canopy, no higher than eighteen feet (18'). Lights shall be fully shielded and shall comply with chapter 14 of this title, Outdoor Lighting.
C. Access to the property shall be laid out in a manner so that all vehicle stacking is on private property. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-17A-13: SHORT-TERM RESIDENTIAL RENTAL – SPECIFIC STANDARDS:
Short-term residential rental development shall meet the following additional standards:
A. A single-family residence may be permitted as a short-term residential rental property if the short-term rental property is:
    1. Located on a lot size of two (2) acres or larger;
    2. Contiguous to and fronts on a major collector or arterial street (sixty-six-foot (66') right-of-way or more); and
    3. Separated by at least five hundred feet (500') from another property used for short-term rental.
B. Landscape Maintenance: Each short-term rental property shall comply with the landscape requirements outlined in section 4-7-11. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-17A-14: STORAGE RENTAL UNITS – SPECIFIC STANDARDS:
Storage rental units shall meet the following additional standards:
A. Storage Rental Units – All Zones (Except a PD-C Zone): Storage rental units shall be limited to twelve feet (12') overall height for the storage unit portion of the facility.
    1. Site location of storage facilities shall be:
        a. Located behind a retail, office, or similar “storefront” and other appropriate mixed uses which effectively screen the storage units from public street views; or
        b. Located to the rear of existing commercial developments so the storage units are not the dominant view from public streets; and
        c. When located adjacent to a residential zone, shall have the front of the storage units screened behind a front façade typical of a commercial, retail, or office building, or similar façade.
    2. Exterior vertical surfaces of the storage facilities shall be covered with fifty percent (50%) of the area in decorative materials such as: decorative brick veneer, stone, textured block, or other similar materials, and the remaining fifty percent (50%) shall be finished with stucco. No unfinished metal or painted metal buildings are permitted.
    3. Colors are limited to natural, muted tones that emulate the local geologic formations common to the area and blend with the predominant colors of the natural surroundings.
    4. Lighting shall comply with dark sky principles and regulations.
    5. Individual storage units shall not be used for manufacturing, retail or wholesale selling, office functions, other business or service uses, and/or human or animal habitation.
    6. Storage facilities shall not permit the storage of any hazardous, flammable, or explosive materials; hazardous or extremely hazardous waste; or any material which creates obnoxious dust, odor or fumes.
    7. Main access shall be permitted only from a public street. Access to individual storage units shall be permitted only from interior private drives.
    8. Storage facilities located adjacent to residential zones shall be screened with a solid block wall no less than six feet four inches (6'4") in height, and landscaping such as high-growing shrubs or trees placed close together (planted less than five feet (5') on center) that will effectively screen and shield the storage units from public view when abutting the adjacent residential zone.
B. Storage Rental Units in a PD-C Zone: In a PD-C zone, storage rental units are not limited to a single story, but shall meet the following additional standards:
    1. The property is located in an isolated area. “Isolated” is defined as:
        a. The property is not conducive to standard commercial, retail, professional office, or residential development;
        b. The storage rental units provide a transition from a more intense use or zoning district to a residential zone;
        c. The property is screened from the public street behind other property or development that fronts the public street; and
        d. The storage rental units are located along a master-planned ninety-foot (90') right-of-way;
    2. Storage rental units accessed from the exterior of the building must be located behind a solid fence, which obstructs the buildings from the public right-of-way;
    3. Multiple-story storage rental units must provide building façades with architectural articulation. Building façade articulation shall include a variation in base, middle, and top of a building created by variations in color and materials. This can be achieved through:
        a. Combinations of stepping back or extending a portion of the façade (pop-outs); and
        b. Vertical divisions using different textures and materials.
    4. Windows must be opaque, unless the windows are for the business office on the ground floor;
    5. Single-story storage facilities can be constructed of prefabricated metal buildings; provided, that the exterior vertical surfaces of the storage facilities are covered with fifty percent (50%) of the area in decorative materials such as: decorative brick veneer, stone, textured block, or other similar materials, and the remaining fifty percent (50%) is finished with stucco;
    6. Unfinished metal or painted-metal buildings are not permitted;
    7. Colors shall be limited to natural, muted tones that emulate the local geologic formations common to the area and blend with the predominant colors of the natural surroundings;
    8. Lighting shall be required to be constructed and shielded (dark sky shielding) to not directly illuminate, or create glare visible from, adjacent properties or public rights-of-way. All outdoor lighting shall be fully shielded and downward directed in compliance with the following:
        a. No artificial light source shall project direct artificial light into the nighttime sky;
        b. No artificial light source shall be placed at a location, angle, or height that creates a light encroachment; and
        c. Light-source shielding shall be made of completely opaque material such that light escapes only through the bottom. Shielding that is translucent, transparent, has perforations or slits of any kind, or allows light to escape through it in any other manner is not permitted;
    9. Individual storage units shall not be used for manufacturing, retail or wholesale selling, office functions, other business or service uses, and/or human or animal habitation;
    10. Storage facilities shall not permit the storage of any hazardous, flammable, or explosive materials; hazardous or extremely hazardous waste; or any material which creates obnoxious dust, odor or fumes;
    11. Main access shall only be allowed from a public street. Access to individual storage units shall be from interior private drives only;
    12. Storage facilities located adjacent to any residential zone shall be limited to twenty-five feet (25'), be screened with a solid-block wall no less than six feet four inches (6'4") in height, and have a ten-foot (10') landscape strip along the property line; and
    13. Landscaping shall include shrubs and trees planted at least five feet (5') on center. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-06-002, 6-4-2020)

ARTICLE B. CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REVIEW


10-17B-1:    Application Requirements
10-17B-2:    Land Use Authority
10-17B-3:    Review Criteria
10-17B-4:    Conditional Use Permit Standards
10-17B-5:    Modification of Conditional Use Permit
10-17B-6:    Expansion and Growth of Conditional Use
10-17B-7:    Revocation of Conditional Use Permit
10-17B-8:    Expiration
10-17B-9:    Requirements for Specific Conditional Use Permits

10-17B-1: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
Each conditional use permit applicant shall submit a complete application upon forms provided by the city, which, at a minimum, shall include:
A. A description of the proposed use;
B. A site plan and supporting materials;
C. A design schematic;
D. A description of mitigating design elements;
E. A description of mitigating management practices and plan; and
F. Any proposed conditions of approval. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-17B-2: LAND USE AUTHORITY:
The land use authority for conditional use permit approval is the city council. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-17B-3: REVIEW CRITERIA:
In reviewing an application for a conditional use permit, the land use authority shall consider whether the application:
A. Identifies the maximum intensity of the proposed development and use;
B. Complies with all provisions of the code; and
C. Compared to permitted development and uses within the zone, substantially mitigates the adverse impacts that are reasonably anticipated from the magnitude and intensity of the development and use, as proposed, considering:
    1. The size and location of the site;
    2. Traffic generation, timing and nature of traffic impacts and the existing condition and capacity of the streets in the area;
    3. Utility demand and available capacity, including storm water retention;
    4. Emergency vehicle access and anticipated average- and peak-day demand;
    5. Location and amount of off-street parking;
    6. Internal vehicular and pedestrian circulation system, including delivery vehicles, loading and unloading;
    7. Fencing, screening, and landscaping to separate the conditional use from adjoining property and uses;
    8. Building mass, bulk, design and orientation, and the location of buildings on the site including orientation to buildings on adjoining lots or parcels;
    9. Usable open space;
    10. Signs and lighting;
    11. Physical design and compatibility with surrounding structures in terms of mass, scale, style, design, and architectural detailing;
    12. Noise, vibration, odors, steam, or other factors that might adversely affect people and property on site and off site;
    13. Control of delivery and service vehicles, loading and unloading zones;
    14. Generation and screening of trash, and automated garbage collection (dumpsters);
    15. Recycling program and pickup areas;
    16. The potential adverse impacts arising from the conduct of patrons, guests, employees, occupants, or their affiliates;
    17. Within and adjoining the site, the impacts of the use on public property and environmentally sensitive lands;
    18. Hours of operation, delivery and use;
    19. Special hazards arising from the use, or from its reasonably anticipated secondary effects, including its potential to attract criminal behavior; and
    20. Demand for public infrastructure or services. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-17B-4: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT STANDARDS:
Upon review and consideration of the criteria identified in sections 10-17B-1 and 10-17B-3, compared to the impacts of allowed uses in the zone, the proposal shall:
A. Be compatible in use, scale and design with allowed uses in the zone; and
B. Not compromise the health, safety, or welfare of:
    1. Persons employed within or using the proposed development;
    2. Those residing or working in the vicinity of the proposed use or development;
    3. Property or improvements in the vicinity of the proposed use or development; or
    4. Not impose disproportionate burdens on the citizens of the city.
C. The land use authority shall issue a conditional use permit, if the applicant has proposed, or if the land use authority can propose, conditions of approval to substantially mitigate the reasonably anticipated detrimental effects of the proposed use in accordance with the standards and criteria herein. The conditional use permit shall describe the scope of the permit, and the conditions of approval.
D. If the land use authority determines that the applicant has not proposed, and the land use authority cannot impose, additional, reasonable conditions of approval to comply with the standards and criteria herein, the land use authority may deny the conditional use permit application. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-17B-5: MODIFICATION OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
A. The land use authority may reasonably modify the conditions of a conditional use permit if the actual detrimental effects of previously identified adverse impacts are greater than anticipated, or the proposed mitigation has been unsuccessful at mitigating the actual detrimental effects, in order to comply with the standards herein.
B. Modification may be initiated by the applicant, the city, or an injured party with standing. The party seeking the modification shall pay the costs associated with the modification proceedings and file a petition for modification with the city. Modification proceedings are conducted in the same manner as an initial review.
C. The conditional use permit holder is a necessary part to the modification proceedings and shall be afforded due process. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-17B-6: EXPANSION AND GROWTH OF CONDITIONAL USE:
A. A conditional use may not be expanded without undergoing modification proceedings, as provided in sections 10-17B-1 through 10-17B-9.
B. A person expands a conditional use if the square footage of a structure on the property will be increased by greater than ten percent (10%) of the square footage existing at the time of the initial application.
C. A conditional use has grown if the following occurs:
    1. The pedestrian or vehicle traffic has increased by greater than twenty percent (20%) than was anticipated at the time of the initial application, and the increased traffic is a result of the use;
    2. Off-street parking has become inadequate due to the number of customers, employees or occupants associated with the use; or
    3. Other detrimental effects, such as noise, odor, or light pollution, have increased beyond that which was reasonably anticipated at the time of initial application.
    4. The city may initiate modification proceedings if a conditional use has grown to the extent provided in this section. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-17B-7: REVOCATION OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
A. The conditional use permit may be revoked or suspended if any of the following occur or are found to have occurred:
    1. The permit was obtained by fraud or misrepresentation;
    2. One (1) or more of the conditions of the permit have not been met;
    3. The holder or user of the permit has failed to comply with any local, state or federal laws governing the conduct of the use;
    4. The holder or user of the permit has failed to construct or maintain the site as shown on the approved plans; or
    5. A conditional use has been expanded or grown and cannot mitigate the detrimental effects of that expansion or growth.
B. Revocation is appropriate when the applicant, holder or user has knowingly engaged in conduct which violates the conditional use permit, or when the applicant, holder or user has previously had its permit suspended. Notice shall be given of a pending revocation, and the property owner will be given reasonable notice, and an opportunity to cure the violation in the same manner as provided for other violations of zoning ordinances. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-17B-8: EXPIRATION:
A. Conditional Use Not Implemented: A conditional use permit expires if the permit has not been implemented within one (1) year from the date of approval. The permit is considered implemented if the holder of the permit engages in the conditional use or commences substantial construction on the site for which the permit was granted.  One (1) extension for one (1) year may be granted if the land use authority finds that the use still complies with the review standards. A request for an extension shall be filed not less than thirty (30) calendar days prior to the expiration date.
B. Conditional Use Abandoned: If the approved use or activity ceases for any reason for a continuous period of six (6) consecutive months or more, the conditional use permit shall automatically terminate without further notice, as having been abandoned. A person may only reinstate the conditional use after a new conditional use permit is issued. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-17B-9: REQUIREMENTS FOR SPECIFIC CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS:
The land use authority shall require the applicant to comply with all of sections 10-17B-1 through 10-17B-8 requirements, above, and these specific additional standards for the following conditional uses:
A. Multiple-Family Dwellings Twenty (20) Units or More or Twelve (12) Dwelling Units an Acre or More: A multiple-family development with twenty (20) or more total dwelling units, or with a density of twelve (12) dwelling units per acre or more, shall meet the following additional standards, and shall be approved by the city council:
    1. Applicants shall submit a site plan, materials board, and elevation drawings showing the project’s overall design plan, including landscaping and proposed building exteriors.
    2. All elevations shall have an aesthetic variation of materials and colors, design articulation, and architectural relief.
    3. Upon staff evaluation and recommendation, the city council shall review the design plans to determine whether the proposed development will be compatible with the character of adjacent and surrounding developments, and whether aesthetically the development is harmonious with the character of the neighborhood in terms of style, materials and colors.
B. Buildings with Ground Floor Area of Twenty Thousand (20,000) Square Feet or Greater: Buildings with ground floor area of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or greater must meet the following additional standards. Buildings with a ground floor (footprint) area of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or more, or a site with an aggregate ground floor (footprint) square footage of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or more, shall meet the following additional standards:
    1. Vehicle access and parking lots properly designed for safety, efficiency and beauty. Parking lots should be landscaped with shade trees throughout the lot to avoid major heat islands, and to break up large asphalt areas.
    2. Enhanced landscaping of the project site that promotes common community appearance.
    3. Building façade articulation shall include a variation in base, middle, and top of a building created by variations in color and materials. Articulated tops should consist of pitch dormers, gable ends, cornice detailing, or similar details. The base of a building shall include elements that relate to human scale such as doors, windows, texture, projections, awnings and canopies, ornament, etc. Buildings shall provide visual interest through articulation of the façade through:
        a. Combinations of significant stepping back or extending a portion of the façade (pop-outs);
        b. Vertical divisions using different textures and materials;
        c. Divisions into storefronts, with separate display windows and entrances, variation in rooflines by alternating dormers, stepped roofs, gables, or other roof elements; and
        d. Arcades, awnings, window bays, arched windows, and balconies at intervals.
    4. Building colors are limited to natural, muted tones that emulate the local geologic formations common to the area and blend with the predominant colors of the natural surroundings. Bright, white or contrasting colors shall be limited to trim.
    5. A site plan along with colored building elevations of all sides of the building and a three (3) dimensional rendering shall demonstrate that the application complies with each of these criteria.
    6. Upon staff evaluation and recommendation, the city council shall review the design plans, upon recommendation from the planning commission, to determine whether the proposed development will be compatible with the character of adjacent and surrounding developments, and whether aesthetically the development is harmonious with the character of the neighborhood in terms of style, materials and colors. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

CHAPTER 18 WALLS, FENCES AND HEDGES


10-18-1:     Requirements
10-18-2:     Requirements on Corner Lots
10-18-3:     Retaining Walls
10-18-4:     Fences
10-18-5:     Barbed Wire
10-18-6:     Permit Required
18A          Rockery Walls
    10-18A-1:    Rockery Walls Subject to This Article – Permit Required
    10-18A-2:    Documents Required for Permit
    10-18A-3:    Site Conditions
    10-18A-4:    Construction
    10-18A-5:    Limitations
    10-18A-6:    Setbacks
    10-18A-7:    Structural Analysis
    10-18A-8:    Materials
    10-18A-9:    Inspections

10-18-1: REQUIREMENTS:
A. No fence shall exceed six feet four inches (6'4") in height in the side and rear yards.
B. No rockery wall, retaining wall, or fence shall exceed four feet (4') in height in a required front yard setback or street side setback. Within the front ten feet (10') behind the sidewalk, or property line if no sidewalk exists, only decorative fences such as picket fences or wrought iron fences with at least fifty percent (50%) of the fence open (up to fifty percent (50%) may be solid, or non-see-through) are allowed.
C. Berms shall not be used to artificially increase the maximum allowed fence height. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-06-002, 6-4-2020)

10-18-2: REQUIREMENTS ON CORNER LOTS:
A. No fence shall exceed six feet four inches (6'4") in height along the rear and side lot lines.
B. In all zones requiring a front setback, no obstruction to view in excess of three feet (3') in height shall be placed within the “sight distance triangle,” defined as a triangular area formed by the street property lines and a line connecting them at points thirty feet (30') from the intersection of the property lines. On double frontage lots, the sight distance triangle shall be required and maintained on the street that the property accesses and the street it intersects.
C. A retaining wall no more than three feet (3') in height may be erected, if set back a minimum of five feet (5'), measured from the back of sidewalk, or back of curb where no sidewalk exists. A combination fence and retaining wall shall not exceed eight feet (8') in height. No fence shall be greater than six feet four inches (6'4") in height.
D. A retaining wall no more than five feet (5') in height may be erected, if set back a minimum of ten feet (10'), measured from the back of sidewalk, or back of curb where no sidewalk exists. No fence shall be greater than six feet four inches (6'4") in height. No combination of retaining wall and fence shall be greater than ten feet (10') in height. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-06-002, 6-4-2020)

10-18-3: RETAINING WALLS:
A. The height of any single retaining wall shall not exceed eight feet (8') in all zones, except manufacturing. In the manufacturing zone, a retaining wall shall not exceed twelve feet (12') in height.
B. Terraced retaining walls shall be constructed out of one (1) type of material. For each additional terraced wall, each wall shall be constructed out of material that is similar in look, color, and texture. The landscape and drainage for rockery or retaining walls shall be maintained by the property owner.
C. Retaining walls shall be measured from the top of the exposed face to finished grade.
D. For interior, rear or side lot lines, where a solid fence is placed on top of a retaining wall or rockery wall, the combined exposed face shall not exceed thirteen feet (13') in height at any single point, measured from the finished grade of the adjacent retaining wall to the top of the solid fence. Retaining walls that exceed eight feet (8') shall be terraced in accordance to subsection G of this section.
E. Fences at least fifty percent (50%) open (up to fifty percent (50%) may be solid, or non-see-through) may be placed on top of a retaining wall with a combined maximum height of thirteen feet (13').
F. Where rockery or retaining walls were erected as part of a subdivision approval, the design and construction of any additional walls shall first be submitted for review and approval by the city, based on plans and specifications certified by a qualified structural engineer, and erected using the colors as were approved for the subdivision.
G. Retaining walls over eight feet (8') in height shall be stepped to form benches which shall be a minimum distance of one-half (½) the height of the lower retaining wall, and shall be landscaped. Benches shall be measured from the top back of the lower retaining wall to bottom face of the terraced retaining wall.
H. The color, texture and design of retaining walls that may be visible to the public must blend into the natural surrounding environment. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-06-002, 6-4-2020)

10-18-4: FENCES:
A. Public Right-of-Way: No fence approved under this chapter shall be erected beyond a property line or on the public right-of-way. If a fence is installed within one foot (1') of a public sidewalk, concrete or gravel shall be installed between the fence and the sidewalk to prevent weeds from growing in this area. Maintenance of the area between the back of sidewalk and the property line shall be the responsibility of the property owner or homeowners’ association as applicable.
B. Controlled Access Streets: On minor arterial or larger streets, fences or retaining walls may be erected to a height of six feet four inches (6'4") in the front setback area. The requirements of section 10-18-2B apply to private driveways.
C. Fences and Retaining Walls Contiguous to a Public Street: Where a fence or retaining wall is located on the property line contiguous to a public street, the fence, or retaining wall, or combination of a fence on top of a retaining wall, shall not exceed six feet four inches (6'4") above the curb or sidewalk grade. Retaining walls may be terraced to achieve greater overall height; provided, that no one (1) vertical plane exceeds six feet four inches (6'4") in height, and walls are offset a minimum of three feet (3'). The retaining wall shall be set back from the sidewalk a minimum of ten feet (10') as required in this chapter.
D. Clearances from Utility Facilities: No fence, wall or similar structure may be located closer than:
    1. Five feet (5') from pad-mount transformer or four (4) way vault.
    2. Ten feet (10') from the door side of pad-mount switch gear, and five feet (5') from the non-door side of the switch gear.
    3. Five feet (5') from fire hydrants.
    4. Three feet (3') from water meter boxes.
    5. Three feet (3') from video or communication pedestals.
    6. Three feet (3') from street lights.
E. Recreation Use: 
    1. On interior-side and rear property lines, a chain link or mesh fence may be erected to a height not exceeding twelve feet (12') for the purpose of enclosing a tennis court, or other court game area. Said fence may not be located in a front or street-side yard setback.
    2. Safety nets are permitted along the side and rear property lines, where a property is adjacent to a golf course. Safety nets that exceed six feet (6') in height require a permit issued by the building department.
F. Required in Certain Areas: In all administrative and professional office, commercial, and manufacturing zones being adjacent to a residential zone of any type, or in multiple-family or planned development zones having a common lot line with a residential zone, a minimum six-foot (6') high solid fence shall be required, but shall be reduced to four feet (4') in height inside the front setback area.
G. Fences Surrounding Developments: 
    1. Developments without individual residential lots that front on a public street may include a solid fence in the front setback area to a height of six feet four inches (6'4"), that is reduced to three feet (3') at each driveway entrance and intersection, in the same manner as required for clear view at intersections in section 10-18-2B, and set back from the back of any sidewalk a minimum of ten feet (10').
    2. Access Gates: If the back frontage of the lot is adjacent to a public trail or sidewalk, an access gate shall be permitted that is no wider than five feet (5') and shall be constructed of decorative iron.
        a. The gate may be solid or see-through.
        b. The gate shall swing to the interior of the lot.
        c. A pathway from the gate to the trail shall be installed and lined with a natural material such as crushed rock, gravel, or flagstones. The pathway shall not be paved with concrete or asphalt.
        d. Motor-vehicle access shall not be permitted.
    3. Landscaping required for commercial and manufacturing developments, and any required “street trees” shall be located on the street side of the fence. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-18-5: BARBED WIRE:
Barbed wire, razor ribbon and similar fencing material is prohibited in all zones except agricultural, manufacturing and C-2 and C-3 zones. In agricultural, manufacturing and commercial zones where permitted, and only for agricultural uses in the residential estates zone, the use of barbed wire, razor ribbon and similar material shall conform to the following restrictions:
A. Barbed wire, razor ribbon or similar material shall be pulled straight and not rolled or coiled.
B. Straight strands of barbed wire and similar material on top of fences or walls shall not exceed a combined fence and barbed-wire height of seven feet (7').
C. In commercial zones, barbed wire or similar material shall not be used within the twenty-foot (20') front setback area and shall not be used along any common lot line with a residential zone or residential development. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-18-6: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A. Retaining walls and rockery walls shall not be erected over three feet (3') in height, measured from top of footing to top of wall, without first obtaining a permit from the city of St. George building department unless shown in detail on an approved subdivision or site plan.
B. A permit is required prior to construction for any fence, rockery wall, or retaining wall being erected in a front setback unless shown in detail on an approved subdivision or site plan.
C. An application for the permit must be submitted with the following information: a site plan showing property lines, sidewalks, buildings, height, and locations of all fences and rockery or retaining walls, and a landscape and drainage plan for rockery or retaining walls. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-06-002, 6-4-2020)

ARTICLE A. ROCKERY WALLS


10-18A-1:    Rockery Walls Subject to This Article – Permit Required
10-18A-2:    Documents Required for Permit
10-18A-3:    Site Conditions
10-18A-4:    Construction
10-18A-5:    Limitations
10-18A-6:    Setbacks
10-18A-7:    Structural Analysis
10-18A-8:    Materials
10-18A-9:    Inspections

10-18A-1: ROCKERY WALLS SUBJECT TO THIS ARTICLE – PERMIT REQUIRED:
Rockery walls four feet (4') high and greater, as measured from the ground surface to the top of the uppermost rock layer, shall be subject to the provisions of this article and shall require a permit issued by the city of St. George community development department prior to construction unless the wall was included and approved on the engineered construction drawings for the subdivision. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-18A-2: DOCUMENTS REQUIRED FOR PERMIT:
The following documentation shall be submitted to the city at the time of application for a permit under this article:
A. A dimensioned drawing that identifies the location of each rockery wall with respect to the property lines, easements, streets, and other rights-of-way. Existing construction-required setbacks, as noted below, and drainage features shall clearly be identified on drawings.
B. A cross section of the wall showing the minimum rock size, for each lift, maximum wall height, reinforcing, backfill specifications, drainage, slope of adjacent ground, embedment, cuts, and batter.
C. All rockery walls four feet (4') and greater shall require engineering analysis.
D. All rockery walls four feet (4') and greater shall require an engineering design. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-18A-3: SITE CONDITIONS:
A. The following specific site conditions shall be considered for each wall design and noted on the drawings submitted:
    1. Future structures and landscaping.
    2. Location of utilities, utility easements, and written permission in a form acceptable to the city from each affected utility to construct the wall. Notwithstanding any written permission, the city reserves the right to deny a permit for a wall within, or over, a utility easement.
    3. Location of existing or future utility installations within eight feet (8') of the base and top of wall.
    4. Data showing the subgrade soil conditions within eight feet (8') of the wall.
    5. The type of fill material to be replaced or removed.
    6. The drawings shall note the drainage for surface water within sixteen feet (16') of the wall, and all walls shall be designed assuming wet conditions.
    7. The drawings shall note the subsurface water conditions within eight feet (8') of the wall.
    8. The drawings shall note the keyway/foundation depth and width.
    9. The drawings shall note the slope conditions and surcharge loads.
    10. Maintenance and service access. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-18A-4: CONSTRUCTION:
A. Monitoring: All phases of rockery-wall construction shall be monitored by the geotechnical engineer employed by the owner/contractor to verify that the nature and quality of the materials being used are appropriate and that the construction is in accordance with the engineered design. The geotechnical engineer shall verify to the city in writing that the materials and construction of the rockery wall as-built is in accordance with the engineered design after construction is complete.
B. Fill Compaction: Where the rockery walls are constructed in front of a fill, the fill shall be placed and compacted in a manner that will provide a competent fill mass as noted in the drawings. All fills shall consist of quality fill meeting the geotechnical engineer’s recommendations as noted on the drawings or report.
C. Compaction Testing: Density tests to verify compaction shall be taken at random locations. At least two (2) tests per one hundred feet (100') of wall length per two feet (2') of backfill shall be taken. In critical locations, the geotechnical engineer may request additional monitoring. The testing shall be conducted by a certified technician under the direction of the geotechnical engineer.
D. Fill Construction Reinforcement: All fill placed behind rockery walls shall be reinforced as recommended by the geotechnical engineer.
E. Rock Selection: The contractor shall have sufficient space and stockpile material available to select from among a number of rocks for each space in the rockery wall to be filled. Rock should be of a generally cubical, tabular or rectangular shape. Rounded rocks should not be used and internal void spaces in the facing should be kept to a minimum. Prior to being placed, all rock shall be inspected and approved by the geotechnical engineer. The rock source shall be preapproved by the geotechnical engineer. Rocks shall be placed to decrease in size with increasing wall height. Rocks shall be placed to bear on good flat-to-flat surfaces. The long dimension of the rocks shall extend back toward the cut/fill face. Rocks shall bear on at least two (2) or more other rocks.
F. Rock Placement: Rock shall be placed as recommended by the geotechnical engineer. A keyway (one-foot (1') minimum) as recommended by the geotechnical engineer shall be constructed into unyielding soil.
G. Drainage: A rock drainage filter or geosynthetic filter fabric shall be installed between the rear face of the rock wall and soil face being protected. The drainage design shall consider adjacent conditions and potential for water and erosion and shall be constructed as directed by the engineer.
H. Surface Drainage: Surface drainage shall be directed away from the rockery-wall face to a positive and permanent discharge well away and beyond the rock wall. The surrounding site shall be graded such that water cannot flow over the top of the wall.
I. Steepness of Walls: The steepness of the wall shall not exceed one horizontal to six vertical (1:6). Specific recommendations from the engineer are required and shall be noted on the drawings.
J. Slopes: Slopes above and below walls shall not exceed two horizontal to one vertical (2:1). (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-18A-5: LIMITATIONS:
A. Height: The height of any single rockery wall shall not exceed eight feet (8'), or as limited by the International Building Code, foundation clearance from slopes, and these standards, whichever is most restrictive.
B. Alignment: Walls shall be in a continuous alignment without abrupt changes in direction.
C. Terminations, Intersections, and Radii: Terminations, intersections, and radii of rockery walls shall be included in the engineering analysis. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-18A-6: SETBACKS:
A. Minimum Setbacks: The setback from a rockery wall to a building or structure shall meet all setback requirements as outlined in the International Building Code. Foundation clearance from slopes or the setback from a rockery wall shall be a minimum of the height of the rockery wall.
B. Separate Rockery Walls Considered One (1) Wall: For height and setback restrictions separate rockery walls shall be considered one (1) wall, unless separated by a horizontal distance greater than the vertical height of the lower wall. The distance shall be measured from the outside of the foundation of the structure to the exposed face of the rockery wall. This provision applies to building or structures at the low and high side of the wall.
C. Terraced Rockery Walls: Multiple rockery walls, designed as terraced retaining walls, shall be separated a minimum distance of one-half (½) the height of the lower rockery wall to another rockery wall. The height of an upper wall shall not exceed the height of a lower wall. The total combined height of all rockery walls shall not exceed sixteen feet (16').
D. Rockery Walls in Utility Easements: Rockery walls shall not be constructed within utility easements without prior written permission in a form acceptable to the city from each affected utility. Notwithstanding any written permission, the city reserves the right to deny a permit for a wall within, or over, a utility easement. Rock walls shall be limited to a height of three feet (3') within the street-frontage utility easement. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-18A-7: STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS:
A. Adherence to Requirements: All structural analysis shall be in accordance with adopted building code of the jurisdiction having authority, the local amendment adopted by the authority having jurisdiction, and this article.
B. Factor of Safety – Seismic Forces: The minimum factor of safety for sliding and overturning of each rock in a rockery wall shall be two (2). This shall include load combinations with seismic forces.
C. Analysis Provisions: The following analysis provisions shall apply:
    1. The maximum unit weight of the rocks used in the design of a rockery wall shall be one hundred fifty-five (155) pcf unless field verified by special inspection.
    2. The maximum coefficient of friction between rocks in a rockery wall shall be one-half (½).
    3. Surcharge load shall be taken into consideration in the analysis.
    4. Specifications shall be provided to clearly define acceptance criteria for rock materials. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-18A-8: MATERIALS:
Rock material shall meet the minimum requirements of the “Rock Wall Construction Guidelines,” by the Associated Rockery Contractors, August 15, 2000, Edition, unless other materials are specifically preapproved by the geotechnical engineer. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-18A-9: INSPECTIONS:
A. Qualified Geotechnical Engineer Required: Construction of rockery walls shall be supervised and inspected by a qualified geotechnical engineer employed by the owner/contractor. Supervision and testing shall be at the frequency specified by the geotechnical engineer, and shall include all phases of construction.
B. Final Compliance Report Required: Upon completion of the wall, the geotechnical engineer shall submit a final compliance report to the authority having jurisdiction. The report shall include a description of the rock wall, including type of rock, size of rock, rock placement, embedment, and inclination, property line setback, separations, and height of wall. The report shall provide a professional opinion as to the compliance with all of the design recommendations and acceptance of the construction.
C. Schedule Required: A schedule for the continuous or periodic supervision and inspection of construction shall be specified on the construction documents and all such supervision and inspection shall be verified in writing. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

CHAPTER 19 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS


10-19-1:     Off-Street Parking Required
10-19-2:     Size
10-19-3:     Access to Individual Parking Spaces
10-19-4:     Residential Area Requirements
10-19-5:     Nonresidential Area Requirements
10-19-6:     Development Standards
10-19-7:     Shared Parking
10-19-8:     Parking for Disabled

10-19-1: OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIRED:
At the time any building or structure is erected, enlarged or increased in capacity, or the use is changed to a more parking-intensive use, there shall be provided safe access to, and sufficient, improved, off-street parking spaces on site for automobiles in accordance with the following requirements. Buildings shall not be added or enlarged, nor building uses changed, unless parking requirements are met. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-19-2: SIZE:
A. Dimensions: The dimensions of each off-street parking space or stall shall be at least nine feet by eighteen feet (9' x 18') for diagonal or ninety-degree (90°) spaces; or nine feet by twenty-two feet (9' x 22') for parallel spaces, exclusive of access drives or aisles.
B. Reduction: A parking stall area may be reduced by two feet (2') lengthwise if landscaping separated from the paved area of the parking stall, by a curb or tire bumper guard, is provided in the remaining two feet (2') of the parking stall. All areas within the parking area not paved shall be landscaped. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-19-3: ACCESS TO INDIVIDUAL PARKING SPACES:
Except for single-family and two (2) family dwellings, access to each parking space shall be from a private driveway and not from a public street, unless all driveway separation requirements are met.
A. One-Way Driveway Width: One-way driveways shall be a minimum of twelve feet (12') in width.
B. Two-Way Driveway Width: Two-way driveways shall be of a minimum width as follows:
    1. Twelve feet (12') for a single-family dwelling, providing access to parking spaces directly off of a street without having to go past another building.
    2. Sixteen feet (16') for a single-family or a two (2) family dwelling that must go past another building to access parking spaces, with a minimum unobstructed two-foot (2') width on both sides of the driveway; or a two (2) family dwelling, providing access to parking spaces directly off of a street without having to go past another building.
    3. Eighteen feet (18') for a single-family or a two (2) family dwelling that must go past another building to access parking spaces where there are obstructions (i.e., walls, trees, etc.) adjacent to one or both sides of the driveway.
    4. Twenty-eight feet (28') for commercial, manufacturing and all other residential developments for the drive approach, and twenty-five feet (25') for the drive aisles.
    5. Additionally, a minimum of twenty feet (20') is required for any dwelling or building when any portion of an exterior wall of the first story is located more than one hundred fifty feet (150') from fire department vehicle access. Vertical clearance, surface, turnarounds and other requirements contained in the International Fire Code shall apply. Exceptions and modifications may apply as approved by the fire chief.
    6. Garages accessed by a twenty-foot (20') wide paved rear alley shall have a minimum five-foot (5') setback from the alley; provided, the dwelling fronts on:
        a. A public street; or
        b. A private street which meets the public street pavement-width standard.
C. Garage and Carport Spaces: Garage and carport spaces shall be counted as one (1) parking space unless such garage or carport is a minimum of four hundred eighty (480) square feet with a minimum width of twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-19-4: RESIDENTIAL AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Number of Spaces for Residential Development: The number of off-street parking spaces required for residential development and mixed-use residential shall be as follows:
    1. Single-family dwelling: two (2) parking spaces per single-family dwelling, one (1) of which shall be covered. Tandem parking shall be allowed in single-family subdivisions only.
    2. Planned development student housing (PD-SH): one (1) parking space for each student/occupant, plus one (1) space for a manager, where an on-site office is established. All parking shall be on site; no street parking or tandem parking shall be counted toward meeting the parking requirement. No parking area shall be located within the required front setback facing a public street, or more than one hundred feet (100') away from the premises it is intended to serve.
    3. Required student/occupant parking in a PD-SH shall be reduced to three-quarters (¾) parking space per student/occupant, where the following criteria are met:
        a. The student/occupant housing is new multifamily construction with ten (10) or more units and is located within the “student pedestrian emphasis area” as shown on Figure 1 attached to the ordinance codified in this title; and
        b. Each property that utilizes this parking reduction shall specify on all rental contracts whether or not an automobile parking space is provided for that individual tenant, and no more than seventy-five percent (75%) of the tenants may be in possession of an automobile; and
        c. The property owner shall enter into an agreement with the city and with Dixie State University stating that the property owner is responsible for monitoring compliance with the above-stated criteria for a student/occupant parking reduction. Monitoring shall include a semiannual report to the city and Dixie State University prepared by the property owner indicating the number and percentage of tenants in possession of an automobile; and
        d. Lighted bicycle parking is provided on a hard-surface area adjacent to the student housing at a ratio of one (1) space per every ten (10) students/occupants; and
        e. One-half (½) of the parking spaces are covered; and
        f. The student/occupant parking reduction does not reduce or alter the other parking requirements in this section.
    4. All Other Dwellings: 
        a. All other dwellings, including mixed-use residential, townhouses and condominiums, shall have two (2) parking spaces per dwelling unit, at least one (1) of which shall be covered. Covered parking may be located within the side and rear setback areas. For projects with more than one hundred (100) dwelling units, with commonly accessed parking, the land use authority may reduce the parking space requirement to one and one-half (1½) spaces per unit upon proof that two (2) spaces per unit is an excessive amount of parking;
        b. No street parking shall be counted toward meeting the parking requirement;
        c. Tandem parking shall not count toward the parking requirement. However, if covered parking is provided within a garage, each dwelling unit may tandem park in the front setback, if the garage and tandem parking spaces are associated with the same unit. Garage must be set back a minimum of twenty feet (20') measured from back of sidewalk or curb where no sidewalk exists to qualify for tandem parking. Interior of garage must be unobstructed and accessible to qualify as covered parking;
        d. No parking area shall be located within the required front setback facing a public street, or more than four hundred feet (400') away from the premises it is intended to serve. All required parking shall be on site;
        e. Minimum of two (2) bicycle parking per project and an additional two (2) per one hundred (100) vehicle parking spaces.
    5. Guest Parking: For housing projects with a density of six (6) dwelling units per acre or more there shall be provided guest parking spaces in the amount of one (1) guest parking space per three (3) dwelling units. The guest parking spaces shall be located on premises and within two hundred feet (200') of the dwelling unit they are intended to serve.
    6. Parking Vehicles on Front Lawns or Setback Areas: Parking vehicles is prohibited on front lawns, sidewalks, required landscape area, front setback or street-side setback areas. Parking is permitted in the front setback on an approved paved surface. Parking is permitted in the side front setback area on gravel.
    7. Short-Term Rental Parking: For each single-family and two (2) family short-term rental property:
        a. Two (2) parking spaces provided per dwelling unit, one (1) of which shall be covered;
        b. On-street parking does not qualify for parking requirements. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-19-5: NONRESIDENTIAL AREA REQUIREMENTS:
The number of off-street parking spaces required for all nonresidential developments shall be as follows:
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Automotive repair and supply           | 1 space for each 400 sf of gross floor area.        |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Bowling alleys and billiard halls      | 5 spaces for each alley, plus 2 spaces for          |
|                                        | each billiard table contained therein.              |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Business or professional offices       | 1 space for each 250 sf of gross floor area.        |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Call centers or telemarketing business | 1 space per employee on the highest shift,          |
|                                        | or 1 space per 100 sf of gross floor area,          |
|                                        | whichever is greater; except that call centers      |
|                                        | occupying no more than 15 percent of a building’s   |
|                                        | total floor area (or 15 percent of an office        |
|                                        | park’s cumulative floor area), up to 3,000          |
|                                        | sf maximum, shall provide at least 1 space          |
|                                        | per 250 sf of gross floor area.                     |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Commercial uses in the C-4 zoning      | 1 space for each 500 sf of floor area. Change       |
| district from 300 West to 300          | of use for an existing building does not require    |
| East                                   | additional parking.                                 |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Dance facilities                       | 1 space for every 3.5 people of maximum capacity    |
|                                        | allowed in the facility.                            |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Child care center                      | 1 space for each staff member, plus 1 space         |
|                                        | for each 10 children for which said establishment   |
|                                        | is licensed.                                        |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Educational uses:                                                                            |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Elementary                             | 2.5 spaces per classroom/teaching station.          |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Intermediate (6th and 7th) and         | 4.5 spaces per classroom/teaching station.          |
| middle (8th and 9th)                   |                                                     |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| High school (10th through 12th)        | 12 spaces per classroom/teaching station.           |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| College, universities, trade schools,  | 1 space for each faculty member, plus 1 space       |
| etc.                                   | for each 3 students.                                |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Schools having an arena or auditorium shall meet this requirement or the requirements        |
| of religious facilities, sports arenas, auditoriums, etc., of this section,                  |
| whichever is greater.                                                                        |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Furniture stores, appliance stores     | 1 space for each 600 sf of floor area.              |
| and lumber yards                       |                                                     |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Golf courses                           | 6 spaces per hole.                                  |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Golf driving ranges                    | 1 space per tee.                                    |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Health studios, gym, and spas          | 1 space for each 250 sf of gross floor area         |
|                                        | or 10 spaces minimum, whichever is greater.         |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Hospitals                              | 2 parking spaces for each bed, plus 1 space         |
|                                        | for each 250 sf of office and other areas.          |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Hotels, motels, motor hotels           | 1 space for each living or sleeping unit, plus      |
|                                        | 2 spaces for resident manager or owner.             |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Indoor shooting range                  | 2 spaces per each shooting lane, plus 1 space       |
|                                        | per each 250 gross sf for sales, storage,           |
|                                        | training, or other uses.                            |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Libraries                              | 1 space for each 300 sf of gross floor area.        |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Manufacturing plants, warehouses,      | 1 space for each 1,000 sf of gross floor area,      |
| storage buildings or structures        | and 1 space for each 250 sf of office or sales      |
| especially for storage purposes        | area.                                               |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Mortuaries and funeral homes           | 5 spaces, plus 1 space for each 35 sf of assembly   |
|                                        | room floor area.                                    |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Nursing homes, care centers and        | 1 parking space for each 3 beds, except where       |
| assisted living                        | skilled care (long-term care) is provided,          |
|                                        | the requirement is 1 parking space for each         |
|                                        | 2 beds.                                             |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Outdoor sales lots for autos, mobile   | 1 space for each 7 vehicles or items of equipment   |
| homes and RVs                          | to be displayed, plus 2 spaces for manager          |
|                                        | and employee parking.                               |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Religious facilities, sports arenas,   | 1 space for each 3.5 fixed seats of maximum         |
| auditoriums, theaters, assembly        | seating capacity, or 1 space for each 35 sf         |
| halls, lodge halls or other meeting    | of seating area within the main auditorium          |
| rooms                                  | where there are no fixed seats. 18 linear           |
|                                        | inches of bench shall be considered a fixed         |
|                                        | seat.                                               |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Restaurants and other establishments   | 1 space for every 100 sf of dining room area,       |
| where food or beverages are consumed   | and 1 space for every 250 sf of kitchen or          |
| on site                                | office area.                                        |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Retail stores and shops, commercial    | 1 space for each 250 sf of gross floor area.        |
| banks, savings and loan offices,       | For commercial centers containing 500 or more       |
| and other financial institutions,      | spaces, spaces in excess of 500 shall be calculated |
| general retail stores, food stores,    | based on 1 space for each 500 sf of gross           |
| supermarkets, drugstores and other     | floor area for retail uses.                         |
| similar commercial businesses          |                                                     |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Service commercial businesses;         | 1 space for each 250 sf of retail or office         |
| businesses such as electrical,         | area, and 1 space for each 500 sf of additional     |
| plumbing, cabinets, printing and       | building area.                                      |
| other similar shops                    |                                                     |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Skating rinks, ice or roller           | 1 space for each 300 sf of gross floor area.        |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Swimming pools (commercial)            | 1 space for each 100 sf of water surface or         |
|                                        | 10 stalls, whichever is greater.                    |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Tennis, handball and racquetball       | 6 spaces minimum or 3 spaces per court, whichever   |
| courts (commercial)                    | is greater.                                         |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Veterinary hospitals                   | 5 spaces for each doctor.                           |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Waterpark                              | 38 spaces per acre.                                 |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
(Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-19-6: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A. All property used as a parking lot shall comply with adopted parking lot and pavement standards.
B. Electric Vehicle Charging Stations (EVCS): All new parking areas shall provide the electrical expansion capacity and conduit to parking spaces for at least one percent (1%) of the required parking spaces, in order to accommodate the future hardwire installation of EVCS.
C. A minimum of two (2) bicycle parking spaces per project and an additional two (2) per one hundred (100) vehicle parking spaces is required. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-06-002, 6-4-2020)

10-19-7: SHARED PARKING:
A. Shared Facilities: Shared parking facilities may be used jointly with parking facilities for other uses when operations are not normally conducted during the same hours, or when peak uses vary.
B. Requests – Guidelines: Shared parking allowed subject to the following guidelines:
    1. No substantial conflict in the periods of peak demand of uses for which the joint use is proposed, or an excess of required parking stalls is available.
    2. The number of parking stalls which may be credited against the requirements for the uses involved will not exceed the number of spaces that may normally be required for any one (1) of the uses sharing the parking.
    3. Parking facilities are no farther than two hundred fifty feet (250') from any use proposing to use shared parking.
    4. A written agreement shall be executed by all parties, and recorded against the properties, assuring the continued availability of shared parking facilities in the event that one (1) of the uses shall be sold or otherwise change ownership or management. The agreement shall provide that the shared parking facilities cannot be removed or changed without the express written consent of the city. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-19-8: PARKING FOR DISABLED:
A. Required – Number: Any parking area to be used by the general public shall provide parking spaces designated and located to adequately accommodate the disabled.
B. Dimensions – Van Space, Access Aisle: In addition, for every eight (8) accessible parking spaces, one (1) accessible van space must be provided. The dimensions of a standard accessible parking space shall be at least nine feet by eighteen feet (9' x 18') with a five-foot (5') wide access aisle (total of fourteen feet by eighteen feet (14' x 18')). The dimensions of an accessible van space shall be at least nine feet by eighteen feet (9' x 18') with an eight-foot (8') wide access aisle (total of seventeen feet by eighteen feet (17' x 18')). (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

CHAPTER 20 MOTOR VEHICLE ACCESS AND LOADING


10-20-1:     Access Requirements
10-20-2:     Residential Lots – Driveways
10-20-3:     Nonresidential Lots – Driveways
10-20-4:     Screening of Parking Lots
10-20-5:     Maintenance
10-20-6:     Off-Street Loading Space
10-20-7:     Garbage Collection Access
10-20-8:     Residential Private Streets – Access
10-20-9:     Alley Access in Residential and Commercial Developments and Subdivisions

10-20-1: ACCESS REQUIREMENTS:
Adequate vehicular ingress and egress to and from all uses of land shall be provided as follows in this chapter. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-20-2: RESIDENTIAL LOTS – DRIVEWAYS:
A. Number of Driveways: No residential lot shall have more than two (2) driveways or curb cuts for access; the existence of a modified curb does not alter the number of driveways. A circular driveway that fronts a major collector or arterial street (sixty-six-foot (66') right-of-way or more) shall count as one (1) driveway or curb cut for access.
B. Minimum Separation: No driveway shall be closer than twelve feet (12') to another driveway. No driveway shall be located within six feet (6') of a property line, except when two (2) adjacent property owners share one (1) curb cut for two (2) driveways at the shared lot line. Each driveway shall be a minimum of twelve feet (12') in width.
C. Maximum Width: No driveway shall be more than fifty feet (50') wide and shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the frontage width.
D. Corner Lots: In no event shall a driveway be placed on any corner lot within a distance of twenty feet (20') from the point of curvature of the radius.
E. Unused Curb Cuts: Prior to certificate of occupancy, the applicant shall replace any unused curb cuts for driveways with standard curb, gutter, sidewalk, and pavement.
F. Right-of-Way Width: No single-family residential lot shall have individual access on a public street with a right-of-way width greater than sixty-six feet (66') except as provided in this section.
G. All driveways shall be paved with concrete or asphalt in accordance with St. George standard specifications for design and construction. Concrete pavers are an approved driveway surface if built to city standards. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-20-3: NONRESIDENTIAL LOTS – DRIVEWAYS:
All nonresidential driveways shall comply with the St. George access management policy. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-20-4: SCREENING OF PARKING LOTS:
The sides and rear of any parking lot that faces a residential zone shall be screened from such zone by a masonry wall, or as may otherwise be required by chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-20-5: MAINTENANCE:
Each parking lot shall be permanently paved, configured and maintained. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-20-6: OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE:
On the same premises with every building, structure or part thereof, erected and occupied or increased in capacity after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, for manufacturing, storage, warehouse, goods display, department store, grocery store, hotel, hospital, or any similar use involving the receipt or distribution by vehicle of materials or merchandise, the applicant shall provide and maintain adequate on-site space for standing, loading and unloading services to avoid interference with private-drive aisles and parking, and public use of streets and alleys. In no case shall required loading and unloading spaces be part of the area used to satisfy access or parking requirements. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-20-7: GARBAGE COLLECTION ACCESS:
All projects requiring automated garbage collection (dumpsters) shall provide convenient access to and from collection areas. Collection areas shall be screened from street views and shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary manner. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-20-8: RESIDENTIAL PRIVATE STREETS – ACCESS:
A. No turnaround or cul-de-sac shall be required on dead-end private streets one hundred fifty feet (150') or less in length measured from the centerline of the intersecting road with three (3) units or less fronting.
B. On dead-end private streets with up to eight (8) units, a turnaround or a cul-de-sac must be constructed to applicable city standards.
C. On dead-end private streets with nine (9) or more units, a cul-de-sac must be constructed to applicable city standards.
D. The maximum length of any dead-end private street shall be six hundred feet (600').
E. All turnarounds shall be used solely as a turnaround and not as a joint use for such things as parking, trash pickup or other streets.
F. For subdivisions served with a dead-end private street having twelve (12) or more units, at least one (1) approved cul-de-sac is required within the subdivision. All other dead-end private streets within said subdivision shall conform to subsections A through E of this section. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-20-9: ALLEY ACCESS IN RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENTS AND SUBDIVISIONS:
A. Residential: In residential developments and subdivisions, an alley may provide access to a garage located to the rear of a dwelling. An alley is permitted only if it provides a secondary vehicular access to a dwelling unit.
B. Commercial: In commercial developments and subdivisions, an alley shall be permitted only if it provides a secondary vehicular access to the rear entrance of a commercial building or unit. Alleys shall not face a public street. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

CHAPTER 21 RESERVED

CHAPTER 22 RESERVED

CHAPTER 23 LANDSCAPE STANDARDS


10-23-1:     Minimum Landscaping Standards
10-23-2:     Additional Requirements for Nonresidential Developments
10-23-3:     Landscaping Completion and Maintenance Requirements for Single-Family Residential Zones, Residential Estate Zones, and Single-Family Residences

10-23-1: MINIMUM LANDSCAPING STANDARDS:
Minimum landscaping standards are required for development within all zones except agriculture, gravel and grazing, open space, and single-family residential, as follows:
A. Application: The requirements of this section apply to all new development and to the remodeling of existing development where there is an increase in the building’s footprint.
B. Design: 
    1. All landscape and irrigation designers and installers shall have all required state and local licenses, insurance, bonding requirements, and be able to show proof of such.
    2. Landscape plans shall make provisions for erosion control on all graded sites. No turf shall be planted on slopes greater than thirty percent (30%). Turf should be reserved for areas where it is functional, including high traffic play areas, or areas needing erosion mitigation. Choose turf species with lower water requirements. Choose turf configurations for irrigation efficiency.
    3. A landscape and irrigation plan prepared by a Utah-licensed landscape contractor or landscape architect shall be submitted to the city for review at the same time as the drawings and plans are submitted for development of the site.
    4. Plants that are well adapted to the St. George-area climate zone shall be used.
    5. Plants with similar water needs shall be grouped together in “hydro zones.” Spray heads and drip emitters shall not be connected to the same irrigation valve.
    6. Drought-tolerant plants with low fuel volume or high moisture content that will blend with the native vegetation shall be used for projects located at the interface between urban areas and natural (nonirrigated) open space.
    7. Storm water detention and retention basins shall be landscaped.
    8. Landscape plans for projects proposed for development in multiple phases shall clearly specify the landscape improvements required in conjunction with each phase.
    9. At least fifty percent (50%) of the required landscaped area shall be covered with foliage of shrubs, grass and live-vegetative ground cover within five (5) years of planting. Trees and the tree canopy shall not be counted in this fifty percent (50%) requirement. In addition to the shrubs, grass, and ground cover, one (1) tree with a minimum one-and-one-half-inch (1½") caliper trunk shall be planted for every four thousand (4,000) square feet of landscaped area with a minimum of one (1) tree per property. The trees may be arranged by the landscape architect as best fits the plan either in rows or clusters. Tree species suitable for desert landscapes are acceptable to meet this requirement.
    10. A plan for ongoing maintenance of right-of-way areas shall be included when landscape and irrigation plans are submitted.
    11. Only ten percent (10%) of proposed rooftop landscaping may be counted towards the total required landscaping requirement.
C. Installation: 
    1. Landscaping and irrigation installation shall be completed as outlined in section 10-1-12.
    2. Landscape and irrigation installers shall follow the plans that have been signed and approved by the city.
    3. Landscaping shall follow the city of St. George access management policy to properly define the safe-sight distances for intersections or driveways and follow height limitations and zoning requirements.
    4. The city may inspect landscaping improvements and require corrective measures regarding the installation of site landscaping and irrigation-system improvements found not to comply with the approved plan.
    5. Soil preparation shall be provided to assure healthy growing conditions for the plants.
    6. The landscape contractor or irrigation contractor shall provide the city with a letter certifying that all improvements have been installed in accordance with the approved plan and specifications prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
    7. All irrigation installers shall be supervised by an irrigation contractor.
D. Irrigation: 
    1. Landscape areas shall be provided with a permanent, fixed automatic irrigation system installed by a licensed landscape contractor.
    2. The distribution uniformity shall be sixty percent (60%) for all fixed-spray systems and seventy percent (70%) for all rotor systems.
    3. Decorative water features such as pools, ponds and waterfalls used in landscaped areas shall have a water recirculation system.
    4. A water performance audit shall be conducted by a certified water auditor within thirty (30) days following the installation of the irrigation system. A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the irrigation zones shall be audited at the discretion of the auditor.
    5. A backflow-prevention assembly shall be properly installed and tested to meet city requirements and meet all state and local health safety laws and ordinances.
E. Trees: 
    1. All street trees shall be planted and maintained in accordance with title 7, chapter 4 of this code.
    2. All healthy trees within ten feet (10') of the right-of-way having a trunk caliper of at least four inches (4") at one foot (1') above the ground shall be preserved during construction unless removal is approved by the shade tree board.
    3. Preserved trees shall be credited toward the satisfaction of the tree planting requirements.
    4. Trees to be preserved shall be protected and watered during construction with the following:
        a. A tree-protection barrier (fence) shall be installed before any demolition, grading or construction begins, and shall not be removed until final completion of the project.
        b. The tree-protection barrier shall be erected around the tree with a radius of no less than seven feet (7') unless otherwise directed or approved by the land use authority.
        c. The tree-protection barrier shall be constructed of any material substantial enough to protect the roots, trunk, and the crown of the tree, such as:
            (1) Three-foot (3') high orange safety fencing on metal posts.
            (2) Three-foot (3') high silt fencing staked with flagging.
    5. Trees or shrubs that are planted under or near power lines shall not grow above twenty-five feet (25') in height at maturity. Tree trunks and branches shall not encroach within ten feet (10') of power lines when fully grown as required by applicable state and federal regulations.
    6. Trees shall not be planted within three feet (3') horizontal distance of electric or gas lines.
    7. The city may remove any tree that is interfering with power lines.
    8. Trees on the approved landscape and irrigation plan shall not be removed without permission from the city.
F. Maintenance: 
    1. Landscaping of detention/retention basins shall be maintained by the property owner. If the detention/retention basin is in a common area, then an owners’ association (OA) shall own and maintain the detention/retention basin. If an owners’ association is dissolved, maintenance becomes the joint and several responsibility of the individual property owners.
    2. An owners’ association shall own and maintain all common areas including park strips between the street and any privacy walls. If an owners’ association is dissolved, maintenance becomes the joint and several responsibility of the individual property owners.
    3. It shall be unlawful for any person owning real property within the city to:
        a. Fail to provide landscaping and irrigation in all areas where it is required to exist. This shall apply to all real property throughout the city regardless of the age of the development, zone or status.
        b. Fail to install, maintain, replace or repair landscaping and irrigation systems in all areas where it is required to exist or does exist.
        c. Modify an approved landscape and irrigation plan or approved site plan without permission from the city. “Modifying the plan” means changing the type of large plant greater than six feet (6') tall at maturity; or decreasing the plant quantities or the size of the landscape area. Minor adjustments required to suit field conditions are permitted. Replacing a plant with the same type of plant is considered maintenance, not modification. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-06-002, 6-4-2020)

10-23-2: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS:
A. Application: The requirements of this section shall apply to all new development or remodeling of existing development where landscaping is required by zoning ordinance in planned development commercial zones, commercial zones, planned development administrative and professional office zones, administrative and professional office zones, airport vicinity zones and overlay commercial zones.
B. Landscape Strip: A landscape strip, outside the public right-of-way along the front of the property on public streets, not less than six feet (6') wide and an average of at least fifteen feet (15') wide shall be landscaped. This requirement does not apply in C-4 zones except where the parking lot abuts the public street in which case the parking lot street frontage shall provide a landscape strip along the street frontage that is a minimum of six feet (6') wide and an average of at least fifteen feet (15') wide.
C. Interior Parking Lot Landscaping: If a site includes thirty (30) or more off-street parking spaces, at least five percent (5%) of the parking lot area shall contain interior parking lot landscaping, in addition to the fifteen-foot (15') wide landscape strip required in subsection B of this section. This requirement shall not apply to vehicle/equipment storage yards or display areas of vehicle sales.
D. Terminal Islands – Divider Medians: Interior parking lot landscape requirements may be met using terminal islands or divider medians with a minimum width of nine feet by sixteen feet (9' x 16'). One (1) parking credit shall be given for every terminal island or divider median which meets the above standard.
E. Shade Trees: Shade trees shall be provided within each island or median to meet the landscape requirements.
F. New Plantings: New plantings shall be incorporated into building entrances, drop-off and pick-up, and outdoor dining areas in order to separate these areas from on-site vehicular circulation and parking facilities and from off-site traffic, enhance pedestrian comfort, convenience and safety, and facilitate outdoor dining with maximum insulation from vehicular traffic impacts.
G. Landscaping on Rights-of-Way: All road rights-of-way not utilized for pavement, curb or sidewalk shall be planted and maintained as landscaped area, except that on Bluff Street, the landscaping requirement shall be satisfied as set forth below.
H. For Property along Bluff Street: In addition to the fifteen-foot (15') wide landscaping strip on the private lot area, all of the road right-of-way up to a twenty-foot (20') wide strip running parallel to the road shall be planted and maintained as a landscaped area. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-23-3: LANDSCAPING COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONES, RESIDENTIAL ESTATE ZONES, AND SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCES:
A. Applicability: The requirements of this section to complete the front yard and street-side yard and install landscaping shall apply to all new development, and to the remodeling of existing dwelling units when a dwelling unit’s footprint increases for single-family residential zones, residential estate zones, and all other single-family residences. Completion and maintenance of landscaping shall apply to all residential properties.
B. Landscaping Requirements: A minimum of thirty percent (30%) of the overall front yard area shall be landscaped. At least one-half (½) of the landscaped area shall contain live vegetation.
C. Completion Requirements: Landscaping shall be completed within one (1) year of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or the final inspection of a remodeled dwelling unit.
D. A minimum of one (1) tree with at least a one-and-one-half-inch (1½") caliper shall be planted in the front yard. The tree may be a desert tree variety.
E. The use of native plants and other low-water-use plants (xeriscape) is encouraged to promote water conservation.
F. Requests for Modification of Landscaping Requirement: The community development director or designee may approve “landscaping,” as defined in this section, that covers less than thirty percent (30%) of the front yard area in landscape where the shape of the lot imposes a hardship in meeting the thirty percent (30%) requirement. If such a modification is granted, all other landscaping requirements outlined in this section shall still apply and may not be waived or modified.
G. Maintenance of Owners’ Association Property: A property owners’ association shall own and diligently maintain all common areas, including park strips between the street and any privacy walls. If a property owners’ association is dissolved, maintenance of the common area becomes the joint and several responsibility of the individual owners of property that once formed the dissolved property owners’ association.
H. It shall be unlawful for any person owning a single-family residence to:
    1. Fail to provide landscaping and irrigation in all areas where landscaping is required or exists, regardless of the age of the development, zone, or status.
    2. Fail to install, maintain, replace, or repair landscaping and irrigation systems in all areas where it is required to exist or does exist.
    3. Modify an approved landscape and irrigation plan or approved site plan without prior written permission from the city. “Modifying an approved landscape and irrigation plan or approved site plan” means changing the type of large plant (greater than six feet (6') tall at maturity), decreasing the plant quantities, or decreasing the size of the landscape area. Minor adjustments required to suit field conditions are permitted. Replacing a plant with the same type of plant is considered maintenance and not modification. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

CHAPTER 24 (RESERVED)

CHAPTER 25 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS


25A          General Provisions
    10-25A-1:    Purpose
    10-25A-2:    Applicability
    10-25A-3:    Procedure
25B          Administration and Enforcement
    10-25B-1:    Conformance to Applicable Rules and Regulations
    10-25B-2:    Self-Imposed Restrictions
    10-25B-3:    Special Conditions
    10-25B-4:    Coordination of Planned Development Applications
    10-25B-5:    Building on Single Lots – Merging Lots
    10-25B-6:    Fees
    10-25B-7:    Enforcement
    10-25B-8:    Permits and Certificates
    10-25B-9:    Compliance with Title
    10-25B-10:   Subdivision Created Pursuant to Provisions
    10-25B-11:   Recording without Approval Void
    10-25B-12:   Metes and Bounds’ Description Applicable
    10-25B-13:   Final Subdivision Plat Recorded Prior to Approval Unlawful
    10-25B-14:   Penalty
25C          Plats and Plans
    10-25C-1:    General Procedures
    10-25C-2:    Planning Discussion
    10-25C-3:    Preliminary Plat
    10-25C-4:    Final Subdivision Plat
    10-25C-5:    Exemption from Plat Requirement
    10-25C-6:    Vacating, Altering or Amending a Subdivision Plat
25D          Improvements
    10-25D-1:    Drawings
    10-25D-2:    Completion or Improvement Completion Assurance Prior to Recording Final Subdivision Plat or Developing Real Property – Acceptance Process
    10-25D-3:    Improvements Required
    10-25D-4:    Layout of Lots
    10-25D-5:    Improvement Completion Assurance and Warranty

ARTICLE A. GENERAL PROVISIONS


10-25A-1:    Purpose
10-25A-2:    Applicability
10-25A-3:    Procedure

10-25A-1: PURPOSE:
The provisions of this title are enacted for the purpose of adopting subdivision regulations for the division of land within the city. The regulations, requirements, data, exceptions, suggestions and conditions set forth in this title are designed to allow for quality growth and development within the city and to assist the subdivider in the preparation of plans for subdivisions. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-25A-2: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this title are applicable to all developments and improvements to land and to all subdivisions, as defined in Utah Code Title 10, Chapter 9a, the Municipal Land Use, Development, and Management Act, or its amendment. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-25A-3: PROCEDURE:
The procedure for dividing any tract of land into two (2) or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots or other division of land shall be consistent with the provisions of Utah Code, this title and the policies and procedures established by the city. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

ARTICLE B. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT


10-25B-1:    Conformance to Applicable Rules and Regulations
10-25B-2:    Self-Imposed Restrictions
10-25B-3:    Special Conditions
10-25B-4:    Coordination of Planned Development Applications
10-25B-5:    Building on Single Lots – Merging Lots
10-25B-6:    Fees
10-25B-7:    Enforcement
10-25B-8:    Permits and Certificates
10-25B-9:    Compliance with Title
10-25B-10:   Subdivision Created Pursuant to Provisions
10-25B-11:   Recording without Approval Void
10-25B-12:   Metes and Bounds’ Description Applicable
10-25B-13:   Final Subdivision Plat Recorded Prior to Approval Unlawful
10-25B-14:   Penalty

10-25B-1: CONFORMANCE TO APPLICABLE RULES AND REGULATIONS:
In addition to the requirements established herein, all subdivision plats shall comply with the applicable laws, plans and regulations, including, but not limited to:
A. The zoning ordinance of the city of St. George, standard specifications for design and construction and all other applicable ordinances of the city.
B. The official city general plan, including all streets, drainage and utility systems and parks shown in the general plan, as adopted.
C. Requirements of the Utah Department of Transportation, Utah Department of Health and other appropriate state agencies.
D. The standards, regulations and policies adopted by the city, including all boards, commissions, agencies and officials of the city who may be authorized to adopt the same. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-25B-2: SELF-IMPOSED RESTRICTIONS:
If the subdivider places restrictions on any of the land contained in the subdivision greater than those required by the zoning ordinance or these regulations, such restrictions or reference thereto may be required to be indicated on the subdivision plat, or the city may require that restrictive covenants be recorded with the county recorder in a form to be approved by the city attorney. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-25B-3: SPECIAL CONDITIONS:
Land which the city finds to be unsuitable for subdivision or development due to steep hillsides, geologic hazards, adverse construction conditions, flooding, improper drainage, slopes, rock formations, adverse earth formations or topography, unavailability of utility facilities, suitable access or resources, utility easements, or other features which would be harmful to the health, safety, and general welfare of the present or future inhabitants of the development or subdivision or its surrounding areas shall not be subdivided or developed unless adequate methods are formulated by the developer or subdivider and approved by the city council, upon recommendation of the city engineer or designee, to solve the problems created by the unsuitable land conditions. Such land shall be set aside for uses as shall not involve such dangers. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-25B-4: COORDINATION OF PLANNED DEVELOPMENT APPLICATIONS:
At the time an application for a planned development (PD) project is submitted to the city, the owner or subdivider shall submit an application to change the proposed development property’s zoning designation to planned development (PD). Simultaneous with filing a planned development application, the subdivider or subdivider’s authorized representative shall:
A. Apply to change the zoning designation to planned development (PD) for the real property on which the proposed development will be located;
B. Submit all information required by this code for a planned development (PD) zone, including, but not limited to, a conceptual plan when required; and
C. Meet with city staff to discuss the proposed development. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-25B-5: BUILDING ON SINGLE LOTS – MERGING LOTS:
A. The improvements built upon any single lot or two (2) adjoining lots held under ownership separate from that of adjacent lots and not otherwise affected by this title shall nonetheless be subject to, and regulated by, chapter 5 of this title. The provisions of this title shall be applicable to prevent the granting of a license, or utility services, by any city officer when any property encompassed by this section is in violation of any of the aforesaid sections, and enforcement and penalty shall be as is further provided in this title.
B. When previously subdivided lots are merged together, all frontages along streets are considered to be front setbacks and shall comply with the setback requirements in the zoning ordinance of the city of St. George. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-25B-6: FEES:
Any and all persons seeking approvals under this title shall pay fees as adopted through resolution by the city council. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-25B-7: ENFORCEMENT:
The city manager shall be charged with the enforcement powers of this title. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-25B-8: PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES:
A. Compliance with Title: No city officer or employee shall issue any license or permit for the use of any land, or the construction or alteration of any building or structure, in violation of the provisions of Utah State law, or any other provisions of this title. Any license or permit issued in conflict with Utah State law, or any other provisions of this title, is void.
B. Building Permits – Conditions for Issuance: In addition to all other conditions required by law for the issuance of a building permit, no building permit for any development or subdivision shall be issued until the following conditions have been met:
    1. The city has approved the preliminary plat, or the lot layout if the property is exempt from platting requirements, and all conditions have been met for the preliminary plat, and for recording of the final subdivision plat, as set forth in Utah Code and as determined by the community development department and the city attorney;
    2. The construction drawings are stamped “approved for construction” by the city;
    3. All required improvements under chapter 25 of this title are completed, and the city has conducted a final inspection and issued a final approval of the improvements; and
    4. The final subdivision plat is recorded in the county recorder’s office.
C. Occupancy Permit: For all subdivisions, occupancy will not be granted, and structures shall not be occupied, until the final subdivision plat is recorded and all required improvements are completed and approved by the city. This includes all required addressing and signs. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-25B-9: COMPLIANCE WITH TITLE:
No person shall subdivide any tract or parcel of land located wholly or in part within the city except in compliance with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-25B-10: SUBDIVISION CREATED PURSUANT TO PROVISIONS:
No person shall purchase, sell or exchange any parcel of land which is any part of a subdivision or a proposed subdivision submitted to the commission, nor offer for recording in the office of the county recorder, any deed conveying such parcel of land or any fee interest therein, unless such subdivision has been created pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-25B-11: RECORDING WITHOUT APPROVAL VOID:
A subdivision plat recorded without the approval of the city as required by Utah Code, this title, and all other applicable statutes and regulations is void. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-25B-12: METES AND BOUNDS’ DESCRIPTION APPLICABLE:
The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer, or other documents used in the process of selling or transferring, does not exempt the transaction from being a violation of, or from the penalties or remedies provided in, this title. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-25B-13: FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT RECORDED PRIOR TO APPROVAL UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to offer to sell or lease, to contract to sell or lease, or to sell or lease any such final subdivision, or any part thereof, which is located in the city, until a final subdivision plat thereof, in full compliance with the provisions of this title, has been duly recorded in the office of the county recorder. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-25B-14: PENALTY:
A violation of any provisions of this title shall constitute a class C misdemeanor and, upon conviction, be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1. Each separate act in violation of the provisions of this title shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the criminal penalties provided herein, the city is authorized to seek injunctive or other relief to terminate or prevent violations hereof or otherwise enforce the provisions of this title. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

ARTICLE C. PLATS AND PLANS


10-25C-1:    General Procedures
10-25C-2:    Planning Discussion
10-25C-3:    Preliminary Plat
10-25C-4:    Final Subdivision Plat
10-25C-5:    Exemption from Plat Requirement
10-25C-6:    Vacating, Altering or Amending a Subdivision Plat

10-25C-1: GENERAL PROCEDURES:
Before any real property is developed or subdivided, the subdivider or subdivider’s authorized representative shall follow the procedures set forth in this chapter and as established by the city council by policy, in applying for and obtaining approval of the proposed subdivision. The general procedure consists of the following principal steps:
A. Planning discussion;
B. Preliminary plat review;
C. Construction drawing review; and
D. Final subdivision plat review. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-25C-2: PLANNING DISCUSSION:
Prior to submitting a planned development zone-change application or a preliminary plat for any type of development or zone, the subdivider shall meet with the city. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-25C-3: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
A. Preparation of Preliminary Plat: It is anticipated that as long as the preliminary plat complies with all requirements under this title, upon final approval of the preliminary plat, the preliminary plat shall be the basis for the construction drawings and final plat. Prior to preparing the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall meet with the planning staff to discuss the subdivision proposal and review the preliminary plat and the requirements for the required plans, construction drawings, studies and reports. The general requirements as to the layout of streets, street improvements, traffic impact studies, drainage, sewerage, fire protection, availability of existing services, and similar matters shall be discussed. The planning staff may also advise or direct the subdivider, when appropriate, to discuss the proposed subdivision or portions thereof with those officials who must eventually approve certain aspects of the subdivision plat or portions thereof within their jurisdiction, including, but not limited to, the fire marshal, joint utility committee, hillside review board, and city staff. Where special issues or conditions exist which require resolution by the commission or city council, resolution of such matters shall be obtained prior to consideration of the preliminary plat by the planning staff.
B. Preliminary Plat Requirements: The preliminary plat shall be clear and legible, be labeled and dimensioned, and be of sufficient scale to adequately describe the conditions of this title. The preliminary subdivision plat and plan shall be accompanied by a completed application form provided by the city, and show the following information:
    1. Title Block: 
        a. The name and type of subdivision, which name the subdivider must have approved by the county recorder and community development director or designee.
        b. The location and dimensions of the subdivision.
        c. The name of the subdivider.
    2. General Plans: 
        a. North arrow and scale.
        b. The boundary and phasing plan of the subdivision.
        c. Existing and proposed contour lines at vertical intervals of not greater than five feet (5') when requested by the city engineer or designee.
    3. Existing Conditions: 
        a. Location, width and names of all streets and driveways within two hundred feet (200') of the subdivision.
        b. All public streets, rights-of-way, easements, parks, other public open spaces, and all section and city boundary lines within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision.
        c. Sewers, water mains, power lines, storm drains, or other facilities within and adjacent within one hundred feet (100') of the proposed subdivision.
        d. Ditches, drainage channels, waterways, and major washes.
        e. The location of the floodplain and floodway, and elevations as designated by FEMA. Also, the location of the erosion hazard boundary for property adjacent to the Virgin and Santa Clara Rivers and Ft. Pearce Wash.
        f. Exceptional topography.
        g. Air traffic approaches when requested by the city engineer or designee.
        h. Information required by the ordinance, if the proposed subdivision is within the hillside overlay area, a geologic hazard area, an adverse construction condition area, or flood or erosion hazard area.
        i. Vicinity map.
    4. Proposed Plan: 
        a. The layout of streets, driveways, public parks and trails, and utility easements showing identification and dimensions. Where double frontage lots are proposed, the general design of the privacy wall shall be shown.
        b. The layout, number, and typical dimensions of lots. The following shall apply to numbering lots:
            (i) Lots shall be numbered consecutively under a definite system. Numbering shall continue throughout the subdivision with no omissions or duplications.
            (ii) Multiple phases within the same subdivision name shall be identified as phase 1, then phase 2 and so forth. Lots within different phases shall also be distinctly numbered as 101, 102, 103 (within phase 1), and 201, 202, 203 (within phase 2), and so forth.
            (iii) Lettering of building lots is not permitted.
            (iv) Areas not designated as a building lot or right-of-way on the plat shall be designated by capital letters and be designated in sequence within a subdivision starting with the letter “A.”
            (v) Plat amendments shall be named and numbered in a form acceptable to the office of the Washington County recorder and Utah State Code as amended.
        c. Parcels of land intended to be dedicated for public use or set aside for use of property owners in the subdivision as common or limited common areas.
        d. A drainage plan by which the subdivider proposes to handle storm water drainage for the subdivision, including proposed realignment or regrading of existing drainageways upstream, within and downstream of the subdivision. All residential drainage shall be conveyed from each lot to the street. Shared drainage is not permitted unless it is in common or limited common area, owned and maintained by a property owners’ association.
        e. A general plan for primary water, sewer, power systems, and related utilities.
        f. A grading plan by which the subdivider proposes to handle elevation changes, retaining walls, and other related design issues as requested by the city.
C. Application Procedure and Requirements: 
    1. The subdivider shall file the preliminary plat along with a preliminary plat review application on forms provided by the city.
    2. At the time of filing the application, the subdivider shall schedule an appointment with the city. The city shall review the application for completeness and may request that the subdivider present additional information to assist in determining the adequacy, quality, and characteristics of the subdivision proposal.
    3. Once the application has been considered and determined to be complete, the application shall be reviewed according to the procedure set forth in this section. If the city finds that the application is not complete, the application shall be rejected, returned to the subdivider, and the subdivider shall submit a complete application.
    4. Approval Procedure: 
        a. The community development department shall concurrently transmit the preliminary plat, and preliminary plat review application, along with all accompanying plans, reports, and studies to the appropriate city officials and other official agencies or bodies as deemed necessary or as required by law, to allow such persons to review the preliminary plat and preliminary plat review application.
        b. After the preliminary plat review application is found to meet the requirements of this title, and all comments have been received from those to whom a request to review was made, the community development director or designee shall cause the preliminary plat to be placed on the next available planning commission agenda, and shall notify the subdivider of the date, time, and place of the meeting at which the preliminary plat shall be reviewed.
        c. The planning commission shall only approve a preliminary plat which it finds to be in accordance with the standards and criteria set forth by the city in this title and all other ordinances, plans, and policies of the city. The planning commission may conditionally approve a preliminary plat, imposing such conditions as it may require in order to bring the preliminary plat into compliance with the requirements of the city’s ordinances, plans, and policies.
        d. After reviewing the preliminary plat, the planning commission shall make a recommendation to the city council that the preliminary plat be approved, conditionally approved, or disapproved. The preliminary plat will then be placed on the next available city council agenda, after all legally required notification requirements have been complied with, and the city shall advise the subdivider of the date, time, and place of the meeting at which the preliminary plat shall be reviewed. After review, the city council shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the preliminary plat.
        e. If the final subdivision plat, or phase thereof, is not approved by the city within one (1) year after city council approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall submit for approval a new preliminary plat in accordance with this subsection, unless it is determined by the community development director or designee that substantial progress toward completion of the final subdivision plat has been done, and the final plat cannot be submitted due to reasons beyond the control of the subdivider. In such case, the community development director or designee may agree to a single reasonable extension of time to complete the final subdivision plat, but no longer than one (1) year.
        f. Approval of the preliminary plat does not constitute full approval of the development as additional requirements may be imposed that are a result of more detailed and thorough review of all plans, specifications, reports, investigations, etc. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-06-002, 6-4-2020)

10-25C-4: FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT:
A. After the preliminary plat has been approved by the city council, and all conditions are complied with, a final subdivision plat shall be prepared and submitted to the community development department. The land use authority shall approve the final plat. The final plat shall be signed by the community development director or designee, the city attorney or designee, the city engineer or designee, the land use authority, and the county treasurer prior to the final plat being recorded. The final plat shall be recorded within one (1) year of final approval by the community development department, or the plat is void.
B. All applications to subdivide real property shall comply with the requirements of Utah Code Title 10, Chapter 9a, of the Utah Land Use and Development Management Act, as amended. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-25C-5: EXEMPTION FROM PLAT REQUIREMENT:
If the requirements of Utah Code Title 10, Chapter 9a, as amended, this title, and all other applicable laws and regulations are satisfied, and the subdivider has obtained written approval from the city council, following the planning commission’s recommendation, a person may submit to the county recorder’s office for recording a document that subdivides property by metes and bounds into less than ten (10) lots, without the necessity of recording a plat. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-25C-6: VACATING, ALTERING OR AMENDING A SUBDIVISION PLAT:
A. Vacating, Altering or Amending Subdivision Plat: All applications for vacating, altering or amending a subdivision plat shall comply with the requirements of Utah Code Title 10, Chapter 9A, as amended.
B. Lot Mergers: All applications seeking to merge lots, parcels, sites, units, plots or other division of land shall comply with the requirements for the adjustment of lot lines as set forth in Utah Code Title 10, Chapter 9A, as amended.
C. Vacating a Street, Right-of-Way, or Easement: All applications for vacating a street, right-of-way, or easement shall comply with the requirements of Utah Code Title 10, Chapter 9A, as amended. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

ARTICLE D. IMPROVEMENTS


10-25D-1:    Drawings
10-25D-2:    Completion or Improvement Completion Assurance Prior to Recording Final Subdivision Plat or Developing Real Property – Acceptance Process
10-25D-3:    Improvements Required
10-25D-4:    Layout of Lots
10-25D-5:    Improvement Completion Assurance and Warranty

10-25D-1: DRAWINGS:
A. Construction Drawings: Construction drawings which are required by the city, including, but not limited to, drawings required for review by the JUC, shall be reviewed concurrently by city staff in accordance with policies, guidelines and procedures set forth by the city. If the final plat has not already been submitted, then the final plat shall be submitted with the construction drawings so that this concurrent review can take place.
B. Approved Construction Drawings: Prior to commencement of construction, plans prepared by the subdivider’s engineer for improvements as outlined in the city’s standard specifications for design and construction, as amended and supplemented from time to time, shall be approved by all required departments. The construction drawings shall identify those improvements which are to be accepted and maintained by the city and improvements which are to be maintained by private entities.
C. Submittal of Construction Drawings: Following city council approval of the preliminary subdivision plat and while the preliminary subdivision plat is effective, the subdivider or subdivider’s authorized representative shall submit the required number of construction drawings and JUC drawings, along with the required number of copies of the final plat to the city engineer or designee for review and approval by all required departments, agencies and bodies. No work of any kind shall commence until all construction drawings are stamped “approved for construction.” Once the final plat and the construction drawings are approved by the appropriate city officials and other agencies and bodies, construction may begin. If the final plat has received staff approval and is ready to be scheduled for final approval by the commission and city council, construction of improvements may begin; provided, that the subdivider executes an indemnity agreement, approved by the city attorney. After the completion of all improvements, drawings of record shall be submitted to the city. In any event, drawings of record shall be submitted no later than the time the improvement completion assurance is released and prior to building permit issuance. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-25D-2: COMPLETION OR IMPROVEMENT COMPLETION ASSURANCE PRIOR TO RECORDING FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT OR DEVELOPING REAL PROPERTY – ACCEPTANCE PROCESS:
A. Completion or Improvement Completion Assurance: The improvements required by this chapter shall be constructed and installed by the subdivider and maintained by the subdivider until accepted by the city. Improvements shall be completed prior to recording the final plat in the office of the county recorder, unless the construction, installation and maintenance are guaranteed in the manner provided in section 10-25D-5.
B. Acceptance Process: Required improvements shall not be accepted by the city and the warranty period thereon shall not expire until the required improvements have been fully installed and been in successful operation for the one (1) year warranty period, except when the city determines for good cause that a two (2) year warranty is necessary as provided in Utah Code Annotated Section 10-9a-604.5, or its amendment.
    1. Approval of Improvements: After the completion of all subdivision improvements, the subdivider shall make a written request to the city for an approval inspection to be made by all affected city departments. Upon receipt of inspection reports from all affected departments, the city will either approve the improvements or provide the subdivider with a list of defective work to be completed before approval. The subdivider shall correct all defective work and materials and make written requests to the city for additional inspections, as may be required. Once the city approves the improvements, a summary of the inspections and approval shall be provided to the subdivider.
    2. Warranty Period: The warranty period shall start on the date the city approves all of the improvements and the subdivider provides the city with a warranty document in a form approved by the city. Subdivider shall warrant all improvements for a period of time as set forth in this section. If, during the warranty period, the city finds any improvements to be defective, the city shall provide subdivider or developer with a list of the defective work and subdivider shall correct all defects immediately except for improvements which, at the city’s discretion, must be repaired by the city. Subdivider shall pay city for all repairs to defects in improvements which are repaired by the city during the warranty.
    3. City Acceptance of Improvements: The subdivider shall schedule with the city an inspection on the improvements at the end of the warranty.
        a. If the city finds that the work on the required improvements is defective and does not meet city standards, the city shall provide the subdivider with a list of the defective work which the subdivider must correct. The subdivider shall schedule additional inspections as necessary and shall, in a timely manner, completely correct all defective work which is identified by the city. After the city finds the subdivider has completely and satisfactorily completed all of the corrections to the defective work on the required improvements, then the city shall accept the improvements, commence maintenance of the improvements, and any warranty held by the city shall be released.
        b. If the city finds that the work on the required improvements does not meet the city standards, the warranty, including, but not limited to, any applicable warranty, cash or irrevocable letter of credit, shall be forfeited to the city and the city shall make the corrections to the improvements. The city shall accept the improvements after completion of the corrections.
    4. Release of the Warranty: Release of the warranty or forfeiture of the warranty and city acceptance of the improvements does not waive the city’s right to any other remedy available at law. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-25D-3: IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED:
The design, installation, connection, and construction of all improvements required by this section shall comply with the city of St. George standard specifications for design and construction and shall be approved by the city before work begins. The improvements required to be completed before issuance of a building permit under this title shall include, but are not limited to, the following:
A. Utilities and Services: 
    1. Required utilities and services include, but are not limited to, the following: power, water, sewer, fire protection, lighting, telephone and cable conduits, signing and addressing, all-weather fire and emergency access, and other utilities and services as required by the city or by law.
    2. All subdivision lots shall be served by the utility systems of the city unless otherwise approved by the city council.
    3. All utility improvements, including street lighting, shall comply with all official standards of the city.
    4. All electrical, telephone, and television cable shall be installed underground, except as otherwise directed by the city council.
B. Storm Drainage and Nuisance Water Control: A storm or nuisance water drainage system shall be provided, and shall be separate and independent from the sanitary sewer system. Drainage, flood control, and adequate erosion protection shall be designed in conformance with the city flood control master plan and drainage guidelines and hydrology manual as detailed in the city of St. George standard specifications for design and construction.
C. Street Improvements: 
    1. Required – Exception: All streets within the city shall be improved with streetlights and pavement bounded by integral concrete curbs, gutters and sidewalks, handicapped ramps, etc. The sole exception shall be in large lot rural subdivisions where street construction shall conform to large lot requirements as detailed in the city of St. George standard specifications for design and construction. Property owners of large lot rural subdivisions shall acknowledge by a recorded certificate that any further subdividing will require full compliance with standard lot improvement requirements, including streetlights, curb and gutter, sidewalks, and roadway width, etc. Said acknowledgment shall waive the property owners’ rights to oppose a special improvement district where necessary to comply with this requirement.
    2. Continuation of Streets: The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for the continuation of the streets in adjoining areas insofar as such continuation or access shall be deemed necessary by the city engineer or designee. All access roads leading to any subdivision shall be improved as may be determined by the city engineer or designee.
    3. Traffic-Control and Street-Name Signs: All traffic-control and street-name signs, conforming to the city of St. George standard specifications for design and construction and approved by the city engineer or designee, shall be provided by the subdivider. When required by the city, mitigation of off-site impacts will be the responsibility of the developer. A traffic impact study may be required to help determine project impacts.
    4. Frontage: All subdivision lots shall have frontage on a dedicated public street improved to city standards, unless the use of a private street has been approved by the council. Private streets, alleys, or ways shall not be approved except when the city engineer or designee finds that public dedication is not necessary. Where determined that public streets are needed for area circulation, property access, or the overall benefit of the driving public, private streets shall not be used. Master-planned roads cannot be private.
    5. Private Streets and Improvements: 
        a. In the event private streets are used, they shall conform to the city of St. George standard specifications for design and construction as to the quality of construction. Private streets shall include curb, gutter, sidewalks or adequate pedestrian facilities, etc. Street width may be adjusted based upon traffic needs and information provided in a traffic impact study (TIS) when required.
        b. The city may observe the construction of private streets. However, in all cases, the developer shall retain the services of a professional engineer and testing firm to provide adequate inspection services and to submit the proper reports and certifications to the city. All private developments shall be required to submit to the city the private development improvements certification, on the approved form prior to certificate of occupancy and acceptance of the development.
        c. Continuation of Principal Streets: The arrangement of streets shall provide for the continuation of principal streets between adjacent properties when such continuation is necessary for convenient movement of traffic, effective fire protection, and efficient continuation of utilities and where such continuation is in accordance with the transportation element of the city’s general plan. If the adjacent property is undeveloped and the street must be a dead-end street temporarily, the right-of-way shall be extended to the property line and a temporary turnaround shall be provided.
        d. Intersections: Intersections shall comply with city specifications and access management requirements.
D. Access to City Street: No subdivision shall be approved which does not have access to an improved and dedicated city street. Where a subdivision obtains access from a street which does not meet minimum city standards, the access road shall be improved to a minimum width of twenty-five feet (25'), meeting applicable safety standards, including shoulders and constructed to final grade. Additional road width may be required to meet safety standards.
E. Improvements to Full Length of Project: Where a subdivision abuts a master-planned road, utilities or drainage system, the subdivider shall complete his portion of such improvements the full length of his project in conformance with the approved city plans, including the general plan.
F. Mitigation of Off-Site Impacts: When required by the city, mitigation of off-site impacts, as well as providing adequate public infrastructure to the development, will be the responsibility of the developer. A traffic impact study (TIS) will be required unless otherwise approved by the city engineer or designee. The TIS may aid in the determination of off-site impact mitigation. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-25D-4: LAYOUT OF LOTS:
A. Lot Arrangement: The arrangement of lots shall be such that there will be no foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography or other conditions, in securing building permits to build on all lots in compliance with the zoning ordinance and in providing safe driveway access in accordance with city requirements to buildings on such lots from an approved street.
B. Lot Dimensions: Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards of the zoning ordinance. In general, side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines (or radial to curving street lines) unless a variation from this rule will give a better street or lot plan. Dimensions of corner lots shall be large enough to allow for erection of buildings, observing the minimum front yard setback from both streets, and providing safe access. Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for business, commercial or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the access, off-street parking and loading facilities required for the type of use and development contemplated, as established in the zoning ordinance.
C. Double Frontage Lots and Access to Lots: 
    1. Double frontage lots shall be avoided where feasible. However, double frontage lots may be necessary to provide separation of residential development from arterials and major collectors or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation.
    2. Residential lots shall not derive access from an arterial street. Access may be limited on major collector streets for safety reasons as determined by the city engineer or designee. In cases where driveway access from such streets may be necessary for several adjoining lots, the city engineer or designee may require that such lots be served by a combined access drive in order to limit possible traffic hazards on such street. The city engineer or designee may also require that access be designed and arranged so as to avoid requiring vehicles to back into traffic. This may include such items as increased building setbacks, increased lot width, shared access, U-shaped driveways, etc.
    3. Where double frontage lots are platted, a six-foot-four-inch (6'4") high solid masonry wall shall be constructed along the public road for a privacy and noise screen. All walls shall comply with the standards set forth in chapter 18 of this title. The city may approve modifications to the masonry wall to allow for architectural elements such as wrought iron within sections of the wall. The privacy wall shall be set back from the sidewalk a minimum of ten feet (10') in order to provide access to and utilization of the utility easement and a landscape area for the planting of shrubs and trees. Where the developer provides both public right-of-way and a deceleration/acceleration lane as required by the city, the utility-landscape strip may be reduced to five feet (5') for the length of the deceleration/acceleration lane. Along arterial streets, the city council, upon recommendation from the planning commission, may require a planter area greater than ten feet (10') in width. In addition, in order to provide proper intersection and driveway sight distance, it will be necessary in some cases to set the wall back a distance greater than ten feet (10') from the sidewalk. Where the developer or property owner dedicates the landscape and utility area described herein to the city, the developer will receive an area credit for the perimeter lots adjacent to the dedicated landscape and utility area equal to the amount of the dedicated area. Such area credit will be applied to the adjacent lots for the purpose of complying with the minimum lot size requirements.
    4. The subdivider shall plant trees along the street frontage in conformance with the city’s community forestry program. Trees shall be planted so as not to obstruct visibility at drives and intersections, nor obstruct traffic control devices.
    5. For planned developments or other residential developments where a homeowners’ association exists, the homeowners’ association shall provide irrigation and maintenance for the landscape strip on the street side of the wall.
    6. If a residential development creates double frontage lots the city shall require a homeowners’ association to be created for ownership and maintenance of landscaping and irrigation on the street side of the wall, unless an alternate maintenance agreement has been approved by the city.
    7. In some cases where no homeowners’ association exists, the city may choose to provide maintenance for landscaping within the right-of-way for streets of eighty feet (80') or more; provided, the landscaping and irrigation system has been installed to city standards.
    8. The privacy wall and landscaping area shall be completed prior to occupancy of any homes in the subdivision, or, where unusual circumstances exist which prevent such completion, a guarantee shall be posted as detailed in section 10-25D-5, in the form of cash or an irrevocable letter of credit.
D. Flag Lots: After determination by the commission that standard lots are not feasible, the commission may, in order to encourage more efficient use of land, allow flag lots to be developed subject to the following conditions:
    1. The property cannot be subdivided with typical public street frontage either at the present or in the foreseeable future.
    2. The staff portion of said lot shall front on a dedicated public street. The minimum width of the staff shall be twenty-five feet (25').
    3. No building or construction, except for driveways, shall be allowed on the staff portion of said lot.
    4. All lot size and setback requirements shall be the same as may be required by the zone in which the lot is located. The staff portion of the lot shall not be used to calculate the minimum lot size. Setbacks shall be shown on the preliminary plat and approved by the planning commission and city council.
    5. No more than two (2) flag lots or four (4) dwelling units may be served by one (1) twenty-five-foot (25') wide staff.
    6. Each flag lot shall be specifically approved by the planning commission and city council. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

10-25D-5: IMPROVEMENT COMPLETION ASSURANCE AND WARRANTY:
A. Improvement Completion Assurance: 
    1. When Required: The city, in its discretion, may allow a subdivider to record the final plat if the subdivider guarantees the installation and construction of the required improvements free from defects in material and workmanship and in compliance with all city standards, by providing an improvement completion assurance.
    2. Form – Amount: The improvement completion assurance required under this subsection shall be in the form of cash or an irrevocable letter of credit, in a form acceptable to the city, for an amount equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the cost of improvements not previously accepted. The cost of improvements shall be approved by the city. All improvements not completed within one (1) year shall thereafter require an improvement completion assurance.
    3. Release: The city shall release the improvement completion assurance under this subsection once all improvements are inspected and approved by the city as required by this title and the subdivider has submitted to the city a warranty in a form acceptable to the city.
B. Warranty of Improvements: 
    1. Required: Each subdivider shall warrant that all improvements required under sections 10-25D-3 and 10-25D-4 shall be free from defects in material and workmanship and that the improvements are in compliance with all city standards. The warranty period shall start on the date the city approves all of the improvements pursuant to section 10-25D-2, and the subdivider provides the city with a warranty in a form approved by the city.
    2. Form – Amount: The warranty required by this chapter shall be in the form of cash or an irrevocable letter of credit, in a form acceptable to the city for an amount equal to at least ten percent (10%) of the total improvement value for the warranty period.
    3. Release: After the expiration of the warranty period, the city shall release the warranty held by the city under this chapter after the final inspection and acceptance of the improvements pursuant to section 10-25D-2.
C. Approval of City Attorney: The form of any improvement completion assurance or warranty submitted under this section shall be reviewed and approved by the city attorney or designee before acceptance by the city. (Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)

TITLE 11 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
(Rep. by Ord. 2019-10-002, 10-10-2019)
(Ord. 8-1-74, 8-5-1974; amd. Ord. 7-3-1997, 7-3-1997; Ord. 2003-02-005, 2-20-2003; Ord. 2013-03-006, 3-7-2013; Ord. 2014-11-010, 11-20-2014)

Tables
 Statutory References
 State Code Citation Table
 Ordinance Table

Statutory References
for Utah Cities and Towns
The statutory references listed below refer the code user to state statutes applicable to Utah cities and towns. They are current through the 2015 First Special Session.

General Provisions
Creation of municipal corporations. Art. XI, § 5 of the Utah Constitution
Incorporation. U.C.A. § 10-2-101 et seq.
Classification. U.C.A. § 10-2-301 et seq.
Annexation. U.C.A. § 10-2-401 et seq.
Consolidation of municipalities. U.C.A. § 10-2-601 et seq.
City powers generally. U.C.A. § 10-8-1 et seq.
Town powers generally. U.C.A. § 10-8-94
Ordinances and resolutions. U.C.A. § 10-3-701 et seq.
Actions for violation of ordinances. U.C.A. § 10-7-65 et seq.
Punishment for ordinance violations. U.C.A. §§ 10-3-703, 10-8-84
Civil municipal ordinance violation administrative procedures. U.C.A. § 10-3-703.7
Jails and workhouses. U.C.A. § 10-8-58 et seq.
Election Code. U.C.A. Title 20A

Administration and Personnel
Election of governing body. U.C.A. § 10-3-201 et seq.
Officer eligibility and residency requirements. U.C.A. § 10-3-301
Vacancies in offices. U.C.A. § 10-3-302
Meetings of governing body. U.C.A. § 10-3-502 et seq.
Ordinances and resolutions. U.C.A. § 10-3-701 et seq.
Municipal administration. U.C.A. § 10-3-801 et seq.
Appointed officials and their duties. U.C.A. § 10-3-902 et seq.
Municipal Officers and Employees Ethics Act. U.C.A. § 10-3-1301 et seq.
Fire department. U.C.A. § 10-8-55
Civil service commission. U.C.A. § 10-3-1001 et seq.
Personnel rules and benefits. U.C.A. § 10-3-1103 et seq.

Revenue and Finance
Uniform Fiscal Procedures Act for Utah Cities. U.C.A. § 10-6-101 et seq.
Uniform Fiscal Procedures Act for Utah Towns. U.C.A. § 10-5-101 et seq.
Appropriations. U.C.A. § 10-8-2
Adoption of Utah Procurement Code authorized. U.C.A. § 10-7-86
Local Sales and Use Tax Act. U.C.A. § 59-12-201 et seq.
Actions to recover special taxes. U.C.A. § 10-7-32
Local Government Bonding Act. U.C.A. § 11-14-101 et seq.
Local taxation of utilities limitation. U.C.A. § 11-26-1 et seq.
Utah Refunding Bond Act. U.C.A. § 11-27-1 et seq.
Warrants and bonds. U.C.A. §§ 10-8-6 and 10-8-7
Specific city powers. U.C.A. § 10-8-1 et seq.

Business Taxes, Licenses and Regulations
Business licensing and regulation by cities. U.C.A. §§ 10-1-203, 10-8-4, 10-8-42 et seq., 10-8-66
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. U.C.A. Title 32B
Pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers. U.C.A. § 11-6-1 et seq.

Animals
Generally. U.C.A. §§ 10-8-59, 10-8-65, 10-8-77
Dogs. U.C.A. § 10-8-65 and Title 18
Animal Welfare Act. U.C.A. § 11-46-101 et seq.

Health and Safety
Cooperation with county health department. U.C.A. § 10-7-3
Abatement of weeds and garbage. U.C.A. § 10-11-1 et seq.
County and Municipal Fireworks Act. U.C.A. § 11-3-1 et seq.
Combustibles and explosives. U.C.A. § 10-8-56
Miscellaneous health and safety powers. U.C.A. § 10-8-44 et seq.
Hospitals. U.C.A. § 10-8-90 et seq.

Public Peace, Morals and Welfare
Utah Criminal Code. U.C.A. Title 76
City powers generally. U.C.A. § 10-8-41 et seq.

Vehicles and Traffic
State traffic code. U.C.A. Title 41
Regulatory powers of local authorities. U.C.A. § 41-6a-208
City traffic regulations. U.C.A. § 10-8-30
Pedestrian Mall Law of Utah. U.C.A. § 10-15-1 et seq.

Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places
Contracts for public improvements. U.C.A. § 11-39-101 et seq.
Playgrounds. U.C.A. § 11-2-1 et seq.
Local Government Bonding Act. U.C.A. § 11-14-101 et seq.
Cemeteries. U.C.A. § 10-8-62
Utah Residential Rehabilitation Act. U.C.A. § 11-25-1 et seq.
Numbering houses and lots. U.C.A. § 10-8-31

Public Services
Water, lighting and sewers. U.C.A. §§ 10-7-4 et seq.; 10-8-14 et seq.
Sale of power plants. U.C.A. § 10-7-15 et seq.
Contracts for public improvements. U.C.A. § 11-39-101 et seq.
Sewage systems. U.C.A. §§ 10-8-38, 11-8-1 et seq.
Waterworks. U.C.A. § 10-8-15 et seq.
Cemeteries. U.C.A. § 10-8-62
Public transportation. U.C.A. § 10-8-86
Utah Public Transit District Act. U.C.A. § 17B-2a-801 et seq.
Prohibition on sale of waterworks or rights. Art. XI, § 6 of the Utah Constitution

Buildings and Construction
Building Inspector and Factory Built Housing Licensing Act. U.C.A. § 58-56-1 et seq.
Other building regulations. U.C.A. § 10-8-52 et seq.
Numbering houses and lots. U.C.A. § 10-8-31
Plumbing. U.C.A. § 10-8-46

Subdivisions
Plats and subdivisions. U.C.A. § 10-9a-601 et seq.

Zoning
Zoning power of cities and towns. U.C.A. § 10-9a-501 et seq.
Appeal authority. U.C.A. § 10-9a-701 et seq.

State Code Citation Table
This table lists Utah Code Annotated and Utah Constitution sections that are cited in the St. George City Code. Thus, Title 2, U.C.A, is cited in Section 3-1-13 of this code.
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
|                 State Citation                 | Code Section |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Article I, Section 22 of the Utah Constitution | § 10-3-1     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 3, Chapter 2, U.C.A.                     | § 4-7-5      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 4-5-501, U.C.A.                              | § 3-7-6      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 4, Chapter 17, U.C.A.                    | § 4-10-1     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 7-15-1, U.C.A.                               | § 1-10C-1    |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 10, Chapter 1, U.C.A.                    | § 3-4A-6     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 10-1-203, U.C.A.                             | § 3-4B-9     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 10-1-305(2)(b), U.C.A.                       | § 3-4A-3     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 10-1-307(4), U.C.A.                          | § 3-4A-5     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 10-1-401, U.C.A. et seq.                     | § 7-7-7      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 10-1-403, U.C.A.                             | § 3-4B-6     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 10-1-405, U.C.A.                             | § 3-4B-7     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 10-1-407, U.C.A.                             | § 3-4B-3     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 10-1-408, U.C.A.                             | § 3-4B-8     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 10-3-703, U.C.A.                             | § 1-4-1      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 10-3-703.5, U.C.A.                           | § 1-4-1      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 10-6-131, U.C.A.                             | § 1-7C-5     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 10-8-84, U.C.A.                              | § 5-3-1      |
|                                                | § 6-1-1      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 10, Chapter 9a, U.C.A.                   | § 2-1-1      |
|                                                | § 10-25A-2   |
|                                                | § 10-25C-4   |
|                                                | § 10-25C-5   |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 10, Chapter 9A, U.C.A.                   | § 10-25C-6   |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 10-9a-103, U.C.A.                            | § 2-1-2      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 10-9a-302, U.C.A.                            | § 2-1-2      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 10-9a-604.5, U.C.A.                          | § 10-25D-2   |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 10-9a-801, U.C.A.                            | § 10-3-5     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 11-13-101, U.C.A.                            | § 1-13-1     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 11, Chapter 26, U.C.A.                   | § 3-4B-9     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 12-1-1, U.C.A. – § 12-1-10, U.C.A.           | § 3-2N-1     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 13-22-2(1)(a), U.C.A.                        | § 3-2B-2     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 13-22-2(b), U.C.A.                           | § 3-2B-2     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 13-51-102, U.C.A.                            | § 3-2O-1     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 15A, U.C.A.                              | § 10-2-1     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 15A-5-202.5(1)(b), U.C.A.                    | § 5-3-7      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 17B-4-101, U.C.A. et seq.                    | § 1-13-1     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 19-2-121, U.C.A.                             | § 4-9-2      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 19-5-102, U.C.A.                             | § 4-2-3      |
|                                                | § 8-4-1-4    |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 19-6-102(10), U.C.A.                         | § 4-4-1      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 19-6-502(10), U.C.A.                         | § 4-4-1      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 20A-1-510, U.C.A.                            | § 1-7-3      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 20A-2-105, U.C.A.                            | § 1-7-2      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 20A-9-203, U.C.A.                            | § 1-7-2      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 26-8a-304, U.C.A.                            | § 3-2F-1     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 26-8a-305, U.C.A.                            | § 3-2F-3     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 26A, Chapter 1, U.C.A.                   | § 4-7-5      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 30-6-1, U.C.A.                               | § 1-4-1      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 31A-22-304, U.C.A.                           | § 1-14-2     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 31A-22-305, U.C.A.                           | § 1-14-3     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 32B, U.C.A.                              | § 3-3-2      |
|                                                | § 3-3-11     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 32B, Chapter 2, U.C.A.                   | § 3-3-2      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 32B, Chapter 6, U.C.A.                   | § 3-3-2      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 32B, Chapter 7, U.C.A.                   | § 3-3-2      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 32B, Chapter 11, U.C.A.                  | § 3-3-2      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 41, U.C.A.                               | § 6-1-1      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 41-1a-102, U.C.A.                            | § 4-10-1     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 41-6-43, U.C.A.                              | § 1-4-1      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 41-6-44, U.C.A.                              | § 1-4-1      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 41-6-44.10, U.C.A.                           | § 1-4-1      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 41-6-146, U.C.A.                             | § 5-3-2      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 41-6a-102, U.C.A.                            | § 10-2-1     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 41-6a-102(11), U.C.A.                        | § 6-5-1      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 41-6a-102(41), U.C.A.                        | § 6-5-1      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 41-6a-102(44), U.C.A.                        | § 6-5-1      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 41-6a-1011(1)(a), U.C.A.                     | § 6-5-1      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 41-6a-1601, U.C.A.                           | § 3-2O-3     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 41-6a-1642, U.C.A.                           | § 3-2O-3     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 41, Chapter 13a, U.C.A.                  | § 3-2L-2     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 41-22-1, U.C.A. et seq.                      | § 4-2-3      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 51, Chapter 7, U.C.A.                    | § 1-7C-1     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 51-21-101, U.C.A.                            | § 7-7-2      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 52, Chapter 4, U.C.A.                    | § 1-6-2      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 52-4-202, U.C.A.                             | § 1-6-2      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 52-4-207, U.C.A.                             | § 1-6-2      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 53, U.C.A.                               | § 3-2O-6     |
|                                                | § 5-3-1      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 53-3-227, U.C.A.                             | § 1-4-1      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 53, Chapter 7, U.C.A.                    | § 5-3-7      |
|                                                | § 9-9-2      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 53-7-202, U.C.A.                             | § 5-3-7      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 53-7-225, U.C.A.                             | § 5-3-7      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 53-8-205, U.C.A.                             | § 3-2O-3     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 53-10-108(1)(b), U.C.A.                      | § 3-2B-7     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 53A, U.C.A.                              | § 5-3-1      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 54, U.C.A.                               | § 3-4D-9     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 54-8b-2, U.C.A.                              | § 3-4B-1     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 54-21-204, U.C.A.                            | § 7-7-6      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 54-21-207, U.C.A.                            | § 7-7-8      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 54-21-208, U.C.A.                            | § 7-7-8      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 54-21-504, U.C.A.                            | § 7-7-7      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 57, Chapter 22, U.C.A.                   | § 4-7-5      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 57-22-4, U.C.A.                              | § 4-7-17     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 57-22-5.1, U.C.A.                            | § 4-7-9      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 58, U.C.A.                               | § 5-3-1      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 58, Chapter 11a, U.C.A.                  | § 10-2-1     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 58-11a-101, U.C.A. et seq.                   | § 10-8B-1    |
|                                                | § 10-10-1    |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 58, Chapter 17b, U.C.A.                  | § 3-9-2      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 58, Chapter 28, U.C.A.                   | § 5-2-11     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 59, Chapter 1, U.C.A.                    | § 3-4A-6     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 59-1-104, U.C.A.                             | § 3-4A-3     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 59, Chapter 12, U.C.A.                   | § 3-4A-1     |
|                                                | § 3-4A-2     |
|                                                | § 3-4A-3     |
|                                                | § 3-4A-6     |
|                                                | § 3-4B-1     |
|                                                | § 3-4D-4     |
|                                                | § 3-4D-6     |
|                                                | § 3-4D-7     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 59-12-101, U.C.A.                            | § 3-4A-6     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 59-12-102, U.C.A.                            | § 3-4B-1     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 59-12-103, U.C.A.                            | § 3-4D-3     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 59-12-106, U.C.A.                            | § 3-4A-7     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 59-12-119, U.C.A.                            | § 3-4A-6     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 59-12-205, U.C.A.                            | § 3-4D-8     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 59-12-207, U.C.A.                            | § 3-4B-1     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 59-12-301, U.C.A.                            | § 4-7-5      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 59, Chapter 13, U.C.A.                   | § 3-4A-3     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 62A, U.C.A.                              | § 5-3-1      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 63-2-101, U.C.A.                             | § 1-9-1      |
|                                                | § 3-1-5      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 63-11-57, U.C.A. et seq.                     | § 7-4-2      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 63-30-1, U.C.A. et seq.                      | § 8-5-5      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 63-30d-801, U.C.A.                           | § 1-14-1     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 70C-5-103, U.C.A.                            | § 3-2B-20    |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 72, U.C.A.                               | § 6-1-1      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 72-7-102, U.C.A.                             | § 3-4B-9     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 72-7-108, U.C.A.                             | § 3-4B-9     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 72-18-2, U.C.A.                              | § 4-10-1     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 73-7-225, U.C.A.                             | § 5-3-7      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 76, U.C.A.                               | § 5-3-1      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 76-3-104, U.C.A.                             | § 1-4-2      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 76-3-204, U.C.A.                             | § 1-4-1      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 76-3-205, U.C.A.                             | § 1-4-1      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 76-3-301, U.C.A.                             | § 1-4-1      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 76-3-302, U.C.A.                             | § 1-4-1      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 76-5-207, U.C.A.                             | § 1-4-1      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 76-8-410, U.C.A.                             | § 3-1-21     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 76-9-301, U.C.A.                             | § 5-2-7      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 76-10-501(6), U.C.A.                         | § 5-4-1      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 76-10-501(10), U.C.A.                        | § 5-4-1      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 76-10-525, U.C.A.                            | § 5-1-2      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 76-10-1601, U.C.A. et seq.                   | § 3-9-5      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 77, U.C.A.                               | § 3-2O-6     |
|                                                | § 5-3-1      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 77-24-1, U.C.A. – § 77-24-5, U.C.A.          | § 5-1-2      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 78, U.C.A.                               | § 5-3-1      |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 78-36-12.3(3), U.C.A.                        | § 4-7-13     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 533, U.C.A.                              | § 3-2O-6     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 7741, U.C.A.                             | § 3-2O-6     |
+------------------------------------------------+--------------+

Ordinance Table
This table lists ordinances passed by the City of St. George. If an ordinance is codified, its location in the code is cited by chapter number at the end of the ordinance description. Ordinances are codified if they are general, permanent, and/or include penalty provisions for noncompliance. “Not codified” indicates that the ordinance could have been codified but was not for some reason (e.g., superseded by a later ordinance, codified in a separate publication). “Special” means the ordinance was special in nature or for a specific period of time (e.g., budget, annexation, tax levy).
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 8-1-74                  | Regulating              |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | platting                |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | recording               |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | subdivisions            |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | land                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-75-1                  | Amend                   |
|                         | Sec                     |
|                         | 5-1-21,                 |
|                         | unlawful                |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | sell                    |
|                         | goods                   |
|                         | on                      |
|                         | public                  |
|                         | streets                 |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | sidewalks               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 7-75-11                 | Establish               |
|                         | policy                  |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | payment                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | utility                 |
|                         | hook                    |
|                         | up                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | other                   |
|                         | related                 |
|                         | charges                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2-77-2                  | Obscenity               |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | prohibiting             |
|                         | conduct                 |
|                         | related                 |
|                         | thereto                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1978-1-77               | Create                  |
|                         | SID                     |
|                         | No.                     |
|                         | 77-2-B                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1978-24                 | Repeal                  |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 1,                      |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 8,                      |
|                         | office                  |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | City                    |
|                         | Manager                 |
|                         | (1-7A)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1978-8-77               | Create                  |
|                         | sidewalk                |
|                         | improvement             |
|                         | district                |
|                         | No.                     |
|                         | 8-77                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1978-11-1               | Adopt                   |
|                         | RDA                     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 79-1-1                  | Amend                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 5,                      |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 2,                      |
|                         | dispensing              |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | beer                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 79-5-4                  | Amend                   |
|                         | Section                 |
|                         | 9-1-3,                  |
|                         | permit                  |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | street                  |
|                         | excavation              |
|                         | (7-2)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 79-6-6                  | Mayor                   |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | act                     |
|                         | as                      |
|                         | CFO                     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1979-6-1                | Mayor                   |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | act                     |
|                         | as                      |
|                         | CFO                     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1979-6-2                | Establish               |
|                         | position                |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Director                |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Finance                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 4-80-2                  | Adopt                   |
|                         | rules                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | road,                   |
|                         | 1978                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 5-80-3                  | Amend                   |
|                         | Section                 |
|                         | 8,                      |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 2,                      |
|                         | payment                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | deposits                |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | utilities               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 5-80-2                  | Amend                   |
|                         | Section                 |
|                         | 1                       |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Ordinance               |
|                         | No.                     |
|                         | 7-75-11,                |
|                         | payment                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | utilities               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 5-80-1                  | Amend                   |
|                         | Section                 |
|                         | 1-7-6,                  |
|                         | appointed               |
|                         | officers                |
|                         | must                    |
|                         | live                    |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | St.                     |
|                         | George                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1980-DSP79-B1           | Create                  |
|                         | SID                     |
|                         | No.                     |
|                         | SP79-B1                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1980-D79-12(19)R        | Create                  |
|                         | SID                     |
|                         | No.                     |
|                         | D79-12(19)R             |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1980-7-1                | Adopt                   |
|                         | specs                   |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | design                  |
|                         | procedures              |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | construction            |
|                         | standards               |
|                         | (9-2)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1980-8-1                | Amend                   |
|                         | first                   |
|                         | six                     |
|                         | chapters                |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | zoning                  |
|                         | ordinance               |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1980-SP78-5G6-20        | Create                  |
|                         | SID                     |
|                         | No.                     |
|                         | SP78-5G6-20             |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1980-SP79-A1A           | Create                  |
|                         | SID                     |
|                         | No.                     |
|                         | SP79-A1A                |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1980-11-1               | Establish               |
|                         | regulations             |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | dedication              |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | land,                   |
|                         | payment                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | fees,                   |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | parks                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | rec                     |
|                         | land                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1980-12                 | Create                  |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | award                   |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | Escalante               |
|                         | a                       |
|                         | 20-year                 |
|                         | franchise               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 3-19-1981               | (4-2)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 81-11-2                 | (5-2)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1982-8-1                | (8-3)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1983-3-1                | (8-3)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-17-1985               | (3-2R)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 5-2-1985                | (8-3)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 11-21-1985              | (3-1,                   |
|                         | 4-2)                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 12-5-1985               | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-12-001)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-2-1986                | (8-3A)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-21-1986               | (8-3A)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 4-3-1986                | (4-2)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 8-21-1986               | (8-3A)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-1-1987                | (3-1)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-7-1987                | (8-3)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 5-1-1987                | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 5-2-1987                | (8-1)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-1-1988                | (6-4)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 5-8-1988                | (1-10B)                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 6-1-1988                | (5-2)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 7-1-1988                | (3-6)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 7-2-1988                | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2018-04-004)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 12-4-1988               | (5-2)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 12-5-1988               | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2018-04-004)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 12-7-1988               | (7-1)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 4-1-1989                | (3-6)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 8-1-1989                | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2018-04-004)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 10-3-1989               | (3-2)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2-3-1990                | (3-2T)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 5-1-1990                | (3-2A)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 10-2-90                 | (8-3)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 12-1-1990               | (5-2)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 12-2-1990               | (3-1)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-1-1991                | (8-5)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 3-2-1991                | (3-1)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 12-3-91                 | (6-2)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 12-5-91                 | (6-2A)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-1-92                  | Criminal                |
|                         | Code                    |
|                         | Class                   |
|                         | B                       |
|                         | Misdemeanors            |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | penalties               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-2-92                  | Traffic                 |
|                         | rules                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | regulations,            |
|                         | State                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Utah                    |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | penalties               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-3-92                  | Airport                 |
|                         | rules                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | regulations             |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-4-92                  | Building                |
|                         | Code                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-5-92                  | Electrical              |
|                         | Code                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-6-92                  | Mechanical              |
|                         | Code                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-7-92                  | Plumbing                |
|                         | Code                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-8-92                  | Fire                    |
|                         | Code                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 3-1-92                  | Chapter                 |
|                         | 6,                      |
|                         | minors                  |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | room                    |
|                         | rental                  |
|                         | motels                  |
|                         | (5-5B)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 3-2-92                  | Vacate                  |
|                         | roadway                 |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 1100                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 3-3-92                  | Vacate                  |
|                         | roadway                 |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 300                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 3-4-92                  | Requirement             |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | quorum                  |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | voting                  |
|                         | wastewater              |
|                         | treatment               |
|                         | issues                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 3-5-92                  | Record                  |
|                         | access                  |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | management              |
|                         | program                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 4-1-92                  | Vacate                  |
|                         | easements               |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 6-1-92                  | SID                     |
|                         | 88-3                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 6-2-92                  | Portico's               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 6-3-1992                | Records                 |
|                         | access                  |
|                         | management              |
|                         | (1-9)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 9-1-1992                | Definition              |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | a                       |
|                         | lot                     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 9-2-1992                | Limit                   |
|                         | animals                 |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | open                    |
|                         | space                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 9-3-1992                | Elderly                 |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | handicapped             |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | residential             |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 11-1-1992               | GRAMA                   |
|                         | amendment               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 11-2-1992               | Ence                    |
|                         | TV                      |
|                         | franchise               |
|                         | ordinance               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 12-1-1992               | Construction            |
|                         | site                    |
|                         | waste                   |
|                         | disposal                |
|                         | facilities              |
|                         | (4-5)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 12-2-1992               | Ence                    |
|                         | TV                      |
|                         | franchise               |
|                         | ordinance               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2-3-1993                | Amend                   |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 2,                      |
|                         | authorize               |
|                         | reconsideration         |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | decisions               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | Water                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Power                   |
|                         | Board                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2-2-1993                | Amend                   |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 2,                      |
|                         | liability               |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | City                    |
|                         | on                      |
|                         | electric                |
|                         | power                   |
|                         | outages                 |
|                         | or                      |
|                         | stoppages               |
|                         | (8-3)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 5-1-1993                | Repeal                  |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | replace                 |
|                         | Gas                     |
|                         | Code                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 5-3-1993                | Amend                   |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 4,                      |
|                         | eliminate               |
|                         | or                      |
|                         | prescribe               |
|                         | control                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | cross                   |
|                         | connections             |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | plumbing                |
|                         | fixtures                |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | assure                  |
|                         | water                   |
|                         | system                  |
|                         | safety                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 5-4-1993                | Require                 |
|                         | 11                      |
|                         | residences              |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | areas                   |
|                         | where                   |
|                         | local                   |
|                         | water                   |
|                         | pressure                |
|                         | is                      |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | excess                  |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 80                      |
|                         | lbs                     |
|                         | per                     |
|                         | square                  |
|                         | inch                    |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | install                 |
|                         | pressure                |
|                         | regulator               |
|                         | (8-3)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 6-2-1993                | Amend                   |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | ordinance               |
|                         | repealing               |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | replacing               |
|                         | Gas                     |
|                         | Code                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | CO                      |
|                         | be                      |
|                         | obtained                |
|                         | (9-1)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 7-1-1993                | Create                  |
|                         | Shade                   |
|                         | Tree                    |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Beautification          |
|                         | Board                   |
|                         | (7-4)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 8-3-93                  | Street                  |
|                         | name                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 3640                    |
|                         | S                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 8-4-93                  | Vacate                  |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Racing                  |
|                         | Ranch                   |
|                         | Estates                 |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 9-1-1993                | Regulate                |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | use                     |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | skateboards             |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | rollerblades            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 9-2-1993                | Amend                   |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 3,                      |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 9,                      |
|                         | cemetery                |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 11-1-1993               | Amend                   |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 6,                      |
|                         | motor                   |
|                         | vehicles                |
|                         | at                      |
|                         | airport                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 12-1-1993               | (9-3C)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 12-3-1993               | Amend                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 10                      |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | ZO,                     |
|                         | construction            |
|                         | subject                 |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | flood                   |
|                         | hazard                  |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-1-1995                | Create                  |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 9,                      |
|                         | design                  |
|                         | standards               |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | single                  |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | two-family              |
|                         | dwellings               |
|                         | outside                 |
|                         | mobile                  |
|                         | home                    |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-2-1995                | Establish               |
|                         | impact                  |
|                         | fees                    |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | municipal               |
|                         | services                |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2-1-1995                | Adopt                   |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | 1993                    |
|                         | National                |
|                         | Electrical              |
|                         | Code                    |
|                         | with                    |
|                         | amendments              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2-2-1995                | Amend                   |
|                         | Section                 |
|                         | 49(A)                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 19                      |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 10,                     |
|                         | clarify                 |
|                         | applications            |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | campgrounds             |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | RV                      |
|                         | parks                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 3-1-1995                | Adopt                   |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | 1994                    |
|                         | Uniform                 |
|                         | Building                |
|                         | Code                    |
|                         | with                    |
|                         | amendments              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 3-2-1995                | Adopt                   |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | 1994                    |
|                         | Fire                    |
|                         | Code                    |
|                         | with                    |
|                         | amendments              |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | date                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 3-3-1995                | Adopt                   |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | 1994                    |
|                         | Uniform                 |
|                         | Mechanical              |
|                         | Code                    |
|                         | with                    |
|                         | amendments              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 3-4-1995                | Adopt                   |
|                         | Sections                |
|                         | 2                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 3                       |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 3-5,                    |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 3                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | sections                |
|                         | 4                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 5                       |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 3-6,                    |
|                         | positions               |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | encroachment            |
|                         | officer                 |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | zoning                  |
|                         | inspector               |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | granting                |
|                         | citation                |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | enforcement             |
|                         | authority               |
|                         | (1-7F,                  |
|                         | 1-7G)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 3-5-1995                | Amend                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 9                       |
|                         | adding                  |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 8,                      |
|                         | regulating              |
|                         | signs                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 6-4-1995                | Amend                   |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 4,                      |
|                         | rights                  |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | terms                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | ex                      |
|                         | officio                 |
|                         | members                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | Airport                 |
|                         | Advisory                |
|                         | Board                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 8-1-1995                | Enacting                |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 1,                      |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 4A,                     |
|                         | campaign                |
|                         | finance                 |
|                         | disclosure              |
|                         | requirements            |
|                         | (1-8)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 9-1-1995                | Street                  |
|                         | name                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | several;                |
|                         | see                     |
|                         | list                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 9-2-1995                | Street                  |
|                         | name                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | portions                |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Skyline                 |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | Tuacahn                 |
|                         | Dr                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 9-4-1995                | Vacate                  |
|                         | roadway                 |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | The                     |
|                         | Villages                |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 1                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 12-1-1995               | Vacate                  |
|                         | roadway                 |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | portion                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Ft.                     |
|                         | Pierce                  |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 12-2-1995               | Amend                   |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 9,                      |
|                         | require                 |
|                         | main                    |
|                         | entries                 |
|                         | adjacent                |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | public                  |
|                         | streets                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-2-96                  | (7-2)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2-1-1996                | Street                  |
|                         | name                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Fairway                 |
|                         | Hills                   |
|                         | at                      |
|                         | Southgate               |
|                         | subdivision             |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2-2-1996                | Street                  |
|                         | name                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Devilwood               |
|                         | Cir                     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2-3-1996                | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | north                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 700                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | on                      |
|                         | 1000                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2-4-1996                | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | northeast               |
|                         | corner                  |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 300                     |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | 400                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2-5-1996                | Amend                   |
|                         | Section                 |
|                         | 19-2                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | conversion              |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | old                     |
|                         | motels,                 |
|                         | hotels                  |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | similar                 |
|                         | bldg                    |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | timeshare               |
|                         | units                   |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 3-1-1996                | Designating             |
|                         | home                    |
|                         | at                      |
|                         | 295                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | Main                    |
|                         | St                      |
|                         | as                      |
|                         | a                       |
|                         | City                    |
|                         | landmark                |
|                         | site                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 3-2-1996                | Adopt                   |
|                         | official                |
|                         | zoning                  |
|                         | map                     |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | City                    |
|                         | as                      |
|                         | presently               |
|                         | existing                |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 3-3-1996                | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 2030                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | Middleton               |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 3-4-1996                | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 206                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | 400                     |
|                         | W                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 3-5-1996                | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 700                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Rd                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 3-6-1996                | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | southwest               |
|                         | corner                  |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Pioneer                 |
|                         | Rd                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Brigham                 |
|                         | Rd                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 4-1-1996                | Extend                  |
|                         | corporate               |
|                         | limits                  |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | include                 |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | SunRiver                |
|                         | II                      |
|                         | addition                |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 5-1-1996                | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | south                   |
|                         | side                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | between                 |
|                         | 2650                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 2750                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 5-2-1996                | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | adding                  |
|                         | chapter                 |
|                         | 22                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | creating                |
|                         | Mining                  |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Grazing                 |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 5-3-1996                | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | allowing                |
|                         | residential             |
|                         | units                   |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | C-3                     |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | C-4                     |
|                         | zones                   |
|                         | with                    |
|                         | conditional             |
|                         | use                     |
|                         | approval                |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 5-5-1996                | Amend                   |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 8                       |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 9                       |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | prohibit                |
|                         | glass                   |
|                         | bottles                 |
|                         | or                      |
|                         | other                   |
|                         | containers              |
|                         | from                    |
|                         | parks                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 6-1-1996                | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | east                    |
|                         | side                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 300                     |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | north                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | VFW                     |
|                         | bldg                    |
|                         | on                      |
|                         | 100                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 6-2-1996                | Amend                   |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 21                      |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | allow                   |
|                         | pigs                    |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | agricultural            |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 6-4-1996                | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | northeast               |
|                         | corner                  |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 1000                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Skyline                 |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 6-5-1996                | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 2990                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 6-6-1996                | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 19                      |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | allow                   |
|                         | sign                    |
|                         | manufacture             |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | painting                |
|                         | as                      |
|                         | a                       |
|                         | conditional             |
|                         | use                     |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | C-2                     |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 7-1-1996                | Adopting                |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | reference               |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | 1996                    |
|                         | National                |
|                         | Electrical              |
|                         | Code                    |
|                         | with                    |
|                         | amendments              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 7-2-1996                | Adopting                |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | Criminal                |
|                         | Code                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | State                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Utah                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | crimes                  |
|                         | punishable              |
|                         | as                      |
|                         | a                       |
|                         | Class                   |
|                         | B                       |
|                         | misdemeanor             |
|                         | or                      |
|                         | lesser                  |
|                         | misdemeanors            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 7-4-1996                | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 510                     |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | 900                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 7-5-1996                | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 19                      |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | allow                   |
|                         | sign                    |
|                         | manufacture             |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | painting                |
|                         | as                      |
|                         | a                       |
|                         | conditional             |
|                         | use                     |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | C-2                     |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 7-6-1996                | Amend                   |
|                         | PD-C                    |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | allow                   |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | development             |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | condos                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | north                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Brigham                 |
|                         | Rd,                     |
|                         | west                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Pioneer                 |
|                         | Rd                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 7-7-1996                | Vacate                  |
|                         | easement                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Millcreek               |
|                         | Industrial              |
|                         | Park                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 8-1-1996                | Amend                   |
|                         | land                    |
|                         | use                     |
|                         | map                     |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | Downs                   |
|                         | Rd                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Tuacahn                 |
|                         | Pkwy                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 8-3-1996                | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | pet                     |
|                         | shop                    |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | C-1                     |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | under                   |
|                         | a                       |
|                         | commercial              |
|                         | use                     |
|                         | permit                  |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 8-4-1996                | Vacate                  |
|                         | easement                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Foremaster              |
|                         | Ridge                   |
|                         | subdivision             |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 8-5-1996                | Amend                   |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 4,                      |
|                         | substituting            |
|                         | sections                |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | adding                  |
|                         | new                     |
|                         | section                 |
|                         | 6-4-4                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 8-6-1996                | Amend                   |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 4,                      |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 8,                      |
|                         | prohibit                |
|                         | off-road                |
|                         | vehicles                |
|                         | within                  |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | Desert                  |
|                         | Tortoise                |
|                         | Reserve                 |
|                         | (4-2)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 8-7-1996                | Salaries                |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | Mayor                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | City                    |
|                         | Council                 |
|                         | (1-6)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 8-8-1996                | Vacating                |
|                         | plat,                   |
|                         | Bloomington             |
|                         | Ranches                 |
|                         | No.                     |
|                         | 4                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 8-9-1996                | Add                     |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 6                       |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 5,                      |
|                         | cable                   |
|                         | communications;         |
|                         | granting,               |
|                         | renewal                 |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | enforcement             |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | franchises              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 9-1-1996                | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | between                 |
|                         | 300                     |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 400                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | on                      |
|                         | 1000                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 9-2-1996                | Amend                   |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 19,                     |
|                         | allowing                |
|                         | rental                  |
|                         | agency                  |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | home                    |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | garden                  |
|                         | equipment               |
|                         | as                      |
|                         | a                       |
|                         | conditional             |
|                         | use                     |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | C-2                     |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 9-3-1996                | Amend                   |
|                         | Section                 |
|                         | 19.2                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | ZO,                     |
|                         | parking                 |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | front                   |
|                         | yard                    |
|                         | setback                 |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | eliminate               |
|                         | covered                 |
|                         | parking                 |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | student                 |
|                         | housing                 |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | C-3                     |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | C-4                     |
|                         | zones                   |
|                         | on                      |
|                         | conditional             |
|                         | use                     |
|                         | basis                   |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 10-1-1996               | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | Downs                   |
|                         | Rd                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Tuachan                 |
|                         | Pkwy                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 10-3-1996               | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | east                    |
|                         | side                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 2100                    |
|                         | W                       |
|                         | between                 |
|                         | Sunset                  |
|                         | Blvd                    |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 1800                    |
|                         | N                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 10-4-1996               | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | west                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Zion                    |
|                         | Motors                  |
|                         | on                      |
|                         | 950                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 11-1-1996               | Extend                  |
|                         | corporate               |
|                         | limits                  |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | include                 |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | SunRiver                |
|                         | II                      |
|                         | addition                |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 11-2-1996               | Extend                  |
|                         | corportate              |
|                         | limits                  |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | annex                   |
|                         | 104.1                   |
|                         | acres                   |
|                         | at                      |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | northwest               |
|                         | corner                  |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | City                    |
|                         | limits                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 11-3-1996               | Amend                   |
|                         | land                    |
|                         | use                     |
|                         | map                     |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | east                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Rd                      |
|                         | south                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 100                     |
|                         | S                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 11-4-1996               | Amend                   |
|                         | land                    |
|                         | use                     |
|                         | map                     |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | southwest               |
|                         | corner                  |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 900                     |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 700                     |
|                         | S                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 11-5-1996               | Amend                   |
|                         | land                    |
|                         | use                     |
|                         | map                     |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | delete                  |
|                         | previously              |
|                         | proposed                |
|                         | road                    |
|                         | 2200                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | at                      |
|                         | approx                  |
|                         | 1850                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 2100                    |
|                         | E                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 11-6-1996               | Street                  |
|                         | name                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | name                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 2750                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | between                 |
|                         | 350                     |
|                         | N                       |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | 750                     |
|                         | N                       |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | 2720                    |
|                         | E                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 11-7-1996               | Street                  |
|                         | name                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 1050                    |
|                         | W                       |
|                         | from                    |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | north                   |
|                         | boundary                |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | Shadow                  |
|                         | Mtn                     |
|                         | subdivision             |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | 540                     |
|                         | N                       |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | Stone                   |
|                         | Mtn                     |
|                         | Dr                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 11-8-1996               | Amend                   |
|                         | Capital                 |
|                         | Facilities              |
|                         | Plan                    |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | sewer                   |
|                         | facilities              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 11-9-1996               | Amend                   |
|                         | fees                    |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | charges                 |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | Wastewater              |
|                         | Dept                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 11-10-1996              | Amend                   |
|                         | Ord                     |
|                         | 1-2-1995                |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | increase                |
|                         | impact                  |
|                         | fees                    |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | be                      |
|                         | pd                      |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | sewer                   |
|                         | facilities              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 12-1-1996               | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 110                     |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | 100                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 12-2-1996               | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | amend                   |
|                         | PD-R                    |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | add                     |
|                         | two                     |
|                         | units                   |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | east                    |
|                         | side                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | The                     |
|                         | Casitas                 |
|                         | Del                     |
|                         | Sol                     |
|                         | twin                    |
|                         | home                    |
|                         | development             |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 12-3-1996               | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | southwest               |
|                         | corner                  |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 700                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 900                     |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 12-4-1996               | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 2257                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | 2450                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-1-1997                | Amend                   |
|                         | transportation          |
|                         | element                 |
|                         | General                 |
|                         | Plan                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | delete                  |
|                         | portion                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 2200                    |
|                         | S                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-2-1997                | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 3780                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | 1550                    |
|                         | W                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-3-1997                | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 400                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | 1100                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-4-1997                | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 767                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-5-1997                | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | west                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | Dr,                     |
|                         | both                    |
|                         | sides                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Arrowhead               |
|                         | Trail                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-6-1997                | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | south                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Virgin                  |
|                         | River,                  |
|                         | west                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | I-15                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Atkinville              |
|                         | area                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-7-1997                | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 1400                    |
|                         | Highland                |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-8-1997                | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Mall                    |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-9-1997                | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Road                    |
|                         | between                 |
|                         | 100                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 300                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-10-1997               | Roadway                 |
|                         | vacation                |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2-1-1997                | Establish               |
|                         | horizontal              |
|                         | control                 |
|                         | network                 |
|                         | (9-11)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2-2-1997                | Create                  |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | award                   |
|                         | Falcon                  |
|                         | Holding                 |
|                         | Group                   |
|                         | non-exclusive           |
|                         | cable                   |
|                         | tv                      |
|                         | franchise               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2-3-1997                | Amend                   |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 6,                      |
|                         | cable                   |
|                         | communication           |
|                         | franchises              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2-4-1997                | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | allow                   |
|                         | independent             |
|                         | human                   |
|                         | crematoriums            |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | C-3                     |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | M-1                     |
|                         | zones,                  |
|                         | with                    |
|                         | CUP                     |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 3-1-1997                | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Bluff                   |
|                         | Street                  |
|                         | between                 |
|                         | 200                     |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 300                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | on                      |
|                         | 400                     |
|                         | W                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 3-2-1997                | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | remove                  |
|                         | 12                      |
|                         | dwelling                |
|                         | units                   |
|                         | per                     |
|                         | acre                    |
|                         | limitation              |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 3-3-1997                | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | require                 |
|                         | 20'                     |
|                         | interior                |
|                         | yard                    |
|                         | setback                 |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 4-1-1997                | Amend                   |
|                         | Wastewater              |
|                         | control                 |
|                         | ordinance               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 4-2-1997                | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 641                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | 1000                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 4-3-1997                | Amend                   |
|                         | Master                  |
|                         | Road                    |
|                         | Plan,                   |
|                         | delete                  |
|                         | MP                      |
|                         | Road                    |
|                         | north                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Santa                   |
|                         | Clara                   |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | between                 |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | View                    |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | Dr                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 4-4-1997                | Delete                  |
|                         | platted                 |
|                         | road                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | approx                  |
|                         | 1400                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 1100                    |
|                         | E                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 5-1-1997                | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 412                     |
|                         | N                       |
|                         | 600                     |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 5-2-1997                | Annex                   |
|                         | Richards                |
|                         | Addition                |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 5-5-1997                | Roadway                 |
|                         | vacation                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 400                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | from                    |
|                         | 700                     |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | 800                     |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 6-1-1997                | Creating                |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 3,                      |
|                         | energy                  |
|                         | sales                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | use                     |
|                         | tax                     |
|                         | (3-4A)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 6-2-1997                | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | south                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 400                     |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 6-3-1997                | Adopt                   |
|                         | impact                  |
|                         | fees                    |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | charges                 |
|                         | (9-3B)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 6-4-1997                | Adopt                   |
|                         | Capital                 |
|                         | Facilities              |
|                         | Plan                    |
|                         | (9-3A)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 7-1-1997                | Amend                   |
|                         | PD-R                    |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Sunbrook                |
|                         | Development             |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 7-2-1997                | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 1125                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | 700                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 1135                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | 700                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 7-3-1997                | Amend                   |
|                         | subdivision             |
|                         | ord                     |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | process                 |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | vacating,               |
|                         | altering                |
|                         | or                      |
|                         | amending                |
|                         | subdivision             |
|                         | plats                   |
|                         | or                      |
|                         | adjusting               |
|                         | lot                     |
|                         | lines                   |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 7-4-1997                | Add                     |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 36,                     |
|                         | wireless                |
|                         | communication           |
|                         | facilities              |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 7-5-1997                | Roadway                 |
|                         | vacation                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | portion                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Sunland                 |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 8-1-1997                | Amend                   |
|                         | Bloomington             |
|                         | Ranches                 |
|                         | Sub                     |
|                         | #6                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 8-2-1997                | Vacate                  |
|                         | lot                     |
|                         | 16                      |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | St.                     |
|                         | George                  |
|                         | Industrial              |
|                         | Park                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 8-3-1997                | Roadway                 |
|                         | vacation                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | platted                 |
|                         | but                     |
|                         | unnamed                 |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 8-4-1997                | Amend                   |
|                         | local                   |
|                         | vendor                  |
|                         | preference              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 9-1-1997                | Amend                   |
|                         | backflow                |
|                         | ordinance               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 9-2-1997                | Amend                   |
|                         | home                    |
|                         | occupation              |
|                         | ordinance               |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 9-3-1997                | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Web                     |
|                         | Hill                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 9-4-1997                | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Shadow                  |
|                         | Mountain                |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 9-5-1997                | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | north                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | Ft.                     |
|                         | Pierce                  |
|                         | Industrial              |
|                         | Park                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 10-1-1997               | Amend                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 1,                      |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 4a,                     |
|                         | campaign                |
|                         | financial               |
|                         | disclosures             |
|                         | (1-8)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 10-2-1997               | Roadway                 |
|                         | vacation                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 400                     |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 10-3-1997               | Amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | JCPenney                |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 10-4-1997               | Amend                   |
|                         | all                     |
|                         | sections                |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Titles                  |
|                         | 78,                     |
|                         | 76,                     |
|                         | 58,                     |
|                         | 53                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 41                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Class                   |
|                         | B                       |
|                         | or                      |
|                         | Class                   |
|                         | C                       |
|                         | Misdemeanors            |
|                         | or                      |
|                         | infractions             |
|                         | (5-3,                   |
|                         | 6-1)                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 11-1-1997               | Review                  |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | actions                 |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | City                    |
|                         | (1-11)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 11-2-1997               | Vacate                  |
|                         | roadway                 |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Sunbrook                |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Santa                   |
|                         | Maria                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 11-3-1997               | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 15-7.7                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 20                      |
|                         | percent                 |
|                         | landscape               |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 11-4-1997               | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 19                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | allow                   |
|                         | auction                 |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 12-1-1997               | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | east                    |
|                         | side                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 400                     |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | south                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 12-2-1997               | Amend                   |
|                         | sign                    |
|                         | ordinance               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 12-3-1997               | Amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Saddleback              |
|                         | Ridge                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 12-4-1997               | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Park                    |
|                         | St                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Highland                |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-1-1998                | Amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | Side                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Mall                    |
|                         | Dr                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-2-1998                | Treatment               |
|                         | Centers                 |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | C-2,                    |
|                         | C-3                     |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | C-4                     |
|                         | zones                   |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-3-1998                | Amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Stonebridge             |
|                         | project                 |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-4-1998                | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 1100                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-5-1998                | Annexing                |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | between                 |
|                         | Tonaquint               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-6-1998                | Vacate                  |
|                         | roadways                |
|                         | adjacent                |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | Cox                     |
|                         | Park                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2-1-98                  | Amend                   |
|                         | GP                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 1.134                   |
|                         | acres                   |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | Bloomington             |
|                         | Hill                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2-2-98                  | Amend                   |
|                         | recorded                |
|                         | plat                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2-3-98                  | Schools                 |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | AP                      |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2-4-98                  | Amend                   |
|                         | GP                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 1740                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | 280                     |
|                         | N                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2-5-1998                | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 1100                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2-6-1998                | Adopting                |
|                         | 1997                    |
|                         | Uniform                 |
|                         | Fire                    |
|                         | Code                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2-7-1998                | Adopting                |
|                         | 1997                    |
|                         | Int'l                   |
|                         | Plumbing                |
|                         | Code                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2-8-1998                | Adopting                |
|                         | 1997                    |
|                         | Uniform                 |
|                         | Building                |
|                         | Code                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 3-1-98                  | Use                     |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | sound                   |
|                         | amplifiers              |
|                         | on                      |
|                         | City                    |
|                         | streets                 |
|                         | (5-3)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 3-2-98                  | Regulating              |
|                         | loitering               |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2020-03-001)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 3-3-98                  | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Virgin                  |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Rio                     |
|                         | Virgin                  |
|                         | RV                      |
|                         | Park                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 3-4-98                  | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 400                     |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | north                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 3-5-98                  | Landmark                |
|                         | site                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 190                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | Main                    |
|                         | St                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 3-6-98                  | Change                  |
|                         | street                  |
|                         | name                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Tuacahn                 |
|                         | Pkwy                    |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | Snow                    |
|                         | Canyon                  |
|                         | Pkwy                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 3-7-1998                | Amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | allow                   |
|                         | semi-truck              |
|                         | parking                 |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 4-1-98                  | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Park                    |
|                         | Townhomes               |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | Green                   |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 4-2-1998                | Roller                  |
|                         | skates,                 |
|                         | skateboards,            |
|                         | rollerblades            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 4-3-1998                | Pawnbrokers,            |
|                         | swap                    |
|                         | meets,                  |
|                         | secondhand              |
|                         | (3-2D,                  |
|                         | 3-2H)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 4-4-1998                | Setbacks                |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | garages                 |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | accessory               |
|                         | buildings               |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 4-5-1998                | Abandonment             |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 1100                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 5-1-1998                | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Pine                    |
|                         | View                    |
|                         | High                    |
|                         | West                    |
|                         | 3050                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 5-2-1998                | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 660                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | 400                     |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 5-3-1998                | Amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Southgate               |
|                         | Commercial              |
|                         | Area                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 5-4-1998                | Amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 400                     |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | 900S                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 5-5-1998                | Roller                  |
|                         | skates,                 |
|                         | skateboards,            |
|                         | rollerblades            |
|                         | (6-3)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 5-6-1998                | Amend                   |
|                         | land                    |
|                         | use                     |
|                         | map                     |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 700                     |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | 900                     |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | Streets                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 6-1-1998                | SID                     |
|                         | 97-1                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 6-2-1998                | Wastewater/pretreatment |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 7-1-1998                | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | south                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Red                     |
|                         | Cliffs                  |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | 2720                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 7-2-1998                | Change                  |
|                         | uses                    |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | C-2                     |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 7-3-1998                | Design                  |
|                         | standards               |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | garages                 |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | carports                |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 7-4-1998                | Residential             |
|                         | treatment               |
|                         | centers                 |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | commercial              |
|                         | zones                   |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 7-5-1998                | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | north                   |
|                         | Brigham                 |
|                         | Rd                      |
|                         | between                 |
|                         | Pioneer                 |
|                         | Rd                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 8-1-1998                | Cluster                 |
|                         | subdivisions            |
|                         | within                  |
|                         | agricultural            |
|                         | zones                   |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 8-2-1998                | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | south                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Sunflower               |
|                         | Townhomes               |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 8-3-1998                | Residential             |
|                         | treatment               |
|                         | centers                 |
|                         | proximity               |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 9-1-1998                | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 1800                    |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | 2000                    |
|                         | North                   |
|                         | 2100                    |
|                         | W                       |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | Downs                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 9-2-1998                | Reduce                  |
|                         | landscape               |
|                         | requirement             |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | front                   |
|                         | yard                    |
|                         | setback                 |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 9-3-1998                | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 450                     |
|                         | N                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Mall                    |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 9-4-1998                | Aggressive              |
|                         | panhandling             |
|                         | (5-3)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 10-1-1998               | Reimbursement           |
|                         | agreements              |
|                         | (9-2)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 10-2-1998               | Amend                   |
|                         | purchasing              |
|                         | ordinance               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 10-3-1998               | Amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | Target                  |
|                         | complex                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 10-4-1998               | Amend                   |
|                         | beer                    |
|                         | ordinance               |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | convention              |
|                         | facility                |
|                         | license                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 11-1-1998               | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 3600                    |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | 4300                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Rd                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 11-2-1998               | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 160                     |
|                         | N                       |
|                         | 200                     |
|                         | W                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 11-3-1998               | Levying                 |
|                         | 1/4%                    |
|                         | sales                   |
|                         | tax                     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 11-4-1998               | Amend                   |
|                         | beer                    |
|                         | ordinance,              |
|                         | hours                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | operation               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 12-1-1998               | Wastewater              |
|                         | pretreatment            |
|                         | ordinance               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 12-2-1998               | Adopting                |
|                         | EDA                     |
|                         | plan,                   |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | II                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 12-3-1998               | Adopting                |
|                         | EDA                     |
|                         | plan,                   |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | I                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 12-4-1998               | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | east                    |
|                         | Webb                    |
|                         | Hill                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-1-1999                | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 2350                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | 2000                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-2-1999                | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | west                    |
|                         | end                     |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Baneberry               |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-3-1999                | Amend                   |
|                         | GP                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | between                 |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Rd                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | Black                   |
|                         | Ridge                   |
|                         | at                      |
|                         | 400                     |
|                         | South                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-4-1999                | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 20,                     |
|                         | MH                      |
|                         | M-2                     |
|                         | zones                   |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-5-1999                | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | both                    |
|                         | sides                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Sunset                  |
|                         | at                      |
|                         | 2100                    |
|                         | W                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 1-6-1999                | Reducing                |
|                         | pH                      |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | wastewater              |
|                         | treatment               |
|                         | ordinance               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2-1-1999                | Add                     |
|                         | affordable              |
|                         | housing                 |
|                         | section                 |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | GP                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2-2-1999                | Reducing                |
|                         | residence               |
|                         | charge                  |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | solid                   |
|                         | waste                   |
|                         | collection              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2-3-1999                | Annexing                |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | Block                   |
|                         | (Leucadia)              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2-4-1999                | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Hidden                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Fossil                  |
|                         | Hills                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2-5-1999                | Adopt                   |
|                         | 1997                    |
|                         | Uniform                 |
|                         | Code/abate              |
|                         | dangerous               |
|                         | building                |
|                         | (9-6)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 3-1-1999                | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | between                 |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Tonaquint               |
|                         | Cemetery                |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 3-2-1999                | Zone                    |
|                         | change-                 |
|                         | west                    |
|                         | end                     |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Baneberry               |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 3-3-1999                | Abandonment             |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | road                    |
|                         | abutting                |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 3-4-1999                | Abandonment             |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 1000                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | 600                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 3-5-1999                | Abandonment             |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | road                    |
|                         | abutting                |
|                         | 200                     |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | St                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 3-6-1999                | Abandonment             |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | George                  |
|                         | Jarvis                  |
|                         | entry                   |
|                         | abutting                |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 4-1-1999                | Restoring               |
|                         | expired                 |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Robbins                 |
|                         | Retirement              |
|                         | Community               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 4-2-1999                | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 15,                     |
|                         | sell                    |
|                         | each                    |
|                         | unit                    |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | duplex                  |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 4-3-1999                | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | northeast               |
|                         | corner                  |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | I-15                    |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 200                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 4-4-1999                | Expand                  |
|                         | historic                |
|                         | preservation            |
|                         | commission              |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | 7                       |
|                         | members                 |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 4-5-1999                | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         |                         |
|                         | parking                 |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | dance                   |
|                         | facilities              |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 5-1-1999                | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | northwest               |
|                         | corner                  |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | Downs                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 1800                    |
|                         | N                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 5-2-1999                | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 250                     |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | 400                     |
|                         | South,                  |
|                         | east                    |
|                         | side                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Rd                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 5-3-1999                | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | south                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Sunset                  |
|                         | Blvd                    |
|                         | west                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 5-4-1999                | Alarm                   |
|                         | ordinance               |
|                         | (3-5)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 5-5-1999                | Abandonment             |
|                         | ROW                     |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | Bloomington             |
|                         | Hills                   |
|                         | water                   |
|                         | tank                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 6-1-1999                | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 767                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 6-2-1999                | Amend                   |
|                         | fees                    |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | charges                 |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | Wastewater              |
|                         | Dept                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 6-3-1999                | Amend                   |
|                         | Wastewater              |
|                         | ord                     |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | allow                   |
|                         | exceptions              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 7-1-1999                | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | between                 |
|                         | Mall                    |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Middleton               |
|                         | Wash                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 7-2-1999                | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | west                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Bluff                   |
|                         | St                      |
|                         | below                   |
|                         | Airport                 |
|                         | ridge                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 7-3-1999                | Require                 |
|                         | fencing                 |
|                         | along                   |
|                         | tortoise                |
|                         | habitat                 |
|                         | (9-12)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 8-1-1999                | Confirm                 |
|                         | assess,                 |
|                         | rolls                   |
|                         | SID                     |
|                         | 97-2                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 8-2-1999                | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | east                    |
|                         | side                    |
|                         | Little                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | Rd                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 8-3-1999                | Regulates               |
|                         | residential             |
|                         | facilities              |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | persons                 |
|                         | w/disability            |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 9-1-1999                | Vacating                |
|                         | portion                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 400                     |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | Street                  |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 9-2-1999                | Civil                   |
|                         | penalties               |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | handicap                |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | fire                    |
|                         | lane                    |
|                         | parking                 |
|                         | (6-2A)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 9-3-1999                | Trespassing             |
|                         | offense,                |
|                         | additional              |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-09-001)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 9-4-1999                | Destruction             |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | attacking               |
|                         | dog                     |
|                         | (5-2)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 9-5-1999                | Confirming              |
|                         | assessment              |
|                         | rolls                   |
|                         | SID                     |
|                         | 98-1                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 9-7-1999                | Adopt                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | incorporate             |
|                         | traffic                 |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | criminal                |
|                         | laws                    |
|                         | (5-3,                   |
|                         | 6-1)                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 10-1-1999               | Amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | at                      |
|                         | Stonebridge             |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 10-2-1999               | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | mouth                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Paradise                |
|                         | Canyon                  |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 10-3-1999               | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | north                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Entrada                 |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | Las                     |
|                         | Sendas                  |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 10-4-1999               | Solid                   |
|                         | Waste                   |
|                         | ordinance               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 10-5-1999               | Airport                 |
|                         | ordinance               |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2020-02-007)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 11-1-1999               | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 476                     |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 11-2-1999               | Vacating                |
|                         | portion                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Riverbend               |
|                         | Estates                 |
|                         | "A"                     |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 11-3-1999               | Vacating                |
|                         | roadway                 |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | old                     |
|                         | sewer                   |
|                         | plant                   |
|                         | property                |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 11-4-1999               | Home                    |
|                         | occupations             |
|                         | (3-7)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 11-5-1999               | Sexually                |
|                         | Oriented                |
|                         | Businesses              |
|                         | (3-8)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 11-6-1999               | Vacate                  |
|                         | Lots                    |
|                         | 8,9                     |
|                         | Anasazi                 |
|                         | Hills                   |
|                         | Subdivision             |
|                         | at                      |
|                         | Entrada                 |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-01-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | Hidden                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-01-002             | Clarify                 |
|                         | sign                    |
|                         | requirement             |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-01-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO,                     |
|                         | add                     |
|                         | disabled                |
|                         | parking                 |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | clarify                 |
|                         | sign                    |
|                         | req.                    |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-01-004             | Adopt                   |
|                         | 1999                    |
|                         | National                |
|                         | Electric                |
|                         | Code                    |
|                         | (9-5)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-01-005             | Vacate                  |
|                         | roadway                 |
|                         | 300                     |
|                         | North                   |
|                         | 200                     |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-01-006             | Chpt                    |
|                         | 10,                     |
|                         | ZO,                     |
|                         | re                      |
|                         | geologic,               |
|                         | flood,                  |
|                         | natural                 |
|                         | haz.                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-02-001             | Designate               |
|                         | 306                     |
|                         | So.                     |
|                         | Main                    |
|                         | landmark                |
|                         | site                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-02-002             | Cemetery                |
|                         | ordinance               |
|                         | (7-5)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-03-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change/amend            |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | Walmart                 |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-03-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO,                     |
|                         | double                  |
|                         | frontage                |
|                         | lots                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-03-003             | Adjust                  |
|                         | animal                  |
|                         | impound                 |
|                         | fees                    |
|                         | (5-2)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-03-004             | Vacate                  |
|                         | road,                   |
|                         | portion                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Supai                   |
|                         | Trail                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-03-005             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | NE                      |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Ruesch                  |
|                         | Machinery               |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-04-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 2450                    |
|                         |                         |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | between                 |
|                         | 50                      |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-04-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | side                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 100                     |
|                         | N                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-04-003             | Increase                |
|                         | utility                 |
|                         | deposit                 |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | $125                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-04-004             | Replacement             |
|                         | airport                 |
|                         | overlay                 |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-05-001             | Adopt                   |
|                         | mechanical              |
|                         | code                    |
|                         | (1998                   |
|                         | edition)                |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-05-002             | Clarify                 |
|                         | veterans’s              |
|                         | rights/Tonaquint        |
|                         | Cemetery                |
|                         | (7-5)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-05-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 3050                    |
|                         |                         |
|                         | N.                      |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Millcreek               |
|                         | Ind.                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-05-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 1200                    |
|                         | W                       |
|                         | Snow                    |
|                         | Cyn.                    |
|                         | Pkway                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-05-005             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | SE                      |
|                         | corner                  |
|                         | 1680                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | 280                     |
|                         | N                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-05-006             | Amend                   |
|                         | GP                      |
|                         | 7                       |
|                         | acres                   |
|                         | SE                      |
|                         | corner                  |
|                         | 1680                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | 280                     |
|                         | N                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-05-007             | Amend                   |
|                         | GP                      |
|                         | 11.26                   |
|                         | acres                   |
|                         | intersect               |
|                         | Riverside/1200          |
|                         | S                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-05-008             | Amend                   |
|                         | General                 |
|                         | Plan                    |
|                         | adopt                   |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | Block                   |
|                         | area                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-06-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | Pheasant                |
|                         | Springs                 |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-06-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 1460                    |
|                         | W                       |
|                         | Snow                    |
|                         | Cyn                     |
|                         | Parkway                 |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-06-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | VV                      |
|                         | Dr,                     |
|                         | 100                     |
|                         | N.                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-06-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | NW                      |
|                         | corner                  |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Bluff                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Sunset                  |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-06-005             | Vacate                  |
|                         | road                    |
|                         | 400                     |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | St.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-07-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | intersect               |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Dr/Sunland              |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-07-003             | Cross                   |
|                         | connections             |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-07-002             | Vacate                  |
|                         | 300                     |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | east                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Rd.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-08-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 458                     |
|                         | W                       |
|                         | 600                     |
|                         | N                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-08-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | general                 |
|                         | plan                    |
|                         | SW                      |
|                         | corner                  |
|                         | 1400                    |
|                         | W                       |
|                         | SCP                     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-08-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Red                     |
|                         | Hills                   |
|                         | Villas                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-08-004             | Employees’              |
|                         | Appeal                  |
|                         | Board                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-09-001             | Vacate                  |
|                         | road                    |
|                         | portion                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 600                     |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | Street                  |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-09-002             | Proximity               |
|                         | limits                  |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | alcohol                 |
|                         | sales                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-09-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 3356                    |
|                         | E.                      |
|                         | Chaparral               |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-09-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | SW                      |
|                         | corner                  |
|                         | 2000                    |
|                         | N.                      |
|                         | Snow                    |
|                         | Canyon                  |
|                         | Pkwy                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-10-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | no.                     |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 450                     |
|                         | N.                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 2800                    |
|                         | E.                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-10-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | east                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 3050                    |
|                         |                         |
|                         | so                      |
|                         | side                    |
|                         | 750                     |
|                         | N.                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-10-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | so                      |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Pine                    |
|                         | View                    |
|                         | High                    |
|                         | w                       |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 3050                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-10-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 800                     |
|                         | No.                     |
|                         | 2720                    |
|                         | E.                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-10-005             | Annex                   |
|                         | property                |
|                         | near                    |
|                         | Arizona                 |
|                         | border                  |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-10-006             | Vacate                  |
|                         | road                    |
|                         | 100                     |
|                         | W                       |
|                         | from                    |
|                         | Tab.                    |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | 100                     |
|                         | So.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-11-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 100                     |
|                         | N.                      |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | View                    |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-11-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | comm                    |
|                         | 950                     |
|                         | So.                     |
|                         | Bluff/Zion              |
|                         | Motors                  |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-12-001             | Special                 |
|                         | exception               |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | relocate                |
|                         | nonconforming           |
|                         | YESCO                   |
|                         | sign                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-12-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 3763                    |
|                         | Caribbean               |
|                         | Cr.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-12-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | hillside                |
|                         | overlay                 |
|                         | map                     |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | include                 |
|                         | Plantations             |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Leucadia                |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | Block                   |
|                         | parcels                 |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-12-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | Plantations             |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-12-005             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | addition                |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | Cliffs                  |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Snow                    |
|                         | Canyon                  |
|                         | project                 |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-12-006             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 165                     |
|                         | North                   |
|                         | 200                     |
|                         | West                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2000-12-007             | Electric                |
|                         | franchise               |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | REA                     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-01-001             | WandP                   |
|                         | Board                   |
|                         | duties                  |
|                         | (8-3)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-01-002             | Rescind                 |
|                         | Ord.                    |
|                         | #2000-10-004            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-01-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 1000                    |
|                         | E.                      |
|                         | Blvd.                   |
|                         | below                   |
|                         | Sinclair                |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-01-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Rd                      |
|                         | on                      |
|                         | 2800                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-01-005             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Tonaquint               |
|                         | N                       |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Joshuas                 |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-01-006             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | W                       |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Tonaquint               |
|                         | across                  |
|                         | Joshuas                 |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-01-007             | Amend                   |
|                         | master                  |
|                         | road                    |
|                         | plan                    |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | delete                  |
|                         | segment                 |
|                         | along                   |
|                         | Cottam                  |
|                         | prop                    |
|                         | line                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Rd                      |
|                         | N                       |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Foothills               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-02-001             | Establish               |
|                         | terms                   |
|                         | employ/comp             |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | City                    |
|                         | Manager                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-02-002             | Vacate                  |
|                         | road                    |
|                         | 1470                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | at                      |
|                         | intersection            |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 1790                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-02-003             | Vacate                  |
|                         | road                    |
|                         | 750                     |
|                         | N                       |
|                         | between                 |
|                         | 2750-3050               |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-02-004             | Vacate                  |
|                         | road                    |
|                         | part                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | St.                     |
|                         | Geo.                    |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | Irr.                    |
|                         | Co.                     |
|                         | map                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-02-005             | Amend                   |
|                         | hillside                |
|                         | overlay                 |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | include                 |
|                         | Sun                     |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | annexation              |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-02-006             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 850                     |
|                         | N                       |
|                         | 2750                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-02-007             | Use                     |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | wastewater              |
|                         | system                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-03-001             | Restrict                |
|                         | short                   |
|                         | term                    |
|                         | rentals                 |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | res                     |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | AG                      |
|                         | zones                   |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-03-002             | Include                 |
|                         | drainage                |
|                         | fee                     |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | utility                 |
|                         | billing                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-03-003             | Adopt                   |
|                         | drainage                |
|                         | fee                     |
|                         | (8-6)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-04-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 831                     |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 857                     |
|                         | E.                      |
|                         | Tabernacle              |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-04-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | Sienna                  |
|                         | Cyn.                    |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | add                     |
|                         | 9                       |
|                         | lots                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-05-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | Stonecliff              |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | add                     |
|                         | homes                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-05-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | master                  |
|                         | road                    |
|                         | plan                    |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | delete                  |
|                         | portion                 |
|                         | 2060                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | school                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-05-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | .5                      |
|                         | acre                    |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | III                     |
|                         |                         |
|                         | Cyn.                    |
|                         | View                    |
|                         | @                       |
|                         | Laurelwood              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-05-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | so.                     |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | on                      |
|                         | 2450                    |
|                         | E.                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-05-005             | Amend                   |
|                         | Gen.                    |
|                         | Plan                    |
|                         | Land                    |
|                         | Use                     |
|                         | Map                     |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | comm.                   |
|                         | dev.                    |
|                         | along                   |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Drive                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-06-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | parking                 |
|                         | ord.                    |
|                         | parking                 |
|                         | standards               |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | off-campus              |
|                         | student                 |
|                         | housing                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-06-002             | Vacate                  |
|                         | road                    |
|                         | 1080                    |
|                         | W.                      |
|                         | @                       |
|                         | Indian                  |
|                         | Hills                   |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-06-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | No.                     |
|                         | side                    |
|                         | Diagonal                |
|                         | @                       |
|                         | 600                     |
|                         | North                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-06-004             | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | define                  |
|                         | off-campus              |
|                         | student                 |
|                         | housing                 |
|                         | occupancy               |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-07-001             | Ledges                  |
|                         | annexation              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-07-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | NW                      |
|                         | corner                  |
|                         | Pioneer                 |
|                         | Rd/Young                |
|                         | St                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-08-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | Stondbridge             |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | road                    |
|                         | ded.                    |
|                         | Plat                    |
|                         | A                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-08-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | animal                  |
|                         | control                 |
|                         | ord.                    |
|                         | (5-2)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-08-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | triangle                |
|                         | @                       |
|                         | Bluff/Diagonal          |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-09-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | re                      |
|                         | detached                |
|                         | storage                 |
|                         | sheds                   |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-09-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | new                     |
|                         | IHC                     |
|                         | hospital                |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-09-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | West                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 400                     |
|                         | W                       |
|                         | north                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | BLM                     |
|                         | equipment               |
|                         | yard                    |
|                         | on                      |
|                         | 200                     |
|                         | North                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-09-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | Tonaquint               |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Mesa                    |
|                         | Palms                   |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-09-005             | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | re                      |
|                         | auto                    |
|                         | sales                   |
|                         | lots                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-09-006             | Vacate                  |
|                         | lot                     |
|                         | 8                       |
|                         | from                    |
|                         | Red                     |
|                         | Hills                   |
|                         | Villas                  |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-09-007             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | zone/allow              |
|                         | plant                   |
|                         | nursery                 |
|                         | on                      |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-10-001             | Auth.                   |
|                         | Mayor                   |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | sign                    |
|                         | econ.                   |
|                         | Dev.                    |
|                         | Agreement               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-10-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | south                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Sandstone               |
|                         | Shadows                 |
|                         | east                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | View                    |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-10-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | SE                      |
|                         | corner                  |
|                         | 2450                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Red                     |
|                         | Cliffs                  |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-10-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 25                      |
|                         | North                   |
|                         | 100                     |
|                         | West                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-10-005             | Vacate                  |
|                         | 2450                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | @                       |
|                         | intersection            |
|                         | w/Riverside             |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-10-006             | Change                  |
|                         | name                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Secret                  |
|                         | Temples                 |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | Sunkissed               |
|                         | Dr                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-11-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO,                     |
|                         | Chapt                   |
|                         | 16,                     |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | increase                |
|                         | units                   |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | RV                      |
|                         | parks                   |
|                         | from                    |
|                         | 750                     |
|                         | sq.                     |
|                         | ft.                     |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | 825                     |
|                         | sq.                     |
|                         | ft.                     |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-11-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 1287                    |
|                         | W.                      |
|                         | Bloomington             |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | So.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-11-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | north                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | St.                     |
|                         | Geo                     |
|                         | Blvd                    |
|                         | on                      |
|                         | 700                     |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-11-004             | Notice                  |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | Bids                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-12-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 2,                      |
|                         | Section                 |
|                         | 14                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | signage                 |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | handicapped             |
|                         | parking                 |
|                         | (6-2)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-12-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 1450                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | Formaster               |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2001-12-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 2400                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | on                      |
|                         | 1450                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-1-001              | Taxicabs                |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-1-002              | Locksmiths              |
|                         | (3-2Q)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-1-003              | Towing                  |
|                         | Services                |
|                         | (3-2U)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-1-004              | Curfew                  |
|                         | (5-5A)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-1-005              | Setback                 |
|                         | requirements            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-1-006              | Front                   |
|                         | yard                    |
|                         | setbacks                |
|                         | on                      |
|                         | private                 |
|                         | streets                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-1-007              | Front                   |
|                         | yard                    |
|                         | setbacks                |
|                         | on                      |
|                         | private                 |
|                         | streets                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-01-008             | Police                  |
|                         | Department              |
|                         | (5-1)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-01-009             | City                    |
|                         | Recorder                |
|                         | (1-7B)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-02-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | land                    |
|                         | use                     |
|                         | map                     |
|                         | from                    |
|                         | MDR                     |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | HDR                     |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Mall                    |
|                         | Dr,                     |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Dr,                     |
|                         | 1900                    |
|                         | East                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-02-002             | Employment              |
|                         | agencies                |
|                         | (3-2M)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-02-003             | Fire                    |
|                         | Department              |
|                         | (4-1)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-02-004             | Assessments             |
|                         | SID                     |
|                         | 2000-1                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-02-005             | Amend                   |
|                         | EDA                     |
|                         | #2                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-02-006             | International           |
|                         | Mechanical              |
|                         | Code                    |
|                         | (9-8)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-02-007             | International           |
|                         | Plumbing                |
|                         | Code                    |
|                         | (9-4)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-02-008             | International           |
|                         | Residential             |
|                         | Code                    |
|                         | (9-10)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-02-009             | International           |
|                         | Fire                    |
|                         | Code                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-02-010             | International           |
|                         | Building                |
|                         | Code                    |
|                         | (9-1)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-02-011             | International           |
|                         | Fuel                    |
|                         | Gas                     |
|                         | Code                    |
|                         | (9-7)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-03-001             | Vacate                  |
|                         | lot                     |
|                         | 3                       |
|                         |                         |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Pine                    |
|                         | View                    |
|                         | Commercial              |
|                         | subdivision             |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-03-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 4150                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | 1600                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-04-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Mall                    |
|                         | Dr,                     |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Dr,                     |
|                         | 1990                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-04-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 2200                    |
|                         | West                    |
|                         | north                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Sunset,                 |
|                         | east                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Sand                    |
|                         | Hollow                  |
|                         | Wash                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-04-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Southwest               |
|                         | corner                  |
|                         | 700                     |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | Main                    |
|                         | Street                  |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-05-001             | Variances               |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-05-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | Anasazi                 |
|                         | Ridge                   |
|                         | Townhomes               |
|                         | PD                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-05-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | increase                |
|                         | OS                      |
|                         | when                    |
|                         | existing                |
|                         | bldg                    |
|                         | is                      |
|                         | converted               |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | residential             |
|                         | treatment               |
|                         | facility                |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-05-004             | Requiring               |
|                         | sterilization           |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | animals                 |
|                         | at                      |
|                         | pound                   |
|                         | (5-2)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-06-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | Entrada                 |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | add                     |
|                         | 81                      |
|                         | acres                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-06-002             | Vacate                  |
|                         | road,                   |
|                         | alignment               |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 2450                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Road                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-06-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | Flying                  |
|                         | J                       |
|                         | station                 |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-06-004             | Annexing                |
|                         | Milne                   |
|                         | Addition                |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-06-005             | Increasing              |
|                         | WP                      |
|                         | impact                  |
|                         | fees                    |
|                         | (9-3B)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-06-006             | Gun                     |
|                         | repair                  |
|                         | as                      |
|                         | home                    |
|                         | occupation              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-07-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Little                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | Rd/2800                 |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-07-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 115                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | Mall                    |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-07-003             | Repeal                  |
|                         | free                    |
|                         | plots                   |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | veterans                |
|                         | (7-5)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-07-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 360E                    |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-07-005             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 280                     |
|                         | N                       |
|                         | Mall                    |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-07-006             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 750                     |
|                         | N                       |
|                         | 1250                    |
|                         | W                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-07-007             | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | regarding               |
|                         | setbacks,               |
|                         | basement,               |
|                         | story                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | story                   |
|                         | above                   |
|                         | grade                   |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-08-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | west                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 2120                    |
|                         | W                       |
|                         | Sunset                  |
|                         | Blvd                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-08-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | Hillside                |
|                         | Overlay                 |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | include                 |
|                         | Ledges                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-08-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 2300                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | 2450                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-09-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | downtown                |
|                         | St.                     |
|                         | George                  |
|                         | area                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-09-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | West                    |
|                         | Black                   |
|                         | Hill                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | Shadow                  |
|                         | Mountain                |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-09-003             | Assessment              |
|                         | Ord                     |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | SID                     |
|                         | 99-4                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-11-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | Commercial              |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | 3D                      |
|                         | Comm                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-12-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | southwest               |
|                         | Bloomington             |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | Bloomington             |
|                         | Lane                    |
|                         | Subdivision             |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2002-12-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | Residential             |
|                         | Cotton                  |
|                         | Manor                   |
|                         | Townhomes               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-01-001             | Assessment              |
|                         | Ord                     |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | SID                     |
|                         | 99-1                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-01-002             | Vacate                  |
|                         | Pine                    |
|                         | View                    |
|                         | Comm.                   |
|                         | Ctr.                    |
|                         | Sub.                    |
|                         | Plat                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-01-003             | No                      |
|                         | parking                 |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | front                   |
|                         | lawn                    |
|                         | areas                   |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-01-004             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | Comm.                   |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | Tonquint                |
|                         | Center                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-01-005             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | east                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Rd.                     |
|                         | 1450                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-01-006             | Parking                 |
|                         | req.                    |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | nursing                 |
|                         | homes                   |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-01-007             | Parking                 |
|                         | req.                    |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | telemarketing/call      |
|                         | centers                 |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-01-008             | Parking                 |
|                         | req.                    |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | restaurants             |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-01-009             | Creating                |
|                         | R-1                     |
|                         | conservation            |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-01-010             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | Block                   |
|                         | 3D,                     |
|                         | Plat                    |
|                         | B                       |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | R-1                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-01-011             | Amend                   |
|                         | parking                 |
|                         | ord.                    |
|                         | (6-2)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-02-001             | Limit                   |
|                         | access.                 |
|                         | bldgs                   |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | 25%                     |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | rear                    |
|                         | lot                     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-02-002             | Change                  |
|                         | name                    |
|                         |                         |
|                         | Water                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Energy                  |
|                         | Services                |
|                         | Bd.                     |
|                         | (8-1,                   |
|                         | 8-3,                    |
|                         | 8-3A)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-02-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | Tabernacle              |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 800                     |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-02-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | E.                      |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Rd.                     |
|                         | so.                     |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 2450                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-02-005             | Subdivision             |
|                         | Ordinance               |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-02-006             | Privacy                 |
|                         | walls                   |
|                         | adjacent                |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | public                  |
|                         | streets                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-02-007             | Public                  |
|                         | transit                 |
|                         | shelters                |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | setbacks                |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-03-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | No.                     |
|                         | BCC                     |
|                         | 7,                      |
|                         | Los                     |
|                         | Padres                  |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Kolob                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-03-002             | Recover                 |
|                         | expenses                |
|                         | responding              |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | hazardous               |
|                         | materials               |
|                         | emergencies             |
|                         | (4-6)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-04-001             | SID                     |
|                         | 99-3                    |
|                         | Assessment              |
|                         | ordinance               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-04-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 360                     |
|                         | N.                      |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-04-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | Emerald                 |
|                         | Springs                 |
|                         | final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-04-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | E.                      |
|                         | Snow                    |
|                         | Canyon                  |
|                         | Parkway                 |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-04-005             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 32                      |
|                         | North                   |
|                         | 800                     |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-04-006             | Speeding                |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | parking                 |
|                         | lots                    |
|                         | (6-1)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-05-001             | Storm                   |
|                         | water                   |
|                         | drainage                |
|                         | services                |
|                         | use                     |
|                         | fee                     |
|                         | (8-6)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-05-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | View/Indian             |
|                         | Hills                   |
|                         | intersec                |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-05-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 19                      |
|                         | Commercial              |
|                         | zones                   |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-06-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 15                      |
|                         | Multi                   |
|                         | Family                  |
|                         | zones                   |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-06-002             | Vacate                  |
|                         | 1400                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | 2580                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-07-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Road                    |
|                         | between                 |
|                         | Settlers                |
|                         | RV                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | Black                   |
|                         | Ridge                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-07-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 800                     |
|                         | S.                      |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-07-003             | Adopt                   |
|                         | City                    |
|                         | Code                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-07-004             | Adopt                   |
|                         | Code                    |
|                         | Enforcement             |
|                         | Program                 |
|                         | (1-12A,                 |
|                         | 1-12B,                  |
|                         | 1-12C,                  |
|                         | 1-12D)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-08-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | Hidden                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | PD                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-08-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 100                     |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | north                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Target                  |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-08-003             | Vacate                  |
|                         | roadway                 |
|                         | SW                      |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 1800                    |
|                         | N.                      |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | Downs                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-08-004             | Amend                   |
|                         | Black                   |
|                         | Ridge                   |
|                         | PD                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-09-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | sign                    |
|                         | requirements            |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | residential             |
|                         | devs.                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-09-002             | Vacate                  |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | Stone                   |
|                         | Point                   |
|                         | Townhomes               |
|                         | 2                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-09-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 694                     |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | Main                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-10-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 1550                    |
|                         | West                    |
|                         | 1040                    |
|                         | North                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-10-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 1450                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | 2580                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-10-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 1450                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | 2750                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-10-004             | Creating                |
|                         | RCC                     |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-11-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | Brightway               |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-11-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 150                     |
|                         | North                   |
|                         | 400                     |
|                         | West                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-11-003             | Family                  |
|                         | definition/college      |
|                         | students                |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-11-004             | Accept                  |
|                         | Haskell                 |
|                         | Homes                   |
|                         | annexation              |
|                         | petition                |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-12-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 400                     |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | 400                     |
|                         | W,                      |
|                         | 100                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | 600                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-12-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | Walmart                 |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | car                     |
|                         | wash                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-12-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | ZO                      |
|                         | re                      |
|                         | residential             |
|                         | treatment               |
|                         | facilities              |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-12-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 250                     |
|                         | W                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Black                   |
|                         | Ridge                   |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-12-005             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 2800                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | 2350                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-12-006             | Setbacks                |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | commercial              |
|                         | abutting                |
|                         | residential             |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2003-12-007             | Haskell                 |
|                         | Homes                   |
|                         | Addition                |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-01-001             | Clarify                 |
|                         | freestanding            |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | political               |
|                         | signs                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-01-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 150                     |
|                         | N.                      |
|                         | 900                     |
|                         | E.                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-01-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 1450                    |
|                         | S.                      |
|                         | E.                      |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Road                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-01-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | SW                      |
|                         | corner                  |
|                         | 1800                    |
|                         | N                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | DD                      |
|                         | Rd.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-01-005             | Amend                   |
|                         | gen.                    |
|                         | plan                    |
|                         | SW                      |
|                         | corner                  |
|                         | 1800                    |
|                         | N                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | DD                      |
|                         | Rd                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-01-006             | Amend                   |
|                         | pH                      |
|                         | limit,                  |
|                         | wastewater              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-01-007             | Disposal                |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | significant             |
|                         | parcels                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | property                |
|                         | (1-13)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-02-001             | Vacate                  |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | Downs                   |
|                         | Retirement              |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 1                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-02-002             | Setbacks                |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | office                  |
|                         | bldgs.                  |
|                         | abutting                |
|                         | residential             |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-02-003             | Vacate                  |
|                         | 2580                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | 1450                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | intersection            |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-02-004             | Adjust                  |
|                         | boundary                |
|                         | with                    |
|                         | Santa                   |
|                         | Clara                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-02-005             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | no.                     |
|                         | sunbrook                |
|                         | w.                      |
|                         | country                 |
|                         | lane                    |
|                         | rd                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-02-006             | Annex                   |
|                         | Snow                    |
|                         | Canyon                  |
|                         | boundary                |
|                         | adjustment              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-03-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | 3D                      |
|                         | commercial              |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-03-002             | Tattoo,                 |
|                         | body                    |
|                         | piercing                |
|                         | zoning                  |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-03-003             | Child                   |
|                         | nursery                 |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 9                       |
|                         | children                |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-03-004             | Vacate                  |
|                         | final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | Dias                    |
|                         | Subdivision             |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-03-005             | Prohibiting             |
|                         | signs                   |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | rights-of-way           |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-03-006             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 2350                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | 2200                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-03-007             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | Red                     |
|                         | Cliffs                  |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | 2450                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-03-008             | Amend                   |
|                         | final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | 350                     |
|                         | north                   |
|                         | condos                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-03-009             | Front                   |
|                         | yard                    |
|                         | setbacks                |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | residential             |
|                         | zones                   |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-03-010             | Establishing            |
|                         | dino                    |
|                         | track                   |
|                         | site                    |
|                         | advisory                |
|                         | board                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-04-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | Sunbrook                |
|                         | PD                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-04-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | Walmart                 |
|                         | PD                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-04-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 2000                    |
|                         | N.                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Tuweap                  |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-04-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 2580                    |
|                         | E.                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 1300                    |
|                         | So.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-04-005             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 1700                    |
|                         | S.                      |
|                         | Black                   |
|                         | Ridge                   |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | Interse                 |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-04-006             | Guarantee               |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | improvements            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-05-001             | Site                    |
|                         | built                   |
|                         | homes                   |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | MH                      |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-05-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 2200                    |
|                         | N.                      |
|                         | Tuweap                  |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-05-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | between                 |
|                         | DD                      |
|                         | Rd.                     |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Snow                    |
|                         | Cyn.                    |
|                         | Pkw                     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-05-004             | Amend                   |
|                         | Stonebridge             |
|                         | PD                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-05-005             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 250                     |
|                         | N.                      |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | View                    |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-06-001             | Allow                   |
|                         | PC                      |
|                         | alternate               |
|                         | member                  |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | B                       |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | A                       |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-06-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | Sun                     |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | PD                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-06-004             | Amend                   |
|                         | Hillside                |
|                         | Dev.                    |
|                         | Overlay                 |
|                         | Zone                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-06-005             | Sales                   |
|                         | tax                     |
|                         | on                      |
|                         | telecommunications      |
|                         | (3-4B)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-06-006             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 2049                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | 2800                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-06-007             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 2800                    |
|                         | S.                      |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Rd.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-06-008             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 2000                    |
|                         | S.                      |
|                         | 2580                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-06-009             | Landmark                |
|                         | site                    |
|                         | 190                     |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | 100                     |
|                         | East                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-07-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | west                    |
|                         | side                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | 1700                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-07-002             | Adopt                   |
|                         | Ft.                     |
|                         | Pearce                  |
|                         | EDA                     |
|                         | Project                 |
|                         | area                    |
|                         | #3                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-08-001             | Vacate                  |
|                         | lots                    |
|                         | 2,19                    |
|                         | Ft.                     |
|                         | Pearce                  |
|                         | Ind.                    |
|                         | Park                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-08-002             | Vacate                  |
|                         | Paragon                 |
|                         | Cove                    |
|                         | @Stone                  |
|                         | Cliff                   |
|                         | I                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-08-003             | Delete                  |
|                         | 10'                     |
|                         | setback/garage          |
|                         | priv.                   |
|                         | streets                 |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-08-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 1300                    |
|                         | W.                      |
|                         | Bluegrass               |
|                         | way                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-08-005             | Amend                   |
|                         | road                    |
|                         | master                  |
|                         | plan                    |
|                         | 2070                    |
|                         | So.                     |
|                         | St.                     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-08-006             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 2750                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | 2000                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-09-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Rd                      |
|                         | so                      |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Ft.                     |
|                         | Pearce                  |
|                         | Ind.                    |
|                         | Park                    |
|                         | north                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | White                   |
|                         | Dome                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-09-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 1900                    |
|                         | E.                      |
|                         | Middleton               |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-09-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 1157                    |
|                         | S.                      |
|                         | Plantations             |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-09-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 1960                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | 2700                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-09-005             | Amend                   |
|                         | Pheasant                |
|                         | Springs                 |
|                         | PD                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-09-006             | Parking                 |
|                         | standards               |
|                         | at                      |
|                         | schools                 |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-10-004             | Walls,                  |
|                         | fences                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-10-001             | Employee                |
|                         | appeal                  |
|                         | board                   |
|                         | (2-2)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-10-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 450                     |
|                         | West                    |
|                         | 400                     |
|                         | North                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-10-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 2580                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | 1150                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-11-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 1600                    |
|                         | S.                      |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-11-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | Ledges                  |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-11-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | master                  |
|                         | road                    |
|                         | plan                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-11-004             | Liability               |
|                         | ins.                    |
|                         | Uninsured               |
|                         | motorist                |
|                         | coverage                |
|                         | (1-14)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-11-005             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 3000                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | 2450                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-11-006             | Hours                   |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | liquor                  |
|                         | licenses                |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-11-007             | Define                  |
|                         | political               |
|                         | sign                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-11-008             | Accept                  |
|                         | Little                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | Farms                   |
|                         | annexation              |
|                         | petition                |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-11-009             | Change                  |
|                         | name                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | dinosaur                |
|                         | board                   |
|                         | (2-3)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-11-010             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 2160                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | 2450                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-12-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 750                     |
|                         | N                       |
|                         | 1300                    |
|                         | W                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-12-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 300                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | 154                     |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-12-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 10,                     |
|                         | Chapters                |
|                         | 2,                      |
|                         | 7B                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 10                      |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | define                  |
|                         | vehicle,                |
|                         | inoperable              |
|                         | vehicle,                |
|                         | abandoned               |
|                         | vehicle,                |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | vessell                 |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2004-12-004             | Amend                   |
|                         | General                 |
|                         | Plan                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | OS                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | LDR                     |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | Commerical              |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | southwest               |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | Foremaster              |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | intersection,           |
|                         | west                    |
|                         | side                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | future                  |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | extension               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-01-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | GP                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | east                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | View                    |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | @                       |
|                         | 950                     |
|                         | W                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-01-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | upper                   |
|                         | Sir                     |
|                         | Monte                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Rolling                 |
|                         | Hills                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-01-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 1100                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | 1000                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-01-004             | Allow                   |
|                         | buildings               |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | Historic                |
|                         | District                |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | into                    |
|                         | restaurants             |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-01-005             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Southwest               |
|                         | Foremaster              |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-01-006             | Define                  |
|                         | unimproved              |
|                         | lot,                    |
|                         | unpaved                 |
|                         | surface,                |
|                         | prohibit                |
|                         | parking                 |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | display                 |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | commercial              |
|                         | purposes                |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-02-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Tuweap                  |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 2000                    |
|                         | N                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-02-002             | Parking                 |
|                         | regulations             |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-02-003             | Segways                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-02-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | west                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 1450                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | Cir,                    |
|                         | south                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Foremaster              |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-02-005             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Trendwest               |
|                         | Resort                  |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-02-006             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 2780                    |
|                         | E,                      |
|                         | north                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 1450                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-02-007             | Permit                  |
|                         | required                |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | excavate                |
|                         | Virgin                  |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Santa                   |
|                         | Clara                   |
|                         | Rivers                  |
|                         | (7-2)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-02-008             | Vacate                  |
|                         | roadway                 |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 2580                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | 1450                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-02-009             | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-02-010             | Annexation              |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Little                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | Farms                   |
|                         | Addition                |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-03-001             | Plantations             |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | Addition                |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-03-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 2350                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | 2150                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-03-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 2500                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | 2070                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-03-004             | Boundary                |
|                         | Line                    |
|                         | Adj                     |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Washington              |
|                         | City                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-03-005             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 3052                    |
|                         | N,                      |
|                         | east                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Snow                    |
|                         | Canyon                  |
|                         | Pkwy                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-03-006             | Maximum                 |
|                         | size                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | bldgs                   |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | C-1                     |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-03-007             | Solicitors,             |
|                         | peddlers                |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | transient               |
|                         | merchants               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-04-001             | Alcohol                 |
|                         | beverage                |
|                         | licensing               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-05-001             | Firearms                |
|                         | ordinance               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-05-002             | Alternate               |
|                         | member                  |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Hillside                |
|                         | Review                  |
|                         | Board                   |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-05-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 1450                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | Foremaster              |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-05-004             | Segways                 |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | amended                 |
|                         | (6-5)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-05-005             | Firearms                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | amended                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-05-006             | Bidding                 |
|                         | procedures/change       |
|                         | orders                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-05-007             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | southwest               |
|                         | corner                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 2450                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Little                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | Rd                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-05-008             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 750                     |
|                         | N                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Picturesque             |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-06-001             | Parking                 |
|                         | on                      |
|                         | unimproved              |
|                         | lots                    |
|                         | (6-2)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-06-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 500                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | 1055                    |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 1075                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-06-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 2800                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Little                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | Rd                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-06-004             | Land                    |
|                         | use                     |
|                         | authority               |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-06-005             | Layout                  |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | lots                    |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | walls,                  |
|                         | fences                  |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | hedges                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-07-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 1160                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | 100                     |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-07-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Bloomington             |
|                         | Courtyard               |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-07-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 2780                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | 1450                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-07-004             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Emerald                 |
|                         | Ridge                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-07-005             | Vacate                  |
|                         | 1100                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-07-006             | Review                  |
|                         | commercial              |
|                         | bldgs                   |
|                         | 20,000                  |
|                         | sq                      |
|                         | ft                      |
|                         | or                      |
|                         | more                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-07-007             | Hillside                |
|                         | standards               |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-07-008             | Limit                   |
|                         | unrelated               |
|                         | persons                 |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-07-009             | Rockery                 |
|                         | walls                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-08-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 1200                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | 3000                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-08-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 250                     |
|                         | W                       |
|                         | 950                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-08-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Sienna                  |
|                         | Park/Stonebridge        |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-08-004             | Adjust                  |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | boundaries              |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-08-005             | Guest                   |
|                         | homes                   |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-08-006             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | SunRiver                |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-09-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | Tonaquint               |
|                         | Office                  |
|                         | Campus                  |
|                         | I                       |
|                         | plat                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-09-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Tonaquint               |
|                         | Hills                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-09-003             | Architectural           |
|                         | standards               |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | RCC                     |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-09-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 100                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | 1470                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-09-005             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 1100                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | 1000                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-09-006             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 1000                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | 3000                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-09-007             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 243                     |
|                         | N                       |
|                         | 400                     |
|                         | W                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-09-008             | Revisions               |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | bidding                 |
|                         | procedures              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-10-001             | Vacate                  |
|                         | roadway                 |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | portion                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Indian                  |
|                         | Hills                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-10-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Riverwood               |
|                         | 4                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-10-003             | Net                     |
|                         | metering                |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-11-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 2720                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | 850                     |
|                         | N                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-11-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 2000                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-11-003             | Sign                    |
|                         | ordinance               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-11-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Sandtown                |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | RCC                     |
|                         | (9-1)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-12-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 449                     |
|                         | W                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 500                     |
|                         | N                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-12-002             | Enacting                |
|                         | new                     |
|                         | rental                  |
|                         | fit                     |
|                         | premises                |
|                         | section                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | City                    |
|                         | code                    |
|                         | (4-7)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-12-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 9,                      |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 13                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | sign                    |
|                         | provisions              |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-12-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | north                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 150                     |
|                         | N,                      |
|                         | east                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Bluff,                  |
|                         | south                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Red                     |
|                         | Hills                   |
|                         | GC                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | west                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | red                     |
|                         | hill                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2005-12-005             | Amend                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 10                      |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | establish               |
|                         | a                       |
|                         | neighborhood            |
|                         | park                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-01-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 2350                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | 2000                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-01-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | Red                     |
|                         | Hills                   |
|                         | Parkway/Twin            |
|                         | Lakes                   |
|                         | Road                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-01-003             | Adjust                  |
|                         | boundary                |
|                         | line                    |
|                         | with                    |
|                         | Santa                   |
|                         | Clara                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-01-004             | Development             |
|                         | standards               |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | mixed                   |
|                         | uses                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-02-001             | Site                    |
|                         | dev.                    |
|                         | standards               |
|                         | Ft.                     |
|                         | Pierce                  |
|                         | Industrial              |
|                         | Park                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-02-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 3000                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Seegmiller              |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-03-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Dr./Foremaster          |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-04-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 3000                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | 2000                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-04-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 2700                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | 850                     |
|                         | North                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-04-003             | Landmark                |
|                         | site                    |
|                         | criteria                |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-04-004             | Dixie                   |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | West                    |
|                         | annexation              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-05-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | General                 |
|                         | Plan                    |
|                         | west                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Tonaquint               |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | south                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Tonaquint               |
|                         | Terrace                 |
|                         | Sub.                    |
|                         | along                   |
|                         | Bloomington             |
|                         | ridge                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-05-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 700                     |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-05-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | building                |
|                         | code,                   |
|                         | Board                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Appeals                 |
|                         | (9-1)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-05-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | west                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Tonaquint               |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | south                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Tonaquint               |
|                         | Terrace                 |
|                         | Sub.                    |
|                         | along                   |
|                         | Bloomington             |
|                         | ridge                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-05-005             | Repealing               |
|                         | airport                 |
|                         | board                   |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2020-02-007)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-05-006             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 2110                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | 2650                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-05-007             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | JEL                     |
|                         | Ranch                   |
|                         | Subdivision             |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-06-001             | Add                     |
|                         | small                   |
|                         | animal                  |
|                         | hospital                |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | boarding                |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | M-2                     |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-06-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 4200                    |
|                         | North                   |
|                         | east                    |
|                         | side                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Highway                 |
|                         | 18                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-06-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | west                    |
|                         | side                    |
|                         | Bluff                   |
|                         | @                       |
|                         | 350                     |
|                         | S.                      |
|                         | Bluff                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-07-001             | Infraction              |
|                         | fees                    |
|                         | (6-2A)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-07-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 1800                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | 3000                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-07-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | SW                      |
|                         | corner                  |
|                         | 1400                    |
|                         | W                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Snow                    |
|                         | Cyn                     |
|                         | Parkway                 |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-07-004             | Impact                  |
|                         | Fees                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-08-001             | Defining                |
|                         | beginning               |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | ending                  |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | pavement                |
|                         | widening                |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-08-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | west                    |
|                         | side                    |
|                         | 3000                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | 1100                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-08-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | General                 |
|                         | Plan                    |
|                         | land                    |
|                         | use                     |
|                         | map                     |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | Milepost                |
|                         | 2                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-08-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | west                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 1100                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | north                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 500                     |
|                         | North/Industrial        |
|                         | Park                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-08-005             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 951                     |
|                         | S.                      |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Rd.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-09-001             | Prohibiting             |
|                         | Oleander                |
|                         | plants                  |
|                         | (4-8)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-09-002             | Lot                     |
|                         | size                    |
|                         | averaging               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-09-003             | Residential             |
|                         | solicitations           |
|                         | (3-2B)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-09-004             | TND                     |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-09-005             | Require                 |
|                         | business                |
|                         | license                 |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | rentals                 |
|                         | (3-1,                   |
|                         | 4-7)                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-09-006             | Public                  |
|                         | hearing                 |
|                         | notice                  |
|                         | requirements            |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-12-001)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-10-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | gen.                    |
|                         | plan                    |
|                         | land                    |
|                         | use                     |
|                         | map                     |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | The                     |
|                         | Lakes                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-10-002             | Adopt                   |
|                         | CDA                     |
|                         | project                 |
|                         | plan                    |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | Ft.                     |
|                         | Pierce                  |
|                         | area                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-10-003             | Backflow                |
|                         | (8-2)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-11-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | general                 |
|                         | plan                    |
|                         | around                  |
|                         | airport                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-11-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 2800                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | 2260                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-11-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | Ledges                  |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-11-004             | Airport                 |
|                         | influence               |
|                         | area                    |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | overlay                 |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-12-001             | Accessory               |
|                         | buildings               |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | sideyards               |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-12-002             | Multi                   |
|                         | family                  |
|                         | zones                   |
|                         | setbacks                |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2006-12-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | Calvary                 |
|                         | Church                  |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | Bloomington             |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-01-001             | Conditional             |
|                         | uses                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | chapter                 |
|                         | 17                      |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-01-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | Atkinville              |
|                         | Interchange             |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-01-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | west                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | North                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Santa                   |
|                         | Clara                   |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-01-004             | Conditional             |
|                         | uses                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | all                     |
|                         | chapters                |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-01-005             | Amend                   |
|                         | bond                    |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | insurance               |
|                         | requirements            |
|                         | (7-2)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-01-006             | New                     |
|                         | impact                  |
|                         | fees                    |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | park                    |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | recreation              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-02-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 3050                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | 450                     |
|                         | North                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-02-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 1333                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | 100                     |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-03-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | general                 |
|                         | plan                    |
|                         | Little                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-03-002             | Minimum                 |
|                         | lot                     |
|                         | width                   |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | RCC                     |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-05-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | general                 |
|                         | plan                    |
|                         | south                   |
|                         | block                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-05-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | east                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Rd                      |
|                         | north                   |
|                         | side                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 1450                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-05-003             | Rockery                 |
|                         | walls                   |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-05-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 1699                    |
|                         | West                    |
|                         | 1020                    |
|                         | North                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-05-005             | Amend                   |
|                         | Beehive                 |
|                         | Homes                   |
|                         | PD                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-06-001             | Add                     |
|                         | small                   |
|                         | animal                  |
|                         | boarding                |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | M-1                     |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-06-002             | Approve                 |
|                         | densities               |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | excess                  |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | general                 |
|                         | plan                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-06-003             | Walls                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | fences                  |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-06-004             | Amending                |
|                         | solid                   |
|                         | waste                   |
|                         | collection              |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | disposal                |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-06-005             | No                      |
|                         | smoking                 |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | parks                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-06-006             | Fifty                   |
|                         | foot                    |
|                         | signs                   |
|                         | near                    |
|                         | freeway                 |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-06-007             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | south                   |
|                         | side                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Ft.                     |
|                         | Pierce                  |
|                         | Industrial              |
|                         | Park                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-07-001             | Temporary               |
|                         | land                    |
|                         | use                     |
|                         | regulation              |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | Little                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-07-002             | Boarding                |
|                         | stables                 |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | AG                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | MandG                   |
|                         | zones                   |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-07-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 2200                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | 3000                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-07-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | w/dev.                  |
|                         | agmt.                   |
|                         | Triple                  |
|                         | Bogey                   |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | Little                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-08-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | General                 |
|                         | Plan                    |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | Desert                  |
|                         | Canyons                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-08-002             | Temporary               |
|                         | land                    |
|                         | use                     |
|                         | regulation              |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | Little                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-08-003             | Vacate                  |
|                         | portion                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Heritage                |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-09-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 165                     |
|                         | West                    |
|                         | 200                     |
|                         | North                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-09-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 550                     |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | 300                     |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-09-003             | Car                     |
|                         | wash                    |
|                         | as                      |
|                         | conditional             |
|                         | use                     |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | C-1                     |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-09-004             | Transient               |
|                         | room                    |
|                         | tax                     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-09-005             | Mixed                   |
|                         | use                     |
|                         | development             |
|                         | standards               |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-10-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 594                     |
|                         | West                    |
|                         | 400                     |
|                         | North                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-10-002             | Increase                |
|                         | transit                 |
|                         | sales                   |
|                         | tax                     |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | .30%                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-10-003             | Design                  |
|                         | review                  |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | commercial              |
|                         | projects                |
|                         | 20,000                  |
|                         | sq.                     |
|                         | ft.                     |
|                         | +                       |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-10-004             | Design                  |
|                         | review                  |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | AP                      |
|                         | projects                |
|                         | 20,000                  |
|                         | sq.                     |
|                         | ft.                     |
|                         | +                       |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-11-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 1800                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | 3000                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-11-002             | Air                     |
|                         | quality                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-11-003             | Allow                   |
|                         | garage                  |
|                         | access                  |
|                         | off                     |
|                         | alley                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-11-004             | Reduce                  |
|                         | separation              |
|                         | between                 |
|                         | two                     |
|                         | story                   |
|                         | residential             |
|                         | bldgs.                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-11-005             | Add                     |
|                         | child                   |
|                         | nursery                 |
|                         | as                      |
|                         | conditional             |
|                         | use                     |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-11-006             | Detached                |
|                         | homes                   |
|                         | on                      |
|                         | building                |
|                         | pads                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-11-007             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 3000                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | 1870                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-12-001             | Adopting                |
|                         | amended                 |
|                         | CDA                     |
|                         | project                 |
|                         | area                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-12-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | Ledges                  |
|                         | PD                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-12-003             | Allow                   |
|                         | residential             |
|                         | child                   |
|                         | family                  |
|                         | support                 |
|                         | facility                |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | multiple                |
|                         | family                  |
|                         | zones                   |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-12-004             | Amend                   |
|                         | dog                     |
|                         | licensing/rabies        |
|                         | vaccinations            |
|                         | (5-2)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2007-12-005             | Amend                   |
|                         | air                     |
|                         | quality                 |
|                         | regulations             |
|                         | (4-9)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-01-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 3300                    |
|                         | S.                      |
|                         | Little                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | Rd.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-01-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 501                     |
|                         | N.                      |
|                         | Bluff                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-01-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 3657                    |
|                         | S.                      |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Rd.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-02-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | general                 |
|                         | plan                    |
|                         | 1450                    |
|                         | So.                     |
|                         | 3000                    |
|                         | E.                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-02-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | general                 |
|                         | plan                    |
|                         | 1100                    |
|                         | W.                      |
|                         | Curly                   |
|                         | Hollow                  |
|                         | Dr.                     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-02-003             | Political               |
|                         | signs                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-02-004             | Amend                   |
|                         | bldg.                   |
|                         | height                  |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | define                  |
|                         | coping                  |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-02-005             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 3670                    |
|                         | S.                      |
|                         | Little                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | Rd.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-02-006             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 2200                    |
|                         | E.                      |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-02-007             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | Judd                    |
|                         | Palmer                  |
|                         | 2000                    |
|                         | S.                      |
|                         | 3000                    |
|                         | E.                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-02-008             | Churches                |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | residential             |
|                         | zones                   |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-02-009             | Density                 |
|                         | bonus                   |
|                         | overlay                 |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-03-001             | Access                  |
|                         | management              |
|                         | policy                  |
|                         | (7-1)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-03-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 2860                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | 750                     |
|                         | North                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-04-001             | Vacating                |
|                         | portion                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 200                     |
|                         | West                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-04-002             | Child                   |
|                         | family                  |
|                         | support                 |
|                         | facility                |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | RCC                     |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-04-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | general                 |
|                         | plan                    |
|                         | St.                     |
|                         | George                  |
|                         | airport                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-04-004             | Compliance              |
|                         | with                    |
|                         | immigration             |
|                         | laws                    |
|                         | (1-10B)                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-05-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 2050                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | 1050                    |
|                         | North                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-05-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 1800                    |
|                         | North                   |
|                         | 2172                    |
|                         | West                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-05-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 1900                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | on                      |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-05-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 285                     |
|                         | W.                      |
|                         | Tabernacle              |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-05-005             | Adopting                |
|                         | Anderson                |
|                         | Development             |
|                         | agreement               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-06-001             | Signs                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-07-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 2450                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Rd.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-07-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 1300                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | 900                     |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-07-003             | Landscape               |
|                         | ordinance               |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-08-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | general                 |
|                         | plan                    |
|                         | 1900                    |
|                         | E.                      |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Dr.                     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-08-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | Lago                    |
|                         | Vista                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Plantation              |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-08-003             | Landscape               |
|                         | ordinance               |
|                         | amendments              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-08-004             | Property                |
|                         | Reserve                 |
|                         | annexation              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-09-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 750                     |
|                         | North                   |
|                         | 3050                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-09-002             | General                 |
|                         | plan                    |
|                         | amendment               |
|                         | 600                     |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | 850                     |
|                         | East                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-09-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 415                     |
|                         | S.                      |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-09-004             | Abandon                 |
|                         | rights-of-way           |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | Tarlton                 |
|                         | Blair                   |
|                         | survey                  |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-10-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | Beehive                 |
|                         | Homes                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-10-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 2200                    |
|                         | E.                      |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-10-003             | Alcohol                 |
|                         | sales                   |
|                         | on                      |
|                         | election                |
|                         | day                     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-11-001             | Add                     |
|                         | worker                  |
|                         | eligibility             |
|                         | statement               |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | bus.                    |
|                         | lic.                    |
|                         | app.                    |
|                         | (3-1)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-11-002             | Adopt                   |
|                         | comm.                   |
|                         | dev.                    |
|                         | project                 |
|                         | area                    |
|                         | plan                    |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | airport                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-12-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 1090                    |
|                         | W.                      |
|                         | Baneberry               |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-12-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Dr.                     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-12-003             | Purchasing              |
|                         | amendments              |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2018-04-004)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2008-12-004             | Transient               |
|                         | room                    |
|                         | tax                     |
|                         | (3-4C)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2009-01-001             | Digital                 |
|                         | billboards              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2009-02-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 1980                    |
|                         | E.                      |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2009-02-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | C-4                     |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | downtown                |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2009-03-001             | TND                     |
|                         | street                  |
|                         | standard                |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2009-03-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 451                     |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | 500                     |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2009-03-003             | Deed                    |
|                         | restriction             |
|                         | amendment               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2009-04-001             | Utility                 |
|                         | deposits                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | interest                |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2009-04-002             | Motor                   |
|                         | vehicle                 |
|                         | regs.                   |
|                         | (6-1)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2009-04-003             | Curfew                  |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | minors                  |
|                         | (5-5A)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2009-04-004             | RCC                     |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | clarifications          |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2009-04-005             | Amend                   |
|                         | commercial              |
|                         | zones                   |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2009-04-006             | Zone                    |
|                         | change/amend            |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | Hidden                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2009-04-007             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 1425                    |
|                         | N.                      |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | Downs                   |
|                         | Rd.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2009-05-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | general                 |
|                         | plan                    |
|                         | 1690                    |
|                         | E.                      |
|                         | Red                     |
|                         | Hills                   |
|                         | Pkway                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2009-06-001             | Enclosed                |
|                         | storage                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2009-07-001             | Landscape               |
|                         | rock                    |
|                         | yards                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2009-07-002             | Guest                   |
|                         | parking                 |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2009-07-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 1090                    |
|                         | W.                      |
|                         | Baneberry               |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2009-07-004             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         |                         |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | post                    |
|                         | office                  |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2009-07-005             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Desert                  |
|                         | Canyons                 |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2009-08-001             | Storm                   |
|                         | water                   |
|                         | ordinance               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2009-09-001             | Vacate                  |
|                         | Rustic                  |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2009-09-002             | Indoor                  |
|                         | archery                 |
|                         | permitted               |
|                         | use/commercial          |
|                         | zones                   |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2009-11-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | gen.                    |
|                         | plan                    |
|                         | Tonaquint/Mesa          |
|                         | Palms                   |
|                         | Dr.                     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2009-12-001             | Landscaping             |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | single                  |
|                         | family                  |
|                         | zones                   |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2009-12-002             | Vacating                |
|                         | Cornerstone             |
|                         | Sub.                    |
|                         | Plat                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2009-12-003             | Annexing                |
|                         | new                     |
|                         | airport                 |
|                         | property                |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2010-01-001             | Vacate                  |
|                         | lots                    |
|                         | Racing                  |
|                         | Ranch                   |
|                         | Estates                 |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2010-01-002             | Chickens                |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2010-02-001             | Indoor                  |
|                         | archery                 |
|                         | range                   |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | M-2                     |
|                         | permitted               |
|                         | use                     |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2010-04-001             | Reannexation,           |
|                         | land                    |
|                         | coming                  |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | as                      |
|                         | MandG                   |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2010-04-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 1450                    |
|                         | So,                     |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | Springs                 |
|                         | pasture                 |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2010-04-003             | Wireless                |
|                         | tower                   |
|                         | location                |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2010-05-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 1443                    |
|                         | W.                      |
|                         | Fairway                 |
|                         | Rd.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2010-05-002             | Extend                  |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Rd                      |
|                         | major                   |
|                         | commercial              |
|                         | sign                    |
|                         | cor.                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2010-06-001             | Allow                   |
|                         | more                    |
|                         | than                    |
|                         | 3                       |
|                         | providers               |
|                         | on                      |
|                         | 1                       |
|                         | cell                    |
|                         | tower                   |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2010-06-002             | Allow                   |
|                         | carport                 |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | sideyard                |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | downtown                |
|                         | area                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2010-06-003             | Allow                   |
|                         | recreational            |
|                         | use                     |
|                         | as                      |
|                         | CUP                     |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | M-1                     |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2010-06-004             | Allow                   |
|                         | indoor                  |
|                         | shooting                |
|                         | range                   |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | C-2                     |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | C-3                     |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2010-06-005             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | Learning                |
|                         | Center                  |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2010-07-001             | Short                   |
|                         | term                    |
|                         | rentals                 |
|                         | (3-2V)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2010-07-002             | Vacating                |
|                         | 850                     |
|                         | North                   |
|                         | 2875                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2010-07-003             | Vacating                |
|                         | portion                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2010-07-004             | Amend                   |
|                         | Emerald                 |
|                         | Ridge                   |
|                         | Subdivision             |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2010-07-005             | Boundary                |
|                         | line                    |
|                         | adj.                    |
|                         | w/Washington            |
|                         | City                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2010-07-006             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 120                     |
|                         | W.                      |
|                         | 1470                    |
|                         | S.                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2010-08-001             | Add                     |
|                         | ATV                     |
|                         | sales                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | repairs                 |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | M-2                     |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2010-08-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | Sunbrook                |
|                         | Ranch                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | uses                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2010-09-001             | Allow                   |
|                         | churches                |
|                         | as                      |
|                         | permitted               |
|                         | uses                    |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | all                     |
|                         | residential             |
|                         | zones                   |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2010-09-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | wastewater              |
|                         | ord.                    |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | remove                  |
|                         | Public                  |
|                         | Works                   |
|                         | Director                |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2010-11-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | 1490                    |
|                         | E.                      |
|                         | Cr.                     |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 1450                    |
|                         | So.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2010-11-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | Snowfield               |
|                         | Estates                 |
|                         | plat                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2010-11-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | Little                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | Rd.                     |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Crimson                 |
|                         | Ridge                   |
|                         | Rd.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2010-11-004             | Lot                     |
|                         | size                    |
|                         | averaging               |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | RE                      |
|                         | zones                   |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2010-12-001             | Add                     |
|                         | 1800                    |
|                         | acres                   |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | Tonaquint               |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | Gen.                    |
|                         | Plan                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-01-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | 251                     |
|                         | W.                      |
|                         | Hilton                  |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | Plaza                   |
|                         | Subdivision             |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-01-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | Whisper                 |
|                         | Ridge                   |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 2                       |
|                         | Subdivision             |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-01-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | Kachina                 |
|                         | Springs                 |
|                         | @                       |
|                         | Entrada                 |
|                         | plat                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-01-004             | Amend                   |
|                         | Kachina                 |
|                         | Springs                 |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 2                       |
|                         | plat                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-01-005             | Amend                   |
|                         | Kachina                 |
|                         | Springs                 |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | @                       |
|                         | Entrada                 |
|                         | plat                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-01-006             | Amend                   |
|                         | Kachina                 |
|                         | Springs                 |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | @                       |
|                         | Entrada                 |
|                         | plat                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-02-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | Desert                  |
|                         | Hills                   |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 6                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-02-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | Res.                    |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | Hidden                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | Fossil                  |
|                         | Hills                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-02-003             | Spice                   |
|                         | ordinance               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-03-001             | Repealing               |
|                         | spice                   |
|                         | ordinance               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-04-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 3800                    |
|                         | So.                     |
|                         | Little                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | Rd.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-04-002             | Recycling               |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | M-1                     |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-04-003             | Double                  |
|                         | frontage                |
|                         | lots/walls              |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-05-001             | Minimum                 |
|                         | lot                     |
|                         | size                    |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | ASBP                    |
|                         | 20                      |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-05-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | Meadow                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | Estates                 |
|                         | 5                       |
|                         | plat                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-05-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | Franklin                |
|                         | Place                   |
|                         | #2                      |
|                         | plat                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-05-004             | Amend                   |
|                         | Cottages                |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | #1                      |
|                         | plat                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-05-005             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 3.68                    |
|                         | acre                    |
|                         | north                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Bundy                   |
|                         | Lane                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-05-006             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | 1746                    |
|                         | So.                     |
|                         | Blackridge              |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-05-007             | Replace                 |
|                         | single                  |
|                         | family                  |
|                         | homes                   |
|                         | w/non-conforming        |
|                         | setbacks                |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-06-001             | Adopt                   |
|                         | master                  |
|                         | trails                  |
|                         | plan                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-06-002             | Adopt                   |
|                         | master                  |
|                         | road                    |
|                         | plan                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-06-003             | Payday                  |
|                         | loans                   |
|                         | not                     |
|                         | permitted               |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | C-1                     |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | C-4                     |
|                         | zones                   |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-06-004             | Allow                   |
|                         | sale                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | produce                 |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | eggs                    |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | RE                      |
|                         | zones                   |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-06-005             | Amend                   |
|                         | Pine                    |
|                         | View                    |
|                         | Comm.                   |
|                         | Center                  |
|                         | 2                       |
|                         | amended                 |
|                         | plat                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-06-006             | Amend                   |
|                         | Tuscan                  |
|                         | Hills                   |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 2                       |
|                         | plat                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-07-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | gen.                    |
|                         | plan                    |
|                         | 85                      |
|                         | acres                   |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | Little                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-07-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 15.89                   |
|                         | acres                   |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | Little                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-07-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | uses                    |
|                         | allowed                 |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | commercial              |
|                         | zones                   |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-08-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | RV                      |
|                         | park                    |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | Desert                  |
|                         | Canyons                 |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-08-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 2000                    |
|                         | E.                      |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-08-003             | Fencing                 |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | old                     |
|                         | industrial              |
|                         | park                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-08-004             | Amend                   |
|                         | general                 |
|                         | plan                    |
|                         | 900                     |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | 400                     |
|                         | East                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-08-005             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 2710                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | south                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Crimson                 |
|                         | Ridge                   |
|                         | Rd.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-09-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 900                     |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | 400                     |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-09-002             | Enforce                 |
|                         | traffic                 |
|                         | laws                    |
|                         | on                      |
|                         | school                  |
|                         | property                |
|                         | (6-1)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-09-003             | Vacate                  |
|                         | 3670                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | Little                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | Road                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-10-001             | Delete                  |
|                         | density                 |
|                         | bonus                   |
|                         | overlay                 |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | from                    |
|                         | City                    |
|                         | Code                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-10-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | airport                 |
|                         | overlay                 |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-11-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | BCC                     |
|                         | lot                     |
|                         | 83                      |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | build                   |
|                         | garage                  |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-11-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | sign                    |
|                         | ord                     |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | delete                  |
|                         | campaign                |
|                         | sign                    |
|                         | section                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-11-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | Tonaquint               |
|                         | Terrace                 |
|                         | 2                       |
|                         | plat                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-11-004             | Amend                   |
|                         | Little                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | general                 |
|                         | plan                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-12-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | commercial              |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | 200-300                 |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | east                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | I-15                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2011-12-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 2710                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | 3580                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-01-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 2900                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | 3580                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-01-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | UT/AZ                   |
|                         | line                    |
|                         | both                    |
|                         | sides                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Rd.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-01-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | north                   |
|                         | side                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | So.                     |
|                         | Parkway                 |
|                         | between                 |
|                         | Interchanges            |
|                         | 6,                      |
|                         | 7                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-01-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 2350                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Equestrian              |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-02-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 4050                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Little                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | Rd.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-03-001             | Vacating                |
|                         | 3670                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | 2640                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-03-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 2198                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | Rustic                  |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-03-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | Whisper                 |
|                         | Ridge                   |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 3                       |
|                         | plat                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-03-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 3000                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | Crimson                 |
|                         | Ridge                   |
|                         | Rd.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-03-005             | Auto                    |
|                         | dealerships             |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-04-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 1040                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | 600                     |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-05-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 3320                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | 2620                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-05-002             | Auto                    |
|                         | parking                 |
|                         | lots                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-06-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 126                     |
|                         | West                    |
|                         | 200                     |
|                         | North                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-06-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | no                      |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Crimson                 |
|                         | Ridge                   |
|                         | Rd                      |
|                         | w.                      |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 3000                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-06-003             | Vacate                  |
|                         | portion                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 600                     |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | St.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-06-004             | Tonaquint               |
|                         | Addition                |
|                         | annexation              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-06-005             | Vacate                  |
|                         | street                  |
|                         | 3710                    |
|                         | So                      |
|                         | 3700                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | Banded                  |
|                         | Hills                   |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-06-006             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 2100                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | 900                     |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-06-007             | Fire                    |
|                         | Chief                   |
|                         | authority               |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | prohibit                |
|                         | ignition                |
|                         | source                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-06-008             | Fireworks               |
|                         | restrictions            |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2018-06-006)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-07-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 177                     |
|                         | North                   |
|                         | 3050                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-07-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 2350                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | south                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Equestrian              |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-08-001             | Vacate                  |
|                         | street                  |
|                         | 900                     |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | between                 |
|                         | 400                     |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | I-15                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-09-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | Crimson                 |
|                         | Ridge                   |
|                         | Rd/3000                 |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-09-002             | Vacate                  |
|                         | 900                     |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | (duplicate              |
|                         | ord                     |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | 2012-08-001)            |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-10-001             | Vacate                  |
|                         | Beehive                 |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Enterprise              |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-10-002             | Temp                    |
|                         | regulation/off          |
|                         | premise                 |
|                         | signs                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-10-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | 3D                      |
|                         | Commercial              |
|                         | Center                  |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-10-004             | Limited                 |
|                         | outdoor                 |
|                         | display                 |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | commercial              |
|                         | zones                   |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-11-001             | Smoke                   |
|                         | shop                    |
|                         | ordinance               |
|                         | (3-9)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-11-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | general                 |
|                         | plan                    |
|                         | 3000                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Crimson                 |
|                         | Ridge                   |
|                         | Dr                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-11-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 12.21                   |
|                         | acres                   |
|                         | Desert                  |
|                         | Canyons                 |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-11-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | Middleton               |
|                         | area                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-11-005             | Amend                   |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | Ridge                   |
|                         | Sub.                    |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 6                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-11-006             | Amend                   |
|                         | Stone                   |
|                         | Cliff                   |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 10                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-12-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | Bluegrass               |
|                         | Way                     |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | use                     |
|                         | list                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-12-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | 1811                    |
|                         | W.                      |
|                         | Canyon                  |
|                         | View                    |
|                         | Dr.                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-12-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | Las                     |
|                         | Colinas                 |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-12-004             | Boundary                |
|                         | adjustment              |
|                         | with                    |
|                         | Santa                   |
|                         | Clara                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-12-005             | Amend                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | Village                 |
|                         | @                       |
|                         | Little                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 1                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2012-12-006             | Vacate                  |
|                         | easement                |
|                         | south                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | Center                  |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-01-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | hillside                |
|                         | overlay                 |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-01-002             | Chickens                |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | rabbits                 |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | OS                      |
|                         | zones                   |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-02-001             | Vacate                  |
|                         | easement,               |
|                         | lot                     |
|                         | 20,21                   |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | Chaco                   |
|                         | Bench                   |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 1                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-02-002             | Vacate                  |
|                         | easement,               |
|                         | lot                     |
|                         | 33,                     |
|                         | Stone                   |
|                         | Cliff                   |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 1                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-02-003             | Vacate                  |
|                         | a                       |
|                         | portion                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Hilton                  |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-02-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Little                  |
|                         | Valley,                 |
|                         | 2200                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | south                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Equestrian              |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-02-005             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 3860                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | 2420                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-02-006             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Road                    |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 1450                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Maverik                 |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-02-007             | Relinquish              |
|                         | easement                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | lot                     |
|                         | 23,                     |
|                         | Bloomington             |
|                         | Ranches                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-02-008             | Amend                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Stonebridge             |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 2                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-02-009             | Vacate                  |
|                         | portions                |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Indian                  |
|                         | Hills                   |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-02-009 (Corrected) | Vacating                |
|                         | portions                |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Indian                  |
|                         | Hills                   |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-02-010             | Modify                  |
|                         | setback                 |
|                         | requirements            |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | garages                 |
|                         | from                    |
|                         | alleys                  |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-03-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Village                 |
|                         | at                      |
|                         | Little                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 1                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-03-002             | Relinquish              |
|                         | easement                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | lot                     |
|                         | 88,                     |
|                         | Red                     |
|                         | Butte                   |
|                         | subdivision             |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-03-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Banded                  |
|                         | Hills                   |
|                         | Dr/3000                 |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-03-004             | Tonaquint               |
|                         | Addition                |
|                         | Annexation              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-03-005             | Monument                |
|                         | grave                   |
|                         | markers                 |
|                         | (7-5)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-03-006             | Subdivision             |
|                         | regulations             |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-04-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 2000                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | 2800                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-04-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 2780                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | 3000                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | north                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 2000                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-05-001             | Street                  |
|                         | name                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Equestrian              |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | Crimson                 |
|                         | Ridge                   |
|                         | Dr                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-05-002             | Vacate                  |
|                         | public                  |
|                         | utility                 |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | drainage                |
|                         | easement                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Lot                     |
|                         | 23,                     |
|                         | Pointe                  |
|                         | West                    |
|                         | Estates;                |
|                         | lot                     |
|                         | merger                  |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-05-003             | Vacate                  |
|                         | 1700                    |
|                         | S,                      |
|                         | between                 |
|                         | Black                   |
|                         | Ridge                   |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Hilton                  |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-05-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 3000                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Crimson                 |
|                         | Ridge                   |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-06-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | east                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Road                    |
|                         | at                      |
|                         | approximately           |
|                         | 3600                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-07-001             | Vacate                  |
|                         | easement,               |
|                         | lots                    |
|                         | 5                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 6,                      |
|                         | Blackberry              |
|                         | Court                   |
|                         | subdivision             |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-07-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | hillside                |
|                         | overlay                 |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-08-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | east                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Crimson                 |
|                         | Ridge                   |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 3000                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-08-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 10,                     |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 7B                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | lot                     |
|                         | size                    |
|                         | averaging               |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | R-1-8                   |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-08-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | Planned                 |
|                         | Development             |
|                         | Commercial              |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-08-004             | Vacate                  |
|                         | public                  |
|                         | utility                 |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | drainage                |
|                         | easement                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | lots                    |
|                         | 2A                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 2B,                     |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Bend                    |
|                         | Estates                 |
|                         | Plat                    |
|                         | B                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-09-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Twin                    |
|                         | Creeks                  |
|                         | @                       |
|                         | Stonebridge             |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 3                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-09-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Heights                 |
|                         | Plat                    |
|                         | "H"                     |
|                         | Subdivision             |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-09-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Jedora                  |
|                         | Estates                 |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 2                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-09-004             | Amend                   |
|                         | final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Dolce                   |
|                         | Vista                   |
|                         | @                       |
|                         | Sunbrook                |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 1                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-09-005             | Amend                   |
|                         | final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Bella                   |
|                         | Terrazza                |
|                         | 2                       |
|                         | at                      |
|                         | Sunbrook                |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-09-006             | Amend                   |
|                         | final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Bella                   |
|                         | Terrazza                |
|                         | 2                       |
|                         | at                      |
|                         | Sunbrook                |
|                         | Amended                 |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Extended                |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-10-001             | Vacate                  |
|                         | public                  |
|                         | utility                 |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | drainage                |
|                         | easement                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Commerce                |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Ventura                 |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-10-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Little                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 2                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-10-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Quitobaquito            |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 1                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-10-004             | Amend                   |
|                         | final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Meadow                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | Farm                    |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 2                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-10-005             | Amend                   |
|                         | final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Canyon                  |
|                         | Terrace                 |
|                         | Estates                 |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 4                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-11-001             | Relinquish              |
|                         | easement                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Stone                   |
|                         | Cliff                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-11-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Rim                     |
|                         | Rock                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-11-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | The                     |
|                         | Overlook                |
|                         | at                      |
|                         | Green                   |
|                         | Valley                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-11-004             | Relinquish              |
|                         | easement                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 3394                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | 2000                    |
|                         | S                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-11-005             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 2500                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | Mountain                |
|                         | Ledge                   |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-11-006             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Medical                 |
|                         | Center                  |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 600                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-11-007             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 1150                    |
|                         | W                       |
|                         | Blackberry              |
|                         | Ct                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-11-008             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Seegmiller              |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 3000                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-11-009             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 2160                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | North                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | Streets                 |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-11-010             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Sunset                  |
|                         | Plateau                 |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 3                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 1B                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-11-011             | Relinquish              |
|                         | easement                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Sunset                  |
|                         | Plateau                 |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 3                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 1B                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-12-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 214                     |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | Tabernacle              |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-12-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 200                     |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | 600                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2013-12-003             | Vacate                  |
|                         | public                  |
|                         | street,                 |
|                         | public                  |
|                         | utility                 |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | drainage                |
|                         | easements               |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | DSU                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-01-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Mesa                    |
|                         | Palms                   |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 5                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-01-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 2990                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | Little                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | Rd                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-01-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Sunbrook                |
|                         | Ranch                   |
|                         | Residential             |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Commercial              |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-01-004             | Amend                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 10,                     |
|                         | Section                 |
|                         | 18-3:A                  |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | C                       |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | fence                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | wall                    |
|                         | on                      |
|                         | corner                  |
|                         | lots                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-02-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | Section                 |
|                         | 10-10-5:K               |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | mixed                   |
|                         | use                     |
|                         | standards               |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | C-4                     |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-02-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Rd                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 1450                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Jiffy                  |
|                         | Lube)                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-02-003             | GP                      |
|                         | Amendment               |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 1151                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | Plantations             |
|                         | Dr                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-02-004             | Amend                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Bloomington             |
|                         | Ranches                 |
|                         | No.                     |
|                         | 5                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | No.                     |
|                         | 3                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-02-005             | Vacate                  |
|                         | easement                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 1450                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Rd                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-03-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | GP                      |
|                         | use                     |
|                         | map                     |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | near                    |
|                         | Mall                    |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Dr                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-03-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 3500                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 3000                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-04-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Artesia                 |
|                         | Terrace                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-04-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | Section                 |
|                         | 10-7B-2                 |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | chickens                |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | rabbits                 |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-04-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 650                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | 1000                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-04-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Crimson                 |
|                         | Ridge                   |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Little                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | Rd                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-05-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | GP                      |
|                         | use                     |
|                         | map                     |
|                         | -1850                   |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Rd                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-05-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | RiverHollow             |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 3                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 4                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-05-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | SunRiver                |
|                         | St.                     |
|                         | George                  |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 16                      |
|                         | Amended                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-06-001             | Vacate                  |
|                         | public                  |
|                         | utility                 |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | drainage                |
|                         | easement                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Blackberry              |
|                         | Court                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-06-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | Section                 |
|                         | 10-19-4:A.2             |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | college                 |
|                         | student                 |
|                         | parking                 |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-06-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | The                     |
|                         | Ledges                  |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-06-004             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD-C                    |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Stephen                 |
|                         | Wade                    |
|                         | Toyota                  |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-06-005             | Amend                   |
|                         | Bloomington             |
|                         | Knolls                  |
|                         | Townhomes               |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 2                       |
|                         | Amended                 |
|                         | No.                     |
|                         | 3                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-06-006             | Amend                   |
|                         | Bloomingthon            |
|                         | Hills                   |
|                         | No.                     |
|                         | 3                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-06-007             | Prohibiting             |
|                         | fireworks               |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | designated              |
|                         | areas                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | City                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-06-008             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 321                     |
|                         | W                       |
|                         | Tabernacle              |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-07-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | update                  |
|                         | impact                  |
|                         | fees                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-07-002             | Final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | amendment               |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Crown                   |
|                         | Point                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-07-003             | Final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | amendment               |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Boulevard               |
|                         | Centre                  |
|                         | Pad                     |
|                         | 'C'                     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-07-004             | Final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | amendment               |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Stone                   |
|                         | Cliff                   |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 8                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-07-005             | Final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | amendment               |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Meadow                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | Estates                 |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 3                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-07-006             | Final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | amendment               |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Southgate               |
|                         | Views                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-07-007             | Final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | amendment               |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Primrose                |
|                         | Pointe                  |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 3                       |
|                         | Amended                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-07-008             | Vacate                  |
|                         | sanitary                |
|                         | sewer                   |
|                         | easement                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 2000                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Rd                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-08-001             | Vacate                  |
|                         | portions                |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 3000                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | public                  |
|                         | utility                 |
|                         | easement                |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-09-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | between                 |
|                         | 2580                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 2780                    |
|                         | E,                      |
|                         | north                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 1300                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-10-001             | Vacate                  |
|                         | easement                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | lots                    |
|                         | 86-88,                  |
|                         | Mulberry                |
|                         | Estates                 |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-10-002             | Final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | amendment               |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | The                     |
|                         | Vistas                  |
|                         | @                       |
|                         | Entrada                 |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | I                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-10-003             | Final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | amendment               |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | The                     |
|                         | Flats                   |
|                         | @                       |
|                         | Southe                  |
|                         | Pointe                  |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 3                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-10-004             | Final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | amendment               |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Emerald                 |
|                         | Ridge                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-11-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 1850                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Rd                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-11-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | Sections                |
|                         | 10-8-8                  |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 10-19-4                 |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | off                     |
|                         | campus                  |
|                         | student                 |
|                         | housing                 |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-11-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 3,                      |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 2,                      |
|                         | Article                 |
|                         | F                       |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | ambulances              |
|                         | (3-2F)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-11-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 2100                    |
|                         | W                       |
|                         | 1860                    |
|                         | N                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-11-005             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Marigold                |
|                         | Way                     |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 1470                    |
|                         | W                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-11-006             | Final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | amendment               |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Temple                  |
|                         | Shadow                  |
|                         | Townhomes               |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 2,                      |
|                         | No.                     |
|                         | 2                       |
|                         | Amended                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-11-007             | Final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | amendment               |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Pelican                 |
|                         | Hills                   |
|                         | Condominiums            |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 2                       |
|                         | Amended                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-11-008             | Final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | amendment               |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Serenity                |
|                         | Hills                   |
|                         | 2nd                     |
|                         | Amended                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-11-009             | Adopt                   |
|                         | Ft.                     |
|                         | Pierce                  |
|                         | CDA                     |
|                         | #2                      |
|                         | Plan                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-11-010             | Amend                   |
|                         | City                    |
|                         | Section                 |
|                         | 11-5-4:C3               |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | subdivision             |
|                         | regulations             |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-12-001             | Create                  |
|                         | Airport                 |
|                         | Advisory                |
|                         | Board                   |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2020-02-007)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-12-002             | Temporary               |
|                         | land                    |
|                         | use                     |
|                         | regulation              |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | off                     |
|                         | premises                |
|                         | signs                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2014-12-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | GP                      |
|                         | land                    |
|                         | use                     |
|                         | map                     |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | extension               |
|                         | Ft.                     |
|                         | Pierce                  |
|                         | Industrial              |
|                         | Park                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-01-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD-C                    |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 184                     |
|                         | W                       |
|                         | 1600                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-01-002             | GP                      |
|                         | Amendment               |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Mall                    |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 3000                    |
|                         | E                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-01-003             | Vacate                  |
|                         | a                       |
|                         | portion                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Marigold                |
|                         | Way                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-02-001             | GP                      |
|                         | Amendment               |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 3000                    |
|                         | East/Virgin             |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         |                         |
|                         | fronting                |
|                         | on                      |
|                         | Mall                    |
|                         | Drive                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-02-002             | GP                      |
|                         | Amendment               |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 3100                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | Bloomington             |
|                         | Dr                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-02-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 3900                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Bentley                 |
|                         | Rd                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-03-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Mall                    |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 3000                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | (Lin's)                 |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-03-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 1650                    |
|                         | N                       |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | Downs                   |
|                         | Rd                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-03-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Tonaquint               |
|                         | Commercial              |
|                         | Center                  |
|                         | 1108                    |
|                         | W                       |
|                         | 1660                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-03-004             | Amend                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 10,                     |
|                         | Section                 |
|                         | 10-8-6                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | outside                 |
|                         | storage                 |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | a                       |
|                         | PD-C                    |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-03-005             | Amend                   |
|                         | zoning                  |
|                         | map                     |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | SunRiver                |
|                         | Master                  |
|                         | Plan                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-03-006             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | between                 |
|                         | 2200                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 2450                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-03-007             | Vacate                  |
|                         | a                       |
|                         | portion                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 1100                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-03-007-A           | Corrected               |
|                         | 2015-03-007             |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-04-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 9,                      |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 14,                     |
|                         | Section                 |
|                         | 6                       |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | illicit                 |
|                         | discharges              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-04-002             | Vacate                  |
|                         | a                       |
|                         | portion                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 1200                    |
|                         | North                   |
|                         | St                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-04-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 1792                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | Black                   |
|                         | Ridge                   |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-04-004             | Vacate                  |
|                         | public                  |
|                         | utilities               |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | drainage                |
|                         | easement                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Ledges                  |
|                         | lots                    |
|                         | 533                     |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 802                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-04-005             | Vacate                  |
|                         | public                  |
|                         | utilities               |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | drainage                |
|                         | easement                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Castle                  |
|                         | Rock                    |
|                         | lots                    |
|                         | 154                     |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 155                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-04-006             | Vacate                  |
|                         | Hilltop                 |
|                         | at                      |
|                         | Sunset                  |
|                         |                         |
|                         | subdivision             |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-05-001             | GP                      |
|                         | Amendment               |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 415                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | Dr                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-05-002             | GP                      |
|                         | Amendment               |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | Power                   |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 3025                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Road                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-05-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Virgin                  |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-05-004             | GP                      |
|                         | Amendment               |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | North                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 1580                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Road                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-05-005             | Vacate                  |
|                         | a                       |
|                         | portion                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 200                     |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | Street                  |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-05-006             | Vacate                  |
|                         | a                       |
|                         | portion                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | maintenance             |
|                         | easement                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Sundown                 |
|                         | Estates                 |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-05-007             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Mall                    |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Smith's                |
|                         | Marketplace)            |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-05-008             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Crimson                 |
|                         | Ridge                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 3000                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-06-001             | Vacate                  |
|                         | Tonaquint               |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | between                 |
|                         | Black                   |
|                         | Ridge                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Indian                  |
|                         | Hills                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-06-002             | GP                      |
|                         | Amendment               |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Northeast               |
|                         | corner                  |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Brigham                 |
|                         | Rd                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Desert                  |
|                         | Hills                   |
|                         | Dr                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-06-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | zoning                  |
|                         | map                     |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Desert                  |
|                         | Canyons                 |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Southern                |
|                         | Parkway                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-06-004             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD-C                    |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 300                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | I15                     |
|                         | (Sprinkler              |
|                         | Supply)                 |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-06-005             | Vacate                  |
|                         | public                  |
|                         | utility                 |
|                         | easement                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Trebruk                 |
|                         | Estates                 |
|                         | Lot                     |
|                         | 1                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-06-006             | Vacate                  |
|                         | easement                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Aspen                   |
|                         | Estates                 |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-06-007             | Vacate                  |
|                         | easement                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Las                     |
|                         | Colinas                 |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Riverstone              |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-06-008             | Prohibiting             |
|                         | fireworks               |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | certain                 |
|                         | areas                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-07-001             | Municipal               |
|                         | boundary                |
|                         | line                    |
|                         | adjustment              |
|                         | w/Santa                 |
|                         | Clara                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-07-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Estancia                |
|                         | Condominiums            |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-07-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Horsemans               |
|                         | Park                    |
|                         | between                 |
|                         | Little                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | Rd                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 2350                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-07-004             | Amend                   |
|                         | City                    |
|                         | code                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | possession              |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | discharge               |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | firearms                |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | City                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-08-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | general                 |
|                         | plan                    |
|                         | use                     |
|                         | map                     |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 300                     |
|                         | N                       |
|                         | 500                     |
|                         | W                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-08-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 415                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-08-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 1450                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Rd                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-08-004             | Third                   |
|                         | amendment               |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | Atkinville              |
|                         | Master                  |
|                         | Plan                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-08-005             | Amend                   |
|                         | general                 |
|                         | plan                    |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | land                    |
|                         | use                     |
|                         | map                     |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | medium                  |
|                         | high                    |
|                         | residential             |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-08-006             | VOID                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | item                    |
|                         | was                     |
|                         | tabled                  |
|                         | (Not                    |
|                         | adopted)                |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-08-007             | Repeal                  |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 4,                      |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 3                       |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | inspection              |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | cleaning                |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-08-008             | Amend                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 1,                      |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 12A,                    |
|                         | Section                 |
|                         | 16                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | authority               |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | inspect                 |
|                         | (1-12A)                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-08-009             | Amend                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 4,                      |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 4                       |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | curbside                |
|                         | recycling               |
|                         | (4-4)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-08-010             | Vacate                  |
|                         | a                       |
|                         | portion                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Canyon                  |
|                         | View                    |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-09-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 9,                      |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 13                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | off                     |
|                         | premises                |
|                         | signs                   |
|                         | (9-13)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-09-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | lots                    |
|                         | 8,                      |
|                         | 11                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 12                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Quail                   |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | Estates                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-09-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 7,                      |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 1,                      |
|                         | Section                 |
|                         | 8                       |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | repeal                  |
|                         | language                |
|                         | "reserved"              |
|                         | (7-1)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-09-004             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD-C                    |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 95                      |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | 200                     |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-09-005             | Amend                   |
|                         | lots                    |
|                         | 122                     |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 123                     |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | The                     |
|                         | Estates                 |
|                         | at                      |
|                         | Valderra                |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-09-006             | Vacate                  |
|                         | a                       |
|                         | portion                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | roadway                 |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 3000                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | 1450                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-09-007             | Enacting                |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 8,                      |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 7                       |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | SunTran                 |
|                         | services                |
|                         | (8-7)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-09-008             | GP                      |
|                         | Amendment               |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 1280                    |
|                         | W                       |
|                         | 4700                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (SITLA)                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-10-001             | Vacate                  |
|                         | easement                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 170                     |
|                         | N                       |
|                         | 400                     |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-10-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 10,                     |
|                         | Section                 |
|                         | 10-14-22.3              |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 10-8-5(D)(1)            |
|                         | (d)                     |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-10-003             | Enact                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 3,                      |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 10                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Special                 |
|                         | events                  |
|                         | (3-10)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-11-001             | Annex                   |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Brookfield              |
|                         | Addition                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | HETTSA                  |
|                         | Group                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-11-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | zoning                  |
|                         | map                     |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Black                   |
|                         | Ridge                   |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Bluff                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-11-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 2000                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-11-004             | GP                      |
|                         | Amendment               |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Bloomington             |
|                         | Golf                    |
|                         | Course,                 |
|                         | Country                 |
|                         | Club,                   |
|                         | etc                     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-11-005             | Vacate                  |
|                         | a                       |
|                         | portion                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 200                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | near                    |
|                         | elementary              |
|                         | school                  |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-11-005-A           | Corrected               |
|                         | 2015-11-005             |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-11-006             | Amend                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | enact                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 9,                      |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 14                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Stormwater              |
|                         | Mgmt                    |
|                         | (9-14)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-12-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | Manufacturing           |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Baron                   |
|                         | Commercial              |
|                         | Center                  |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-12-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD-C                    |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | IHC                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-12-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 700                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | 1100                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-12-004             | Vacate                  |
|                         | a                       |
|                         | portion                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | trail                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | recreation              |
|                         | easement                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Dino                    |
|                         | Crossing                |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-12-005             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD-R                    |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Magnolia                |
|                         | Hills                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-12-006             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Vintage                 |
|                         | at                      |
|                         | Tabernacle              |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-12-007             | Amend                   |
|                         | final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Virgin                  |
|                         | Rio                     |
|                         | RV                      |
|                         | Park                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-12-008             | Power                   |
|                         | easement                |
|                         | vacation                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 1790                    |
|                         | W                       |
|                         | 970                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-12-009             | Vacate                  |
|                         | utility                 |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | drainage                |
|                         | easement                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 1050                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-12-010             | Amend                   |
|                         | Hidden                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | Master                  |
|                         | Plan                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-12-011             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 750                     |
|                         | N                       |
|                         | between                 |
|                         | 1275                    |
|                         | W                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Picturesque             |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-12-012             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | The                     |
|                         | Ledges                  |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-12-013             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 3500                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | 3400                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-12-014             | Amend                   |
|                         | GP                      |
|                         | land                    |
|                         | use                     |
|                         | map                     |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Ridge                   |
|                         | Top                     |
|                         | Complex                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2015-12-015             | Amend                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 10,                     |
|                         | 10-2-1,                 |
|                         | 10-7A-4,                |
|                         | 10-7A-6,                |
|                         | 10-7B-4,                |
|                         | 10-7B-6,                |
|                         | 10-7C-4,                |
|                         | 10-7C-7,                |
|                         | 10-7D-5,                |
|                         | 10-7D-7                 |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 10-17                   |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-01-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Deserts                 |
|                         | Edge                    |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 1                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-01-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Boulder                 |
|                         | Creek                   |
|                         | Commons                 |
|                         | North                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-01-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 1                       |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 7;                      |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 1                       |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 10A;                    |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 8                       |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 3                       |
|                         | (1-7,                   |
|                         | 1-7C,                   |
|                         | 1-10A,                  |
|                         | 6-2A,                   |
|                         | 8-3)                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-01-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 1060                    |
|                         | West                    |
|                         | Shady                   |
|                         | Springs                 |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-01-005             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 3580                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         |                         |
|                         | 3000                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-01-006             | Vacate                  |
|                         | easement                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | lot                     |
|                         | 48                      |
|                         | Oakwood                 |
|                         | Estates                 |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 2                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-01-007             | Amend                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 3,                      |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 2,                      |
|                         | Article                 |
|                         | P                       |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Motels                  |
|                         | (3-2P)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-02-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | south                   |
|                         | side                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Colorado                |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-02-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | Gordon                  |
|                         | Palmer/Southgate        |
|                         | area                    |
|                         | PD                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-02-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | GP                      |
|                         | Tonaquint               |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Curly                   |
|                         | Hollow                  |
|                         | Drive                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-02-004             | Amend                   |
|                         | GP                      |
|                         | Pioneer                 |
|                         | Road                    |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Sugar                   |
|                         | Leo                     |
|                         | Road                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-02-005             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Desert                  |
|                         | Canyons                 |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-02-006             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Arbors                  |
|                         | 3                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-02-007             | Amend                   |
|                         | GP                      |
|                         | 1450                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 3000                    |
|                         | East                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-02-008             | Amend                   |
|                         | GP                      |
|                         | 1450                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Road                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-02-009             | 4th                     |
|                         | amendment               |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | Atkinville              |
|                         | Master                  |
|                         | Plan                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-03-001             | Adopt                   |
|                         | Central                 |
|                         | Business                |
|                         | District                |
|                         | CDA                     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-03-002             | Adopt                   |
|                         | Millcreek               |
|                         | CDA                     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-03-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 3025                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Road                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-03-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 450                     |
|                         | North                   |
|                         | between                 |
|                         | 2480                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 2720                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-03-005             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Brigham                 |
|                         | Road                    |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Desert                  |
|                         | Hills                   |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-03-006             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD-C                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Road                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 1450                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | Street                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-03-007             | Easement                |
|                         | vacation                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | SIMLEW,                 |
|                         | LC,                     |
|                         | at                      |
|                         | approximatley           |
|                         | 2050                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-04-001             | Easement                |
|                         | vacation                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | lot                     |
|                         | 51                      |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Canyon                  |
|                         | View                    |
|                         | Ridge,                  |
|                         | lot                     |
|                         | 62                      |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Santa                   |
|                         | Maria                   |
|                         | at                      |
|                         | Sunbrook                |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 1                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-04-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | east                    |
|                         | side                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Pioneer                 |
|                         | Road                    |
|                         | at                      |
|                         | Sugar                   |
|                         | Leo                     |
|                         | Road                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-05-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Stone                   |
|                         | Cliff                   |
|                         | Subdivision             |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 13                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-05-002             | Master                  |
|                         | Sign                    |
|                         | Plan                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Boulder                 |
|                         | Creek                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-05-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD-C                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Boulder                 |
|                         | Creek                   |
|                         | Crossing,               |
|                         | Lot                     |
|                         | 1                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-05-004             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD-C                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Boulder                 |
|                         | Creek                   |
|                         | Crossing,               |
|                         | Lot                     |
|                         | 6                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-05-005             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Seegmiller              |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 3000                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-05-006             | Vacate                  |
|                         | a                       |
|                         | portion                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 250                     |
|                         | North                   |
|                         | between                 |
|                         | Main                    |
|                         | Street                  |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 100                     |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-05-007             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD-R                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Inn                     |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Entrada                 |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Shinava                 |
|                         | Ridge                   |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Short                   |
|                         | Term                    |
|                         | Rentals                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-05-008             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Bloomington             |
|                         | Country                 |
|                         | Club                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-05-009             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Bloomington             |
|                         | Country                 |
|                         | Club                    |
|                         | PD-R,                   |
|                         | Resort                  |
|                         | Overlay                 |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-05-010             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | The                     |
|                         | Arbors                  |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 5                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-05-011             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | The                     |
|                         | Arbors                  |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 4                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-05-012             | Amend                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 10,                     |
|                         | add                     |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 8B                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | PD-TNZ                  |
|                         | (Planned                |
|                         | Dev                     |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Traditional             |
|                         | Neighborhood            |
|                         | Zone)                   |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-05-013             | Vacate                  |
|                         | sewer                   |
|                         | line                    |
|                         | easement                |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | deed                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | dedication              |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Reserve                 |
|                         | @                       |
|                         | Sand                    |
|                         | Hollow                  |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-05-014             | Repeal,                 |
|                         | amend                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | enact                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 7,                      |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 3                       |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Public                  |
|                         | Parks                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-06-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 476                     |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-06-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD-C                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Pine                    |
|                         | View                    |
|                         | Plaza                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-06-003             | Prohibiting             |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | ignition,               |
|                         | detonation              |
|                         | or                      |
|                         | use                     |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | fireworks               |
|                         | or                      |
|                         | other                   |
|                         | ignitions               |
|                         | sources                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-07-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Southwest               |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Seegmiller              |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Little                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | Road                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-07-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 3,                      |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 2,                      |
|                         | Article                 |
|                         | O                       |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Taxicab                 |
|                         | Services                |
|                         | (3-2O)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-07-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Kenworth                |
|                         | Site                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-07-004             | Vacate                  |
|                         | a                       |
|                         | portion                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 250                     |
|                         | North                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-07-005             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Red                     |
|                         | Hills                   |
|                         | Pkwy                    |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 1900                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | Street                  |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-08-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | GP                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Road                    |
|                         | at                      |
|                         | 3100                    |
|                         | South                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-08-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | GP                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 2450                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | Virgin                  |
|                         | River                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-08-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | GP                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 550                     |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 6540                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Drive                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-08-004             | Public                  |
|                         | roadway                 |
|                         | name                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Gentry                  |
|                         | Court                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-08-005             | Public                  |
|                         | roadway                 |
|                         | name                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Gentry                  |
|                         | Court                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-08-006             | Amend                   |
|                         | final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Meadow                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | Farms                   |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 4                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 7                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-08-007             | Amend                   |
|                         | final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Coyote                  |
|                         | Springs                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-09-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | GP                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Ventana                 |
|                         | Ridge                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-09-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | MP                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Desert                  |
|                         | Hills                   |
|                         | Town                    |
|                         | Homes                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-09-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | Entrada                 |
|                         | At                      |
|                         | Snow                    |
|                         | Canyon                  |
|                         | Chaco                   |
|                         | West                    |
|                         | Phases                  |
|                         | 3                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 3A                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-09-004             | Easement                |
|                         | vacation                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Pine                    |
|                         | View                    |
|                         | Plaza                   |
|                         | Commercial              |
|                         | Center                  |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-09-005             | Easement                |
|                         | vacation/lot            |
|                         | merger                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Bloomington             |
|                         | Hills                   |
|                         | No.                     |
|                         | 2                       |
|                         | Subdivision             |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-09-006             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | Regional                |
|                         | Medical                 |
|                         | Center                  |
|                         | Expansion               |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Parking                 |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-09-007             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Sage                    |
|                         | Meadows                 |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 4                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-09-008             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Walk                    |
|                         | Village                 |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-09-009             | SunRiver                |
|                         | Commons                 |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | PD-R                    |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | PD-C                    |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | hotel                   |
|                         | site                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-10-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD-C                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Dinosaur                |
|                         | Crossing,               |
|                         | Pads                    |
|                         | B,                      |
|                         | D                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | K                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-10-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | final                   |
|                         | plat/lot                |
|                         | merger                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | The                     |
|                         | Ledges                  |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | St.                     |
|                         | George                  |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 10                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-10-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | final                   |
|                         | plat/adjust             |
|                         | lot                     |
|                         | line                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Meadow                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | Farms                   |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 2                       |
|                         |                         |
|                         | Amd                     |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 7                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-10-004             | Vacate                  |
|                         | a                       |
|                         | portion                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 2150                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | between                 |
|                         | Horsemans               |
|                         | Park                    |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Crimson                 |
|                         | Ridge                   |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-10-005             | Vacate                  |
|                         | a                       |
|                         | portion                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 1000                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | between                 |
|                         | 600                     |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 700                     |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | Streets                 |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-10-006             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 2780                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | approximately           |
|                         | 900                     |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-10-007             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 415                     |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-10-008             | Amend                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 3                       |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 3                       |
|                         | pertaining              |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | alcohol                 |
|                         | manufacturing           |
|                         | licenses                |
|                         | (3-3)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-11-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | GP                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 1900                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Side                    |
|                         | Dr                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-11-002             | Vacate                  |
|                         | public                  |
|                         | roadway                 |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Desert                  |
|                         | Edge                    |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | at                      |
|                         | approx                  |
|                         | 3380                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | from                    |
|                         | 6100                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | 6270                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-11-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 10                      |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 10                      |
|                         |                         |
|                         | Section                 |
|                         | 5                       |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | add                     |
|                         | Astragalus              |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | list                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | streets                 |
|                         | designated              |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | auto                    |
|                         | sales                   |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-11-004             | Amend                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 9                       |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 9                       |
|                         | Section                 |
|                         | 1                       |
|                         | adopting                |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | International           |
|                         | Fire                    |
|                         | Code,                   |
|                         | 2015                    |
|                         | edition                 |
|                         | (9-9)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-11-005             | Repeal                  |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | replace                 |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 8,                      |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 4                       |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Pretreatment            |
|                         | ordinance               |
|                         | (3-2S,                  |
|                         | 7-1,                    |
|                         | 8-4)                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-11-006             | Amend                   |
|                         | DRMC                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | IHC                     |
|                         | PD-C                    |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Cancer                  |
|                         | Center                  |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-11-007             | Amend                   |
|                         | final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | vacate                  |
|                         | public                  |
|                         | utility                 |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | drainage                |
|                         | easement                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Estates                 |
|                         | at                      |
|                         | Valderra                |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-11-008             | Vacate                  |
|                         | easement                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | golf                    |
|                         | course                  |
|                         | adjacent                |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | Bloomington             |
|                         | Country                 |
|                         | Club                    |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 1                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-12-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | SR-18                   |
|                         | at                      |
|                         | approximately           |
|                         | 4300                    |
|                         | North                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-12-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Castle                  |
|                         | Rock                    |
|                         | Subdivision             |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 2                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-12-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | Ridge                   |
|                         | Subdivision             |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 1                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-12-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Greyhawk                |
|                         | Apartments              |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-12-005             | Amend                   |
|                         | Master                  |
|                         | Plan                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Fossil                  |
|                         | Hills                   |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | add                     |
|                         | a                       |
|                         | 96-unit                 |
|                         | townhome                |
|                         | project                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-12-006             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Ancestor                |
|                         | Village                 |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-12-007             | Amend                   |
|                         | final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | St.                     |
|                         | James                   |
|                         | Place                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2016-12-008             | Amend                   |
|                         | final                   |
|                         | plat                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Bloomington             |
|                         | Country                 |
|                         | Club                    |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 8                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-01-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD-C                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | southwest               |
|                         | corner                  |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 3000                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Mall                    |
|                         | Dr                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-01-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Maple                   |
|                         | Mountain                |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Marietta                |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-01-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | GP                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | adopting                |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | Active                  |
|                         | Transportation          |
|                         | Plan                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-01-004             | Gubler                  |
|                         | West                    |
|                         | Annexation              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-01-004             | Amend                   |
|                         | Fort                    |
|                         | Pierce                  |
|                         | Industrial              |
|                         | Park                    |
|                         | plat                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-02-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 10,                     |
|                         | Ch                      |
|                         | 19                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | expand                  |
|                         | student                 |
|                         | pedestrian              |
|                         | area                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 679                     |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 695                     |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | Tabernacle              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-02-002             | Vacate                  |
|                         | irrigation              |
|                         | line                    |
|                         | easements               |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Brookfield              |
|                         | Estates                 |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 3                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-02-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Dinosaur                |
|                         | Crossing                |
|                         | West                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-02-004             | Vacate                  |
|                         | portion                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | roadway                 |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | waterline               |
|                         | easement                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Hidden                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 9                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-03-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Riverfront              |
|                         | Medical                 |
|                         | Center                  |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-03-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | The                     |
|                         | Fields                  |
|                         | at                      |
|                         | Mall                    |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 2                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-03-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 8,                      |
|                         | Ch.                     |
|                         | 7,                      |
|                         | Section                 |
|                         | 2                       |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Paratransit             |
|                         | Eligibility             |
|                         | Appeal                  |
|                         | Board                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-03-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Champion                |
|                         | Gymnastics              |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-03-005             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 82                      |
|                         | W                       |
|                         | 700                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-03-006             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD-AP                   |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Taylor                  |
|                         | Andrews                 |
|                         | Hair                    |
|                         | Academy                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-03-007             | Amend                   |
|                         | GP                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 600                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | 1000                    |
|                         | E                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-03-008             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 600                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | 1000                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-03-009             | Vacate                  |
|                         | drainage,               |
|                         | irrigation,             |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | utility                 |
|                         | easement                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 1670                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Crosby                  |
|                         | Way                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-03-010             | Vacate                  |
|                         | public                  |
|                         | utilities               |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | drainage                |
|                         | easement,               |
|                         | adj                     |
|                         | lot                     |
|                         | line                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 2566                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | 1480                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-04-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 1,                      |
|                         | Ch                      |
|                         | 10,                     |
|                         | Article                 |
|                         | B,                      |
|                         | Section                 |
|                         | 4,                      |
|                         | Subsection              |
|                         | A,                      |
|                         | Bidding                 |
|                         | Procedures              |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2018-04-004)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-04-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | enact                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 3,                      |
|                         | Ch                      |
|                         | 2,                      |
|                         | Section                 |
|                         | 2,                      |
|                         | 3.A.,                   |
|                         | 4.B.,                   |
|                         | 5.B.,                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 6.F.12,                 |
|                         | Sexually                |
|                         | Oriented                |
|                         | Businesses;             |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 5                       |
|                         | Ch                      |
|                         | 3,                      |
|                         | Section                 |
|                         | 6,                      |
|                         | Crimes                  |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Offenses;               |
|                         | Public                  |
|                         | Safety;                 |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 7,                      |
|                         | Ch                      |
|                         | 3,                      |
|                         | Section                 |
|                         | 1,                      |
|                         | 2,                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 3,                      |
|                         | Public                  |
|                         | Parks                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Public                  |
|                         | Squares                 |
|                         | (3-8,                   |
|                         | 3-10,                   |
|                         | 5-3,                    |
|                         | 7-3)                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-04-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | Bloomington             |
|                         | Country                 |
|                         | Club                    |
|                         | No.                     |
|                         | 2                       |
|                         | Subdivision             |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-04-004             | Amend                   |
|                         | Tamarack                |
|                         | Ridge                   |
|                         | Estates                 |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | No.                     |
|                         | 4                       |
|                         | Amended                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-04-005             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD-C                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Riverwoods              |
|                         | Business                |
|                         | Park                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-04-006             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 2252                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | 2800                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-04-007             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 862                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | 100                     |
|                         | W                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 700                     |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | at                      |
|                         | approx                  |
|                         | 150                     |
|                         | W                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-04-008             | Amend                   |
|                         | The                     |
|                         | Springs                 |
|                         | Estates                 |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 8                       |
|                         | Subdivision             |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-05-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | GP                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 3150                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | I-15                    |
|                         | Freeway                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-05-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | west                    |
|                         | side                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 120                     |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | between                 |
|                         | 2690                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Brigham                 |
|                         | Rd                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-05-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 1400                    |
|                         | W                       |
|                         | Curly                   |
|                         | Hollow                  |
|                         | Dr                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-05-004             | Amend                   |
|                         | Red                     |
|                         | Cliffs                  |
|                         | Park                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 3                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-05-005             | Amend                   |
|                         | Meadow                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | Estates                 |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 3,                      |
|                         | Lot                     |
|                         | 115                     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-05-006             | Amend                   |
|                         | Meadow                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | Estates                 |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 3,                      |
|                         | Lot                     |
|                         | 115                     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-05-007             | Amend                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 8,                      |
|                         | Ch.                     |
|                         | 7,                      |
|                         | Section                 |
|                         | 2                       |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Paratransit             |
|                         | Eligibility             |
|                         | Appeal                  |
|                         | Board                   |
|                         | (8-7)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-05-008             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 3800                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | Bentley                 |
|                         | Road                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-05-009             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD-C                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 166                     |
|                         | West                    |
|                         | 1700                    |
|                         | South                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-05-010             | Amend                   |
|                         | Stone                   |
|                         | Cliff                   |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 10                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-05-011             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 3800                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | Bentley                 |
|                         | Road                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-06-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | GP                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | New                     |
|                         | zoning                  |
|                         | district                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Industrial              |
|                         | (IND)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-06-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 10,                     |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 11                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Manufacturing           |
|                         | Zones                   |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-06-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 10,                     |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 19,                     |
|                         | Section                 |
|                         | 1                       |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Off                     |
|                         | Street                  |
|                         | Parking                 |
|                         | Required                |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Section                 |
|                         | 5                       |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Nonresidential          |
|                         | Area                    |
|                         | Requirements            |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-06-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 605                     |
|                         | Place                   |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Student                 |
|                         | Housing                 |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-06-005             | Amend                   |
|                         | GP                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Desert                  |
|                         | Color                   |
|                         | Community               |
|                         | Area                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-06-006             | Amend                   |
|                         | Stone                   |
|                         | Cliff                   |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 14                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-06-006-C           | Amend                   |
|                         | Stone                   |
|                         | Cliff                   |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 14                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-06-007             | Amend                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 1,                      |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 10,                     |
|                         | Article                 |
|                         | C                       |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Returned                |
|                         | Checks                  |
|                         | (1-10C)                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-06-008             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD-C                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Lot                     |
|                         | 10                      |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | 3D                      |
|                         | Commercial              |
|                         | Subdivision             |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-06-009             | Prohibiting             |
|                         | fireworks               |
|                         | or                      |
|                         | other                   |
|                         | ignition                |
|                         | sources                 |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | designated              |
|                         | areas                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-06-010             | Amending                |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | adopting                |
|                         | certain                 |
|                         | fees                    |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | various                 |
|                         | services                |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | recreational            |
|                         | activities              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-06-011             | Amend                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 7,                      |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 4,                      |
|                         | Sections                |
|                         | 2                       |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 12                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Shade                   |
|                         | Tree                    |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Beautification          |
|                         | Board,                  |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | City                    |
|                         | Forester,               |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | other                   |
|                         | provisions              |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | amend                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 10,                     |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 25,                     |
|                         | Section                 |
|                         | 3.E                     |
|                         | (7-4)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-07-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Fieldstone              |
|                         | Phases                  |
|                         | 5                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 6                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-07-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD-C                    |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Sun                     |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Commons                 |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 2                       |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Terrible                |
|                         | Herbst                  |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-07-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Elmwood                 |
|                         | Estates                 |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 5                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-07-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | The                     |
|                         | Arbors                  |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 6                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-07-005             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 528                     |
|                         | W                       |
|                         | 300                     |
|                         | N;                      |
|                         | 305                     |
|                         | N                       |
|                         | 500                     |
|                         | W;                      |
|                         | 317                     |
|                         | N                       |
|                         | 500                     |
|                         | W                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-07-006             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD-C                    |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Boulder                 |
|                         | Creek                   |
|                         | Crossing                |
|                         | Lot                     |
|                         | 9                       |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | First                   |
|                         | Colony                  |
|                         | Mortgage                |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-08-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD-C                    |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | The                     |
|                         | Fields                  |
|                         | at                      |
|                         | Mall                    |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | Lot                     |
|                         | 3                       |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Dental                  |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-08-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | GP                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Fossil                  |
|                         | Hills                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-08-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | GP                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Fifty                   |
|                         | 50                      |
|                         | Development             |
|                         | Inc                     |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Pioneer                 |
|                         | Road                    |
|                         | Property                |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-08-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | Change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Marine                  |
|                         | United                  |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-08-005             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD-C                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Boulder                 |
|                         | Creek                   |
|                         | Crossing                |
|                         | Subdivision             |
|                         | Lot                     |
|                         | 7                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-08-006             | Amend                   |
|                         | Lot                     |
|                         | 25,                     |
|                         | Rivers                  |
|                         | Edge                    |
|                         | at                      |
|                         | Sunbrook                |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-08-007             | Amend                   |
|                         | Lot                     |
|                         | 1                       |
|                         | Bloom.                  |
|                         | Cntry.                  |
|                         | Club                    |
|                         | No                      |
|                         | 10                      |
|                         | Sub.                    |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | lot                     |
|                         | 34                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 35                      |
|                         | Bloom.                  |
|                         | Cntry.                  |
|                         | Club                    |
|                         | No.                     |
|                         | 11                      |
|                         | Sub.                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-08-008             | Amend                   |
|                         | Lot                     |
|                         | 74                      |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 75                      |
|                         | The                     |
|                         | Knolls                  |
|                         | at                      |
|                         | Little                  |
|                         | Valley                  |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 2                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-09-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 314                     |
|                         | N                       |
|                         | 3050                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-09-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD-C                    |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Dinosaur                |
|                         | Crossing                |
|                         | Commercial              |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-09-003             | Vacate                  |
|                         | roadway                 |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | portions                |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Middleton               |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-09-004             | Temporary               |
|                         | land                    |
|                         | use                     |
|                         | regulations             |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | storage                 |
|                         | rental                  |
|                         | units                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-09-005             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Church                  |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Christ                  |
|                         | 1330                    |
|                         | W                       |
|                         | 750                     |
|                         | N                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-09-006             | Amend                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 10,                     |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 7F                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Residential             |
|                         | Central                 |
|                         | City                    |
|                         | Zone                    |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Development             |
|                         | Standards               |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-09-007             | Vacate                  |
|                         | roadway                 |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | portion                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 500                     |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-09-008             | Setting                 |
|                         | fees                    |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | City                    |
|                         | cemeteries              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-09-009             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | The                     |
|                         | Ledges                  |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-10-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 10,                     |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 8,                      |
|                         | Section                 |
|                         | 5                       |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | PD                      |
|                         | Zone                    |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | setbacks                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | side                    |
|                         | yard                    |
|                         | setbacks                |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-10-002             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD-C                    |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Dinosaur                |
|                         | Crossing                |
|                         | Commercial              |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-10-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD-C                    |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Target                  |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-10-004             | Amend                   |
|                         | Final                   |
|                         | Plat                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Lot                     |
|                         | 30,                     |
|                         | The                     |
|                         | Arbors                  |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 4                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Lot                     |
|                         | 34,                     |
|                         | The                     |
|                         | Arbors                  |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 4                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-10-005             | Amend                   |
|                         | Final                   |
|                         | Plat                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Lots                    |
|                         | 1                       |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 2,                      |
|                         | The                     |
|                         | Villas                  |
|                         | at                      |
|                         | Valderra                |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 1                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-11-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Astragalus              |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | next                    |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | Southern                |
|                         | Pkwy                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-11-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 772                     |
|                         | N                       |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-11-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Bloomington             |
|                         | Country                 |
|                         | Club                    |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 12                      |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-11-004             | Amend                   |
|                         | GP                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Red                     |
|                         | Hills                   |
|                         | Pkwy                    |
|                         | between                 |
|                         | Twin                    |
|                         | Lakes                   |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 1700                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | Street                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-11-005             | Amend                   |
|                         | GP                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Southern                |
|                         | Hills                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-11-006             | Amend                   |
|                         | GP                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | West                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Lin's                   |
|                         | Marketplace             |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-11-007             | Vacate                  |
|                         | utility                 |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | drainage                |
|                         | easement,               |
|                         | vacate                  |
|                         | portion                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | sewer                   |
|                         | line                    |
|                         | easement                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 2780                    |
|                         | E                       |
|                         | 1140                    |
|                         | S                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-12-001             | Amend                   |
|                         | PD-R                    |
|                         | zone                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Desert                  |
|                         | Bluff                   |
|                         | at                      |
|                         | Desert                  |
|                         | Canyons                 |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-12-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | Side                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | I-15                    |
|                         | Freeway,                |
|                         | north                   |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | substation              |
|                         | (SG-6-3-12-2210         |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | SG-6-3-12-2220)         |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-12-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Redhawk                 |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | Bach                    |
|                         | Homes                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-12-004             | Amend                   |
|                         | Lot                     |
|                         | 4,                      |
|                         | St                      |
|                         | James                   |
|                         | Place                   |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 2                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2017-12-005             | Amend                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | enact                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 5,                      |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 4,                      |
|                         | Firearms,               |
|                         | Weapons,                |
|                         | Trapping                |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Animals                 |
|                         | (5-4)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2018-01-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 1400                    |
|                         | West                    |
|                         | 3560                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2018-01-002             | PD-C                    |
|                         | amendment               |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Atkinville              |
|                         | Master                  |
|                         | Plan                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2018-01-003             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 3143                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | 840                     |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2018-01-004             | Amend                   |
|                         | GP                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 2710                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | Crimson                 |
|                         | Ridge                   |
|                         | Drive                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2018-01-005             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 2710                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | Crimson                 |
|                         | Ridge                   |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2018-01-006             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 2710                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | Crimson                 |
|                         | Ridge                   |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2018-01-007             | Vacate                  |
|                         | easement                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Hilton                  |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | roundabout              |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2018-01-008             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 1100                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2018-01-009             | PD-C                    |
|                         | amendment               |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Astragalus              |
|                         | Road                    |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | Southern                |
|                         | Corridor                |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2018-01-010             | PD-C                    |
|                         | amendment               |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Riverwood               |
|                         | Mills                   |
|                         | Commercial              |
|                         | Subdivision             |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2018-02-001             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 2050                    |
|                         | East                    |
|                         | Riverside               |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2018-02-002             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 2450                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | Street                  |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Road                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2018-02-003             | Amend                   |
|                         | GP                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Desert                  |
|                         | Color                   |
|                         | Amendment               |
|                         | 1                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2018-02-004             | Amend                   |
|                         | GP                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Canyon                  |
|                         | View                    |
|                         | Drive                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2018-02-005             | Vacate                  |
|                         | a                       |
|                         | portion                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | 1470                    |
|                         | Street;                 |
|                         | between                 |
|                         | Black                   |
|                         | Ridge                   |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Hilton                  |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2018-02-006             | Temporary               |
|                         | signage                 |
|                         | for                     |
|                         | Bluff                   |
|                         | Street                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2018-02-007             | Vacate                  |
|                         | common                  |
|                         | area/open               |
|                         | space                   |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | Sundown                 |
|                         | Estates                 |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2018-02-008             | Amend                   |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 3,                      |
|                         | Chapter                 |
|                         | 1,                      |
|                         | Sections                |
|                         | 3,                      |
|                         | 4,                      |
|                         | 7,                      |
|                         | 16,                     |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 21                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Home                    |
|                         | Occupations             |
|                         | (3-1,                   |
|                         | 3-7)                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2018-02-009             | Amend                   |
|                         | GP                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Fossil                  |
|                         | Hills                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2018-02-010             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Rover                   |
|                         | Road                    |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 1450                    |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | DSG                     |
|                         | Holdings,               |
|                         | Inc                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2018-02-011             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | River                   |
|                         | Road                    |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | DSG                     |
|                         | Holdings,               |
|                         | Inc                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2018-03-001             | Vacate                  |
|                         | a                       |
|                         | portion                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Desert                  |
|                         | Canyons                 |
|                         | Pkwy                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2018-03-002             | Vacate                  |
|                         | a                       |
|                         | portion                 |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | a                       |
|                         | power                   |
|                         | line                    |
|                         | easement                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | The                     |
|                         | Ledges,                 |
|                         | White                   |
|                         | Rocks                   |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 5                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2018-03-003             | Change                  |
|                         | name                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | roadway                 |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Winter                  |
|                         | Quarters                |
|                         | Trail                   |
|                         | to                      |
|                         | Fish                    |
|                         | Rock                    |
|                         | Road                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2018-03-004             | (Reserved)              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2018-03-005             | Repeals and             |
|                         | replaces                |
|                         | § 3-2O-6,               |
|                         | for-hire                |
|                         | driver's                |
|                         | permit                  |
|                         | (3-2O)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2018-04-001             | (Reserved)              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2018-04-002             | (Reserved)              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2018-04-003             | (Reserved)              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2018-04-004             | Repeals                 |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | replaces                |
|                         | §§ 1-10B-1 –            |
|                         | 1-10B-8,                |
|                         | purchasing              |
|                         | policy                  |
|                         | (1-10B)                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2018-04-005             | (Reserved)              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2018-06-006             | Repeals                 |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | replaces                |
|                         | § 5-3-7,                |
|                         | fireworks               |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | other                   |
|                         | ignition                |
|                         | sources                 |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2020-06-001)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2018-12-001             | Amends                  |
|                         | § 1-6-5,                |
|                         | mayor                   |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | city                    |
|                         | council                 |
|                         | compensation            |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | benefits                |
|                         | (1-6)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2019-01-001             | (Reserved)              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2019-01-002             | (Reserved)              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2019-01-003             | (Reserved)              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2019-01-004             | (Reserved)              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2019-01-005             | Amends                  |
|                         | §§ 3-1-5,               |
|                         | 3-1-19, 3-1-20          |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Ch.                     |
|                         | 3-3;                    |
|                         | repeals                 |
|                         | § 1-4-1(F),             |
|                         | business                |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | alcohol                 |
|                         | licenses                |
|                         | (1-4,                   |
|                         | 3-1,                    |
|                         | 3-3)                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2019-02-001             | Repeals                 |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | replaces                |
|                         | § 8-6-3,                |
|                         | storm                   |
|                         | drainage                |
|                         | service                 |
|                         | fees                    |
|                         | (8-6)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2019-02-002             | Adjusts                 |
|                         | subdivision             |
|                         | lot                     |
|                         | line                    |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | vacates                 |
|                         | public                  |
|                         | utilities               |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | drainage                |
|                         | easement                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Blackberry              |
|                         | Court                   |
|                         | Subdivision             |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 3                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2019-02-003             | Vacates                 |
|                         | public                  |
|                         | utilities               |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | drainage                |
|                         | easement                |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Lot                     |
|                         | 20,                     |
|                         | Bloomington             |
|                         | Hills                   |
|                         | No.                     |
|                         | 3                       |
|                         | Subdivision             |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2019-02-004             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | east                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | Terrible                |
|                         | Herbst                  |
|                         | C-Store                 |
|                         | on                      |
|                         | Pioneer                 |
|                         | Road                    |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2019-02-005             | Amends                  |
|                         | GP                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | SHCG,                   |
|                         | LLC,                    |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | Zen                     |
|                         | 360,                    |
|                         | LLC                     |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2019-02-006             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | northwest               |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Star                    |
|                         | Nursery                 |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2019-02-007             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Lot                     |
|                         | 3                       |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | Fields                  |
|                         | at                      |
|                         | Mall                    |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 2                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2019-02-008             | Zone                    |
|                         | change                  |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Lot                     |
|                         | 4                       |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | Fields                  |
|                         | at                      |
|                         | Mall                    |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | Phase                   |
|                         | 2                       |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2019-02-009             | Amends                  |
|                         | GP                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Southern                |
|                         | Hills                   |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | Interchange             |
|                         | No.                     |
|                         | 5                       |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | Development             |
|                         | Solutions               |
|                         | Group                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2019-02-010             | Amends                  |
|                         | GP                      |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | 415                     |
|                         | South                   |
|                         | Dixie                   |
|                         | Drive                   |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2019-02-011             | Vacates                 |
|                         | public                  |
|                         | utilities               |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | drainage                |
|                         | easement                |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | increases               |
|                         | size                    |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Lot                     |
|                         | 122                     |
|                         | -                       |
|                         | the                     |
|                         | Cliffs                  |
|                         | of                      |
|                         | Snow                    |
|                         | Canyon                  |
|                         | Plat                    |
|                         | C                       |
|                         | Amended                 |
|                         | (Special)               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2019-02-012             | Amends                  |
|                         | § 10-1-11,              |
|                         | zoning                  |
|                         | changes                 |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | amendments              |
|                         | (Repealed               |
|                         | by                      |
|                         | 2019-10-002)            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2019-04-001             | Amends                  |
|                         | §§ 9-14-2,              |
|                         | 9-14-3(A),              |
|                         | 9-14-5(E),              |
|                         | 9-14-7(B),              |
|                         | 9-14-8                  |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 9-14-9,                 |
|                         | storm                   |
|                         | water                   |
|                         | management              |
|                         | (9-14)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2019-07-001             | Adds                    |
|                         | § 5-3-8;                |
|                         | repeals                 |
|                         | § 7-3-2C,               |
|                         | alcoholic               |
|                         | beverages               |
|                         | (5-3,                   |
|                         | 7-3)                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2019-08-004             | Repeals                 |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | replaces                |
|                         | § 6-2-6,                |
|                         | parking                 |
|                         | time                    |
|                         | limited                 |
|                         | (6-2)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2019-08-010             | Adds                    |
|                         | Ch.                     |
|                         | 1-15;                   |
|                         | amends                  |
|                         | §§ 2-2-2                |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 2-2-4,                  |
|                         | appeals                 |
|                         | (1-15,                  |
|                         | 2-2)                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2019-09-001             | Repeals                 |
|                         | § 5-3-3,                |
|                         | trespassing             |
|                         | (Repealer)              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2019-10-002             | Repeals                 |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | replaces                |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 10;                     |
|                         | repeals                 |
|                         | Title                   |
|                         | 11,                     |
|                         | zoning                  |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | subdivision             |
|                         | regulations             |
|                         | (10-1,                  |
|                         | 10-2,                   |
|                         | 10-3,                   |
|                         | 10-4,                   |
|                         | 10-5,                   |
|                         | 10-6,                   |
|                         | 10-7,                   |
|                         | 10-7A,                  |
|                         | 10-7B,                  |
|                         | 10-7C,                  |
|                         | 10-7D,                  |
|                         | 10-7E,                  |
|                         | 10-7F,                  |
|                         | 10-7G,                  |
|                         | 10-7H,                  |
|                         | 10-8,                   |
|                         | 10-8A,                  |
|                         | 10-8B,                  |
|                         | 10-8C,                  |
|                         | 10-8D,                  |
|                         | 10-10,                  |
|                         | 10-11,                  |
|                         | 10-13A,                 |
|                         | 10-13B,                 |
|                         | 10-13C,                 |
|                         | 10-13D,                 |
|                         | 10-13E,                 |
|                         | 10-14,                  |
|                         | 10-16,                  |
|                         | 10-17A,                 |
|                         | 10-17B,                 |
|                         | 10-18,                  |
|                         | 10-18A,                 |
|                         | 10-19,                  |
|                         | 10-20,                  |
|                         | 10-23,                  |
|                         | 10-25A,                 |
|                         | 10-25B,                 |
|                         | 10-25C,                 |
|                         | 10-25D)                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2019-12-001             | Repeals                 |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | replaces                |
|                         | Ch.                     |
|                         | 2-1,                    |
|                         | planning                |
|                         | commission              |
|                         | (2-1)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2020-01-003             | Amends                  |
|                         | Ch.                     |
|                         | 9-14,                   |
|                         | storm                   |
|                         | water                   |
|                         | management              |
|                         | (9-14)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2020-02-005             | Adds                    |
|                         | Ch.                     |
|                         | 7-7,                    |
|                         | small                   |
|                         | wireless                |
|                         | facilities              |
|                         | in                      |
|                         | public                  |
|                         | rights-of-way           |
|                         | (7-7)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2020-02-006             | Adds                    |
|                         | Ch.                     |
|                         | 4-10,                   |
|                         | property                |
|                         | maintenance             |
|                         | (4-10)                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2020-02-007             | Repeals                 |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | replaces                |
|                         | Ch.                     |
|                         | 7-6,                    |
|                         | airport                 |
|                         | (7-6)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2020-03-001             | Repeals                 |
|                         | § 5-3-4,                |
|                         | loitering               |
|                         | (Repealer)              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2020-03-006             | Amends                  |
|                         | §§ 1-6-2                |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 2-1-1,                  |
|                         | meetings                |
|                         | (1-6,                   |
|                         | 2-1)                    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2020-04-002             | Amends                  |
|                         | § 1-10B-4(B),           |
|                         | bidding                 |
|                         | procedures              |
|                         | (1-10B)                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2020-04-006             | Repeals                 |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | replaces                |
|                         | §§ 4-4-1, 4-4-4, 4-4-5  |
|                         | and                     |
|                         |  4-4-6,                 |
|                         | solid                   |
|                         | waste;                  |
|                         | recyclables;            |
|                         | collection              |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | disposal                |
|                         | (4-4)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2020-05-004             | Repeals                 |
|                         | § 2-2-3,                |
|                         | employee                |
|                         | appeal                  |
|                         | board                   |
|                         | (Repealer)              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2020-05-005             | Amends                  |
|                         | Ch.                     |
|                         | 2-1, planning           |
|                         | commission              |
|                         | (2-1)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2020-06-001             | Repeals                 |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | replaces                |
|                         | § 5-3-7,                |
|                         | fireworks               |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | other                   |
|                         | ignition                |
|                         | source                  |
|                         | restrictions            |
|                         | (5-3)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2020-06-002             | Adds                    |
|                         | §§ 10-7-6(H),           |
|                         | 10-8B-3(E),             |
|                         | 10-13A-9                |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | 10-18-6(C)              |
|                         | [10-19-6(C)];           |
|                         | amends                  |
|                         | §§ 10-2-1,              |
|                         | 10-5-1,                 |
|                         | 10-7A-1,                |
|                         | 10-7F-4,                |
|                         | 10-7G-4(B),             |
|                         | 10-8A-1,                |
|                         | 10-8A-3,                |
|                         | 10-8A-5,                |
|                         | 10-8B-1,                |
|                         | 10-8B-2,                |
|                         | 10-8B-3(D),             |
|                         | 10-8C-3(F)              |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | (G),                    |
|                         | 10-8D-1,                |
|                         | 10-8D-5(B),             |
|                         | 10-8D-6(B),             |
|                         | 10-8D-7(B),             |
|                         | 10-8D-8(B),             |
|                         | 10-11-1,                |
|                         | 10-17A-3(G)(3),         |
|                         | 10-17A-14,              |
|                         | 10-18-1(B),             |
|                         | 10-18-2,                |
|                         | 10-18-3(D),             |
|                         | 10-18-6(A),             |
|                         | 10-23-1(B) and          |
|                         | 10-25C-3(B)(4);         |
|                         | amends                  |
|                         | and                     |
|                         | renumbers               |
|                         | § 10-13A-9              |
|                         | as                      |
|                         | 10-13A-10,              |
|                         | zoning                  |
|                         | (10-2,                  |
|                         | 10-5,                   |
|                         | 10-7,                   |
|                         | 10-7A,                  |
|                         | 10-7F,                  |
|                         | 10-7G,                  |
|                         | 10-8A,                  |
|                         | 10-8B,                  |
|                         | 10-8C,                  |
|                         | 10-8D,                  |
|                         | 10-11,                  |
|                         | 10-13A,                 |
|                         | 10-17A,                 |
|                         | 10-18,                  |
|                         | 10-19,                  |
|                         | 10-23,                  |
|                         | 10-25C)                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2020-07-005             | Repeals and             |
|                         | replaces                |
|                         | § 3-3-5(E),             |
|                         | alcoholic               |
|                         | beverage                |
|                         | license                 |
|                         | application             |
|                         | (3-3)                   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The St. George City Code is current through Ordinance 2020-07-005, passed July 16, 2020.
Disclaimer: The city recorder has the official version of the St. George City Code. Users should contact the city recorder for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.
Note: This site does not support Internet Explorer. To view this site, Code Publishing Company recommends using one of the following browsers: Google Chrome, Firefox, or Safari.

City Website: www.sgcity.org
City Telephone: (435) 627-4000
Code Publishing Company