CITY OF SOUTH SALT LAKE MUNICIPAL CODE 
1994 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances of 
the City of South Salt Lake, Utah 
____________ 
Beginning with Supp. No. 20, 
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 
 
PREFACE 
The City of South Salt Lake Municipal Code, originally published by Book Publishing Company in 1994, has been kept current by regular supplementation by Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., its successor in interest. 
Beginning with Supplement No. 20, Municipal Code Corporation will be keeping this code current by regular supplementation. 
During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Book Publishing Company under the direction of Kevin R. Watkins, City Attorney. 
The code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the Title, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 2.12.040 is Section .040, located in Chapter 2.12 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with Supplement No. 20, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers. 
This supplement brings the Code up to date through Ordinance No. 2020-05, passed April 8, 2020. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633 
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
This code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this code. 
Numbering System. 
The numbering system is the backbone of a Code of Ordinances; Municipal Code Corporation uses a unique and versatile numbering structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this Code. It is based on three tiers, beginning with title, then chapter, and ending with section. Each part is represented in the code section number. For example, Section 2.04.010 is Section .010, in Chapter 2.04 of Title 2. 
Title. 
A title is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This code contains about 15 to 20 titles. For example, the first title is Title 1, General Provisions, which may contain ordinances about the general penalty, code adoption and definitions. The titles in this code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are Reserved for later use. 
Chapter. 
Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without renumbering existing material. For example, Chapter 2.06, City Manager, can be added between 2.04, City Council, and Chapter 2.08, City Attorney. 
Section. 
Each section of the code contains substantive ordinance material. The sections are numbered by "tens" to allow for expansion of the code without renumbering. 
Tables of Contents. 
There are many tables of contents in this code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
At the end of each code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1992).) 
Beginning with Supplement No. 20, a secondary ordinance history note will be appended to affected sections. Ordinance history notes will be amended with the most recent ordinance added to the end. These history notes can be cross referenced to the code comparative table and disposition list appearing at the back of the volume preceding the index. 
Statutory References. 
The statutory references direct the code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated. 
Cross-Reference Table. 
When a code is based on an earlier codification, the cross-reference table will help users find older or "prior" code references in the new code. The cross-reference table is located near the end of the code, under the tabbed divider "Tables." This table lists the prior code section in the column labeled "Prior Code Section" and the new code section in the column labeled "Herein." 
As of Supplement No. 20, this table will no longer be updated. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
To find a specific ordinance in the code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This very useful table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed for inclusion in the code. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
Beginning with Supplement No. 20, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
Beginning with Supplement No. 20, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the ordinance number, adoption date, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the code of each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX 
Fee 5.04.030 
Required when 5.04.010 
The index will be updated as necessary when the code text is amended. 
Insertion Guide. 
Each supplement to the new code will be accompanied by an Insertion Guide. This guide will tell the code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Page Numbers. 
When originally published, this code was numbered with consecutive page numbers. As it is amended, new material may require the insertion of new pages that are numbered with hyphens. (Example: 31, 32, 32-1.) Backs of pages that are blank (in codes that are printed double-sided) are left unnumbered but the number is "reserved" for later use. 
Electronic Submission. 
In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to get you your code more quickly but also ensure that it is error-free. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com. 
For hard copy, send two copies of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
If you have any questions about this code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310  
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 1.01 - CODE ADOPTION 
Sections: 
 
1.01.010 - Adoption. 
There is adopted the "City of South Salt Lake Municipal Code" as compiled, edited and published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington. 
(Ord. 97-8 § 1)  
1.01.020 - Title—Citation—Reference. 
This code shall be known as the "City of South Salt Lake Municipal Code" and it is sufficient to refer to said code as the "SSL Municipal Code" in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the "City of South Salt Lake Municipal Code." References may be made to the titles, chapters, sections, and subsections of the "City of South Salt Lake Municipal Code" and such references shall apply to those titles, chapters, sections, subsections, as they appear in the code. 
(Ord. 97-8 § 2)  
1.01.030 - Reference applies to all amendments. 
Whenever a reference is made to this code as the "City of South Salt Lake Municipal Code" or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city of South Salt Lake codified herein, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections, and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. 
(Ord. 97-8 § 3)  
1.01.040 - Title, chapter and section headings. 
Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. 
(Ord. 97-8 § 4)  
1.01.050 - Reference to specific ordinances. 
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. 
(Ord. 97-8 § 5)  
1.01.060 - Ordinances passed prior to the adoption of this code. 
The last ordinance included in this code was Ordinance No. 96-29 passed December 11, 1996. All subsequent ordinances passed after December 11, 1996 are included and made a part of this code. 
(Ord. 97-8 § 6)  
1.01.070 - Effect of code on past actions and obligations. 
The adoption of this code does not affect prosecutions for ordinance violations committed prior to the effective date of this code, does not waive any fee or penalty due and unpaid on the effective date of this code, and does not affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit posted, filed or deposited pursuant to the requirements of any ordinance. 
(Ord. 97-8 § 7)  
1.01.080 - Constitutionality. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. 
(Ord. 97-8 § 8)  
1.01.090 - References to prior code. 
References in city forms, documents and regulations to the chapters and sections of the former city code shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained in this code. 
(Ord. 97-8 § 9)  
Chapter 1.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
1.04.010 - Rules of construction. 
In the construction of this code and all ordinances amendatory thereof, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the legislative body or contrary to the context of the ordinance. 
The singular number includes the plural. 
Words used in the masculine gender comprehend as well the feminine and neuter. 
"Business" means and includes any trade, profession, calling, activity, operation or enterprise for which a license is required. 
"Highway" and "road" mean and include public bridges and may be held equivalent to the words "county road" and "state road." 
"License" means and includes certificate of license. 
"Owner," applied to a building or land, means and includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or any part of such building or land. 
"Person" means and includes bodies politic and corporate, partnerships, associations and companies. 
"Property" means and includes both real and personal property. 
"Street" means and includes alleys, lanes, courts, public places and sidewalks. 
"Tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, means and includes any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land either alone or with others. 
(Ord. 2005-15 (part): prior code § 1-1-5)  
1.04.020 - Conflict of provisions. 
Where it appears that a provision of this code regulates in an area governed by the United States Constitution, the Constitution of the State of Utah or competing federal or state law or regulation, the provision should be construed as narrowly as possible to avoid a conflict with those superior bodies of law. If portions of a particular provision of this code may be severed from the whole without completely eviscerating the purpose of the provision, a reviewing court of law may sever the offensive portion. If there are conflicting provisions of law within this code, the provision that is most particular to the subject matter at issue shall govern over a less specific provision. 
(Ord. 2005-15 (part): prior code § 1-1-9)  
Chapter 1.08 - CITY SEAL 
Sections: 
 
1.08.010 - Seal. 
The seal provided for the city shall be circular in form, one and three-fourths inches in diameter, with the words "Corporate Seal" in the center thereof, and the words "City of South Salt Lake" on the top and the words "Salt Lake County, Utah" on the bottom, and the same is established and declared to be the seal of and for the city of South Salt Lake. 
 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 1-3-6)  
Chapter 1.12 - ORDINANCES 
Sections: 
 
1.12.010 - Ordinances effective date. 
Every ordinance or tax levy passed by the city council shall be presented to the mayor for his approval or disapproval. If the mayor approves the ordinance or tax levy, he shall sign it and it shall be recorded by the city recorder and thereafter shall be in force. If the ordinance is an appropriation ordinance, the mayor may approve or disapprove all or any part of the appropriation. If the mayor disapproves an ordinance, tax levy, or appropriation, he shall return it with a statement of his objections, to the city council within fifteen (15) days and the city council shall, at its next meeting, reconsider the ordinance, tax levy or appropriation item. If after reconsideration it again passes by a vote of at least two-thirds of all city council members, it shall be recorded and thereafter be in force. If any ordinance, tax levy or appropriation item is not returned within fifteen (15) days after presentation to the mayor, it shall be recorded and thereafter shall be in force. 
(Ord. 2005-14 (part): editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 1-1-6)  
1.12.020 - Enacting clause. 
The enacting clause of all ordinances of the city of South Salt Lake, passed after the publication date of this code shall be in the following form: "Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of South Salt Lake." No enacting clause shall be used in any section of any ordinance except the first. 
(Ord. 2005-14 (part): prior code § 1-1-7)  
1.12.030 - Numbering of ordinances. 
The city recorder shall number all ordinances consecutively adopted after the publication of this code and shall continue thereafter to consecutively number all ordinances filed and spread upon the records, in the order of their passage and shall assign appropriate section numbers in conformity with the system of numbering used in this code. 
(Ord. 2005-14 (part): prior code § 1-1-8)  
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATIVE CODE 
Chapters:  
Chapter 2.01 - ADMINISTRATIVE CODE 
Sections: 
 
2.01.010 - Title. 
This title shall be known as the administrative code of the city of South Salt Lake. Three copies of this administrative code, in its entirety, can be found at the city recorder's office. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement: Ord. 96-24 § 1 (1.2))  
Chapter 2.04 - OFFICE OF MAYOR 
Sections: 
 
2.04.010 - Qualifications and term of office. 
A.  The mayor shall be a registered voter of the city of South Salt Lake. 
B.  The mayor shall be elected at-large for a term of four years. 
(Ord. 96-24 § 1 (4.1)) 
  UCA References: 10-3-1219 Council-mayor form—Powers and duties of mayor.  
2.04.020 - Vacancy in office of mayor. 
A.  If a vacancy occurs in the office of mayor: 
1.  The city council shall within thirty (30) days, follow procedures set forth in UCA Section 10-3-1219 and shall include any changes to fill the unexpired term of the mayor. 
2.  The city council chair shall become the acting mayor pending the appointment of a person to fill the vacancy. 
(Ord. 96-24 § 1 (4.2)) 
  UCA References: 10-3-1222 Council-mayor form—Vacancy in office of mayor.  
2.04.030 - Powers and duties. 
The mayor shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the city and shall be given the power and duty to: 
A.  Enforce the laws and ordinances of the city of South Salt Lake. 
B.  Within fifteen (15) days of city council passage of policy, ordinance, tax levy or funds' appropriation: 
1.  Approve and sign it; or 
2.  Disapprove and return it to the city council. 
C.  Execute the policies adopted by the city council. 
D.  Prepare and submit to the city council a recommended fiscal year budget. This draft budget will be completed and submitted to the city council no later than the first regularly scheduled meeting in May of each year. 
E.  Exercise control of all departments, offices and divisions within the city. 
F.  Attend all city council meetings without the right to vote but with the right and responsibility to: 
1.  Take part in all discussions; 
2.  Inform the city council of the condition and needs of the city; 
3.  Make recommendations; 
4.  Freely give advice to the city council. 
G.  Appoint with the advice and consent of the city council, qualified persons to: 
1.  a.  City recorder; 
b.  City treasurer; 
c.  City attorney; 
d.  Police chief; 
e.  Fire chief; 
f.  Director of finance; 
g.  Director of urban livability; 
h.  Director of community and economic development; 
i.  Justice court administrator; 
j.  Human services and information resource director; 
k.  Director of public works; 
l.  Recreation director; 
m.  Deputy city attorney; 
n.  Public assets director; 
o.  Deputy community and economic development director/housing administrator; 
p.  All statutory officers, commissions, boards and committees of the city. 
2.  No person may perform the functions of any position specified in paragraph G of this section without the prior consent of the municipal council. 
H.  The mayor may be the director of the human resources department, or may appoint a human services and information resource director, with the advice and consent of the city council. The mayor or human services and information resource director shall execute the duties and responsibilities set forth in this chapter. 
1.  Functional Responsibilities. 
a.  The department of human resources' function is to provide administrative and technical direction to the city's personnel management system. This direction is subject to the limitations of applicable funds' appropriations, statutes and ordinances. These directions include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
i.  Administering, with the advice of the city council, and when applicable, the mayor, the personnel management system; 
ii.  Providing for personnel procurement, including: 
(A)  Establishing and maintaining comprehensive personnel records for all city employees, 
(B)  A classification plan for all positions in city based on the level, difficulty of duties and responsibilities assumed, 
(C)  Recruitment, testing, selection and hiring of all city employees, including: 
(1)  Using written standards which have been reviewed and commented on by the city council, 
(2)  Administering examinations when practicable for all original appointments and promotions subject to testing, 
(D)  Plans for recruitment, examination and placement of persons to determine their relative fitness for positions, 
(E)  Eligibility lists for appointment and promotion; 
iii.  Preparing, recommending and enforcing policies and procedures for personnel administration; 
iv.  Giving personnel management advice and counsel including: 
(A)  Leadership in the development of effective personnel administration within all departments of the city, 
(B)  Advising the city council, and when applicable, the mayor, on utilization of personnel resources in the city; 
v.  Providing for the development of the city's personnel including: 
(A)  Programs for the improvement of employees' effectiveness. These should include such programs as management training, safety training, health counseling, and other programs that help develop and improve the employees of the city, 
(B)  Plans for Promotions. These plans should consider applicant's qualifications, record of performance and abilities; seling, and other programs that help develop and improve the employees of the city, 
(B)  Plans for Promotions. These plans should consider applicant's qualifications, record of performance and abilities; 
vi.  Providing personnel records and reports, including: 
(A)  Comprehensive personnel records of all city employees, 
(B)  Certifying all employees for payroll and other benefit purposes, 
(C)  Certifying the appointment, promotion, demotion, discipline and other actions affecting city employees, 
(D)  Making annual reports to the city council regarding the condition of the overall personnel management system, 
(E)  Providing forms, procedures and methods for personnel recordkeeping, 
(F)  Maintaining a roster of all city employees; 
vii.  Providing a personnel salary and benefit program including: 
(A)  Preparation and recommendation to the city council of an equitable pay plan for all city employees, 
(B)  Computing for budgetary purposes the annual salary costs for all departments; 
viii.  Providing an Employee Performance Evaluation Program. This program will serve as a basic factor in salary administration, promotions, establishing order of layoffs due to lack of funds or work, reinstatements, discharge or transfers; 
ix.  Providing for handling employee grievances including: 
(A)  A process for resolving employee grievance and complaint prior to appeals, 
(B)  Coordination of procedures for disciplinary actions such as suspensions, demotions in rank or grade, or discharge, 
(C)  Providing for presentation of charges, hearings and appeals for all employees; 
x.  The mayor may terminate or discipline executive and administrative employees, officers and departments heads. He or she may also appoint with the consent of the council or remove with cause members of boards, commissions and committees. 
I.  Furnish to the city council on a monthly basis financial reports that set forth: 
1.  Amounts of all budget appropriations; 
2.  Disbursements to date from these appropriations; 
3.  Percentage of the appropriations expected to date. 
J.  Execute or have executed agreements within certified budget appropriations on behalf of the city. All agreements are subject to the procedure described in UCA Section 10-6-138. 
K.  Approve and authorize administrative standards, procedures and programs in harmony with the policies established by the city council. 
L.  Propose amendments to this administrative code. 
M.  Act as official day-to-day representative in relationships with: 
1.  The press and other media representatives; 
2.  Governmental and quasi-governmental agencies; 
3.  The private sector; 
4.  Negotiations at which the city's interest must be represented; 
5.  Ceremonial occasions; 
6.  Communications between the city and the public. 
N.  Advocate city interests. 
O.  Provide leadership to the city. 
P.  Promote citizen involvement. 
Q.  Promote city unity and solidarity. 
R.  Recommend programs for the physical, economic, social and cultural development of the city. 
S.  Solemnize marriages in accordance with the laws of the state of Utah. 
T.  Formulate and recommend to the city council policies for adoption. 
U.  Prepare and submit to the city council annual financial statements for the city. Included should be a report summarizing all city department operations. (UCA Section 12-3-1219.5.) 
V.  Deliver to his/her successor (within five days after swearing-in ceremony) all property of every description in his/her possession belonging to the city or pertaining to the office of mayor. 
W.  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance or statute. 
X.  Other powers necessary for the proper administration of the city. 
(Ord. 2001-16 § 1; Ord. 96-24 § 1 (4.3)) 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, 5-28-2014; Ord. No. 2014-19, 7-30-2014; Res. No. 2015-07, 2-11-2015) 
  UCA References: 10-3-1219 Council-mayor form—Powers and duties of mayor.  
2.04.040 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2020-05, § I, adopted April 8, 2020, repealed § 2.04.040, which pertained to emergency management and derived from Ord. 96-24 § 1 (4.4).  
2.04.050 - Relationship with city council. 
A.  The mayor will act as liaison between the administrative staff and the city council. 
(Ord. 96-24 § 1 (4.5))  
2.04.060 - Staffing the mayor's office. 
To provide necessary service to the city and its departments the mayor, subject to funds' appropriations, may: 
A.  Create a mayor's office to provide those assistants and staff needed by the mayor to manage the city. 
B.  Establish, abolish, change or transfer functions, duties and services within the mayor's office. 
C.  Establish, abolish, change or reorganize divisions within the mayor's office. 
D.  Appoint, assign, reassign, or remove assistants and staff within the mayor's office. 
E.  Transfer Personnel Between Different Departments. From time to time the mayor may transfer functions, duties, services and assign or reassign personnel from, to or between any section or division of the mayor's office and between and among any section or division of such administrative departments and division or sections of the administrative organization of the city. Such actions by the mayor may be on a temporary or permanent basis as determined by the mayor and as funds are appropriated. 
(Ord. 96-24 § 1 (4.6))  
2.04.065 - Salary of the mayor. 
The salary of the mayor of South Salt Lake shall be six thousand seven hundred ninety-one dollars ($6,791.00) per month. 
(Ord. 2007-23 § 1 (part): Ord. 2006-08 § 1 (part): Ord. 2001-10 § 1 (part); Ord. 98-8 § 1) 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, 6-15-2011)  
2.04.070 - Establishing special executive committees. 
A.  The mayor may establish executive committees and in consultation with the city council joint executive/legislative committees: 
1.  To solicit advice, to assist or to provide counsel in the executive affairs of the city; 
2.  Composed of city personnel and/or private parties. 
B.  Any such committees organized shall work with and report to the city in a manner designated by the mayor. 
(Ord. 96-24 § 1 (4.7))  
Chapter 2.05 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
Sections: 
 
2.05.010 - Definitions. 
A.  As used in this chapter: 
1.  "Disaster" means a sudden calamitous manmade, natural or war-caused event bringing great damage, loss or destruction. 
2.  "Disaster" emergency means those conditions which may, by investigation made, be found actually or likely to: 
a.  Affect seriously the safety, health or welfare of a substantial number of the citizens of the city or preclude the operation or use of essential public services and facilities; 
b.  Be of such a magnitude or severity to necessitate seeking county or state supplementation of local efforts or resources exerted or utilized in alleviating the danger, damage, suffering or hardship faced; and 
c.  Have been caused by forces beyond the control of man, by reason of civil disorder, riot or disturbance, or by factors not foreseen and not known to exist when appropriation bills were enacted. 
3.  "Emergency management" means the judicious planning, assignment and coordination of all available resources in an integrated program of prevention, mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery for emergencies of any kind, whether from attack, manmade or natural sources. 
4.  "Emergency services" means the preparation for and the carrying out of functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and provide emergency repair of injury and damage resulting from disaster, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for carrying out of those functions. The functions include, without limitation, firefighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, disaster warning services, communications, radiological, shelter, chemical and other special weapons defense, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency resources management, temporary restoration of public utility services, and other functions related to civilian protection. 
5.  "Enforcement Official" has the same meaning as defined in Section 8.14.100 of this Code or its successor provision. 
6.  "Local emergency" means the condition declared by the mayor when in his or her judgement the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster is or threatens to be of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant coordinated local government action to prevent or alleviate the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
7.  "Manmade disaster" means any industrial, nuclear, or transportation accident, explosion, conflagration, power failure, natural resource shortage, or other condition, except enemy action, resulting from manmade causes, such as oil spills and other injurious environmental contamination, which threatens or causes substantial damage to property, human suffering, hardship or loss of life. 
8.  "Natural disaster" means any hurricane, windstorm, tornado, storm, flood, high water, wind-driven water, earthquake, landslide, mudslide, snowstorm, drought, fire, explosion, pandemic or epidemic as those terms are used and defined in Utah Code Ann. § 26-23b-102 or its successor provision, or other catastrophe which results in substantial damage to property, hardship, suffering or possible loss of life. 
9.  "Responsible Person" has the same meaning as defined in Section 8.14.100 of this Code or its successor provision. 
10.  "War-caused disaster" means any condition following an attack resulting in substantial damage to property or injury to persons caused by use of bombs, missiles, shellfire, nuclear, radiological, chemical or biological means, or other weapons, or overt paramilitary actions, or other conditions such as sabotage. 
(Ord. No. 2020-05, § II(Exh. A), 4-8-2020)  
2.05.020 - The mayor-powers and duties. 
A.  The mayor is authorized to declare a local disaster upon finding a disaster has occurred or is imminent. An emergency's existence or resolution is declared by: 
1.  The mayor in consultation with readily available city councilmembers; or 
2.  In the event of the mayor's absence or disability, the mayor's successor as established in Utah Code Ann. 53-2a-807 or its successor provision. 
B.  An emergency which causes danger of injury or damages to persons or property can be declared as a result of: 
1.  Riot; 
2.  Mob action; 
3.  Act of God; 
4.  Natural disaster; 
5.  Manmade disaster; or 
6.  Civil disturbance. 
C.  The declaration or resolution of an emergency shall become effective upon its issuance and dissemination in appropriate form to the public. 
D.  Power to create orders deemed necessary to preserve the peace and order of the city can be made by proclamation or resolution of: 
1.  The mayor in consultation with readily available city councilmembers; or 
2.  In the event of the mayor's disability or absence, the city councilmembers. 
E.  The following orders which may be deemed necessary to preserve the peace and order of the city can be made: 
1.  An order to establish a curfew upon all or part of the city providing: 
a.  Curfew areas which require the public to remove themselves from the area, 
b.  Exemption from curfew for specific personnel performing essential services such as medical, utility, fire, police and city services; 
2.  An order to close any business establishment for the period of the emergency whose products create a potential of personal harm or property damage. The types of business may include but are not limited to those selling or dispensing: 
a.  Intoxicating liquors or beer, 
b.  Gasoline or other flammable liquids or combustible products, 
c.  Firearms and ammunition; 
3.  An order to close all private clubs or portion thereof where the consumption of intoxicating liquor and/or beer is permitted; 
4.  An order to discontinue the sale of beer or other alcoholic beverages for the period of the emergency; 
5.  An order to designate any public street, thoroughfare, alley, park or vehicle parking area closed to motor vehicles and pedestrians for the period of the emergency; 
6.  An order to call upon organizations, within or without the city, to assist in preserving and keeping the peace within the city for the period of the emergency. These include regular and volunteer fire and/or law enforcement organizations: 
7.  Other orders which are imminently necessary for the protection of life and property; 
(Ord. No. 2020-05, § II(Exh. A), 4-8-2020)  
2.05.030 - Penalty for violation. 
A.  Violations. 
1.  Violations of any declaration of a local disaster or subsequent proclamation, rule, or order issued by the Mayor pursuant to this Chapter or pursuant to any other applicable state or local law is punishable as a Class B Misdemeanor or by an administrative citation. 
2.  Violations of any state statute related to a declaration, proclamation, rule, directive, or order pursuant to an emergency, as defined by the respective jurisdiction, issued by the state of Utah or Salt Lake County may be enforced by an administrative citation. 
B.  Administrative citation. 
1.  Upon discovering a violation of this Chapter an Enforcement Official may serve an administrative citation on the Responsible Person. 
2.  Enforcement Officials shall follow the rules regarding administrative citations prescribed by Chapter 8.14 of this Code or its successor provision, including notification of the right to and procedure for requesting an administrative hearing as set forth in section 2.22.040 of this Code or its successor provision. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an administrative hearing shall not be required to be held during the local emergency but shall be held as soon as practicable after the local emergency has ended. However, at the mayor's discretion, the administrative hearing may be held during the local emergency if conditions permit. 
3.  Fines shall be prescribed in Chapter 3.11 of this Code or its successor provision. 
(Ord. No. 2020-05, § II(Exh. A), 4-8-2020)  
2.05.030 - Office of Disaster and Emergency Services. 
A.  The office of disaster and emergency services is created under the office of the mayor and shall be managed by an emergency manager, who shall be appointed in the manner set forth in subsection B of this section, Emergency Manager. The office of disaster and emergency services will coordinate activities pertaining to natural, manmade and war-caused disasters and will be the instrument through which the mayor may exercise the authority and discharge the responsibilities vested in him or her. 
B.  Emergency Manager. The emergency manager shall be an employee of South Salt Lake who is recommended by the mayor and approved by the city council. The emergency manager shall report directly to the mayor and shall be responsible for the planning, administration and operation of the local organization subject to the direction and control of the mayor. 
C.  Emergency Management Plan. The office of disaster and emergency services shall prepare an emergency management plan that shall be submitted to and approved by the city council. The plan shall establish an emergency management team providing for the use of services, equipment, facilities and personnel of all city government divisions and other service providers during a threatened or actual local disaster emergency. It shall be the duty of all emergency management team members to perform the functions assigned to them in the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a state of readiness at all times. All substantive amendments to the plan shall be approved by the city council, provided, however, that in the event an amendment is pending at the time a disaster is proclaimed, the amendment will be considered approved immediately, and will remain effective unless specifically revoked by the city council. 
D.  Emergency Operations Center. The office of disaster and emergency services shall establish and staff an emergency operations center (EOC) equipped with a communications system to support government operations in emergencies and provide other essential facilities and equipment for agencies and activities assigned emergency functions. An alternate EOC will also be established in case the EOC is not able to operate in an emergency. 
(Ord. No. 2020-05, § II(Exh. A), 4-8-2020)  
Chapter 2.08 - CITY COUNCIL 
Sections: 
 
2.08.010 - Qualifications and terms of office. 
A.  Councilmembers must be residents of the city of South Salt Lake. 
B.  Councilmembers elected from districts must be residents of the district from which they are elected. 
C.  Councilmembers shall have no other compensated employment with the city of South Salt Lake. 
D.  Councilmembers shall serve terms of four years, or until a successor is qualified. 
E.  The city council consists of seven members, five to be elected from districts and two to be elected at large. 
F.  Three councilmembers, two from districts, will be elected in the same election year as the mayor. The four remaining councilmembers, three from districts, will be elected two years later in the next election. 
(Ord. 99-11 § 1: Ord. 96-24 § 1 (3.1)) 
  UCA References: 10-3-1211 Councilmembers — Qualifications — Terms of office.  
2.08.020 - Election district boundaries. 
A.  The city council shall, within six months of the legislature completing its redistricting process, make any adjustments in the boundaries of the districts as may be required to maintain districts of substantially equal population. 
B.  In the event of annexation or other expansion of municipal boundaries, which encompasses more than fifty (50) registered voters, the city council shall, within six months of such expansion, make any adjustments in the boundaries of the districts as may be required to maintain districts of substantially equal population. 
C.  If the council fails to accomplish these duties, the court of the county in which the district is located shall, on petition of any registered voter of the municipality, make the necessary boundary adjustments. 
(Ord. 96-24 § 1 (3.2)) 
  UCA References: 10-3-1216 Councilmembers elected from districts — Boundary — Adjustments.  
2.08.030 - Vacancy in council. 
If a vacancy occurs in the city council, this vacancy shall be filled as provided in UCA 20A-1-510. 
(Ord. 96-24 § 1 (3.3)) 
  UCA References: 10-3-1218 Vacancy in council.  
2.08.040 - Council chairman and quorum. 
A.  The city council shall, by a majority vote of its members, select one of its members as chairman. 
B.  A majority of the councilmembers shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. No act of the council shall be binding unless a majority of the quorum concur in respect to it. 
(Ord. 96-24 § 1 (3.4)) 
  UCA References: 10-3-1213 Chairmen of councils — Quorum.  
2.08.050 - Meetings of council. 
A.  The council shall prescribe the time and place of its regular meetings, provided that the council hold at least two meetings each month. 
B.  All meetings of the council shall be held in compliance with the provisions of UCA Title 52, Chapter 4, relating to open and public meetings. 
C.  The books, records, and accounts of the council shall be kept at the office of the city recorder. Individual citizens or citizen groups may have access to all public records, with the exception of those personnel records which have been classified as confidential for public policy reasons. 
(Ord. 96-24 § 1 (3.5)) 
  UCA References: 10-3-1212 Meetings of council — Access to records.  
2.08.060 - Powers and duties. 
A.  The city council shall act as the legislative body of the city government. It shall have the power to enact city policies, but the power of enforcement of such policies rests with the mayor. 
B.  The city council shall pass ordinances, appropriate funds, review municipal administration, and perform all duties that may be required of it by law. 
C.  The city council shall have power to pass resolutions and ordinances concerning matters such as: 
1.  Tax levies; 
2.  Adoption of the city budget; 
3.  Sewer, water, and other service rates; 
4.  Licensing fees and other fees set forth in the South Salt Lake Municipal Code; 
5.  Zoning and building regulations. 
D.  The city council shall consider and give, where appropriate, its advice and consent to the mayor on all proposed appointments of city officers and appointments to commissions, committees or other bodies established to provide advice or assistance to the operation of the city government. 
E.  Subject to South Salt Lake Municipal Code 2.08.080, the city council may appoint administrative support staff. 
F.  The city council shall have power to make and enforce any additional rules and regulations for the government of the council, the preservation of order, and the transaction of the business of the council as may be necessary. 
G.  The city council shall, by ordinance, provide for the manner in which: 
1.  Municipal property is bought, sold, traded, encumbered, or otherwise transferred; and 
2.  Subdivisions or annexations are approved, disapproved or otherwise regulated. 
(Ord. 96-24 § 1 (3.6)) 
(Ord. No. 2018-15, § I, 11-14-2018) 
  UCA References: 10-3-701 et seq. Municipal ordinances, resolutions and procedure. 
10-3-1210 Functions of the council. 
10-3-1215 Rules and regulations for government of council. 
10-3-1219.5 Ordinances on transfer of municipal property and regulation of subdivisions and annexations.  
2.08.070 - Limitations on councilmembers. 
A.  No member of the council shall direct or request, except in writing, the appointment of any person to, or his removal from office or to interfere in any way with the performance by the officers of their duties. 
B.  The council shall not give orders to any subordinate of the mayor either publicly or privately, but may make suggestions or recommendations. 
(Ord. 96-24 § 1 (3.7))  
2.08.075 - Salary and retirement contribution of the councilmembers. 
The salary of the city councilmembers shall be nine hundred forty-six dollars ($946.00) per month. In addition to the base salary, the council chair shall receive a pay differential of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per month. So long as the city council member does not qualify for benefits under the Utah State Retirement System, city councilmembers shall receive a contribution into a retirement account of 17.29 percent of their monthly salary. 
(Ord. 2007-23 § 1 (part): Ord. 2006-08 § 1 (part): Ord. 2001-10 § 1 (part); Ord. 98-8 § 2) 
(Ord. No. 2014-09, 5-14-2014; Ord. No. 2017-06, 6-7-2017)  
2.08.080. - City council administrative support staff. 
A.  Any staff appointed by the city council to serve as administrative support staff shall be exempt from the protections of Utah Code 10-3-1105(1)(a) and any successor provisions. 
B.  The city council shall adopt a personnel policies and procedures manual governing city council staff. If no manual is adopted prior to the appointment of the city council's first administrative staff, then the City's Personnel Policies and Procedures manual shall apply. 
C.  The city council shall provide for the manner in which appointed staff is directed and supervised. 
D.  The city council shall establish job descriptions, job functions, and provide by ordinance compensation for city council administrative support staff. 
E.  Appointment of administrative staff shall be by a two-thirds vote of the city council. 
F.  Termination of administrative staff shall be by a two-thirds vote of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2018-15, § I, 11-14-2018)  
Chapter 2.12 - TREASURER 
Sections: 
 
2.12.010 - Treasurer—Duties. 
The city treasurer is appointed, with the advice and consent of the city council, by and reports to the mayor. 
The powers and duties of the city treasurer are set forth in the Uniform Fiscal Procedures Act, UCA 10-6-101 et seq. 
(Ord. 96-24 § 1 (5.6E))  
Chapter 2.16 - RECORDER 
Sections: 
 
2.16.010 - Recorder—Duties. 
The city recorder is appointed, with the advice and consent of the city council, by and reports to the mayor. 
The powers and duties of the city recorder are set forth in the Uniform Fiscal Procedures Act, UCA 10-6-101 et seq. 
(Ord. 96-24 § 1 (5.6D))  
Chapter 2.20 - MUNICIPAL JUSTICE COURT JUDGE 
Sections: 
 
2.20.010 - Municipal justice court judge—Appointment—Vacancies. 
A.  The mayor shall appoint a qualified person to the position of municipal justice court judge and such appointment shall be confirmed by a majority of the city council. Following confirmation by the city council the municipal justice court judge shall be certified by the judicial council pursuant to UCA 78-5-134. The term of the municipal justice court judge is four years. 
B.  If a vacancy occurs in the office of the municipal justice court before the completion of his or her term of office, the mayor may: 
1.  Fill the vacancy by appointment for the unexpired term by following the procedures and requirements for appointments as found in subsection A of this section; or 
2.  Contract with a justice court judge of the county, an adjacent county or another municipality within those counties for judicial services. 
C.  All vacancies in the office of municipal justice court judge shall be filled in accordance with the requirements and procedures as found in UCA 20A-1-506. 
(Ord. 95-4 § 1; Ord. 264 § 2, 1993: prior code § 1-4-23)  
Chapter 2.22 - ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
Sections: 
 
2.22.000 - Purpose and intent. 
For specified municipal action, as more particularly defined and designated in this code, in which an adverse decision by a city official results in detriment to a person, it is the purpose and intent of the city council to afford that person due process of law by way of an administrative hearing. Due process shall require proper notice of the nature of the violation and the opportunity to be heard, a hearing before a fair and impartial administrative law judge, the right to present evidence, the right to cross-examination, the right to be represented by an attorney or other advocate, the right to receive an adequate explanation of the reasons justifying any resulting administrative order and the right to appeal an administrative order to the district court. 
(Ord. 2004-03 (part))  
2.22.010 - Effect of headings. 
Title, chapter, and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2004-03 (part))  
2.22.020 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, portion or provision of this chapter is, for any reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council hereby declares that it would have adopted this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, portion or provision thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, clauses, phrases, portions or provisions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. This section shall apply to all amendments made to this chapter. 
(Ord. 2004-03 (part))  
2.22.030 - Definitions. 
"Administrative citation" means a citation issued to a responsible person that gives notice of a violation and the civil fee for such violation. 
"Administrative order" means an order issued by an administrative law judge. The order may include an order to enter upon private property to abate a violation of this code, to pay civil fees and administrative costs, to reverse or modify decisions of city officials as provided elsewhere in this code or take any other action as authorized or required by this chapter and applicable state codes. 
"Administrative law judge" means a person appointed by the mayor or his designee to preside over administrative hearings. 
"Itemized statement of costs" means a written notice to a responsible person, itemizing the city's actual costs and administrative cost of abating a code violation, ordering payment of those costs and advising the responsible person of the right to contest the reasonableness of the costs at an administrative hearing. 
"Municipal action" means a notice of violation and summons, an administrative citation, an itemized statement of costs, a notice of emergency abatement or other notice of any other adverse municipal decision for which the right to an administrative hearing is specifically provided by ordinance. 
"Notice of emergency abatement" means a written notice that informs a responsible person of emergency abatement actions taken by the city and provides and itemized statement of costs for those actions. 
"Notice of violation and summons" means a written notice that informs a responsible person of code violations, orders certain steps to correct the violations, demands appearance at an administrative hearing and sets forth a date and time for the hearing. 
"Person" means any natural person, firm, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business trust, organization or the manager, lessee, agent, sergeant, officer or employee of any of them or any other entity that is recognized by law as the subject of rights or duties. For purposes of this chapter, "person" also indicates a person whose interest is adverse to the city at an administrative hearing. 
(Ord. 2004-03 (part))  
2.22.040 - Request for administrative hearing. 
A.  Where the right to an administrative hearing has been established under this code, a person having that right may request an administrative hearing, if the request is filed within ten calendar days from the date of service of one of the following: 
1.  Itemized statement of costs as defined in Chapter 8.14; 
2.  Administrative citation as defined in Chapter 8.14; 
3.  Notice of emergency abatement as defined in Chapter 8.14; or 
4.  Notice of any other municipal action where the right to an administrative hearing is provided under any other title and chapter of this code. 
B.  The request for an administrative hearing shall be made in writing, and shall be accompanied by a filing fee to be established in the consolidated fee schedule. This fee shall not be waived. 
C.  The request shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  It shall be in writing; 
2.  It shall contain a legible, plain statement of the reason or reasons that the person requesting the hearing is entitled to relief from the municipal action; 
3.  It shall be accompanied by a copy of the itemized statement of costs, administrative citation, notice of emergency abatement or other notice of municipal action for which the hearing is requested; 
4.  It shall contain the name of the person requesting the hearing and the address to which all notices and orders shall be mailed; 
5.  It shall be dated and signed by the person requesting the hearing; and 
6.  It shall be filed with the city recorder. 
D.  The city may initiate an administrative hearing by service and filing of a notice of violation and summons as provided in Chapter 8.14. Service of the notice of violation and summons shall be made as provided in Section 8.14.120. 
E.  Within twenty (20) days after receiving a request for an administrative hearing or the service of a notice of violation and summons, the administrative law judge shall schedule a date, time and place for the administrative hearing. Failure to hold the hearing within twenty (20) days of the request shall not be a basis for reversal of the municipal action. No adverse action, except an emergency abatement pursuant to Section 8.14.410, shall be taken pending the administrative hearing. 
F.  Failure to request an administrative hearing within ten calendar days from the date of service of any of the notices in subsection (A) above shall constitute a waiver of the right to an administrative hearing and the right to an appeal. 
(Ord. 2004-03 (part))  
2.22.050 - Notification of administrative hearing. 
A.  Notice of the date, time, and place of the administrative hearing shall be served upon the person requesting the hearing no later than five city business days in advance of the hearing. Failure to provide timely notice of the hearing shall result in the continuation of the hearing. No adverse action will be taken or imposed by the city, with the exception of emergency abatement action pursuant to 8.14.410, pending the hearing. 
B.  Except in the case of a notice of violation and summons, the notice shall be served by mailing it to the address designated in the request for hearing and shall be deemed to have been served on the third day following the date of mailing. Notice of violation and summons shall be served in accordance with Section 8.14.120. 
C.  Upon service of the notice or notice of violation and summons, the person receiving the service shall be required to attend the administrative hearing at the appointed date and time. 
(Ord. 2004-03 (part))  
2.22.060 - Appointment and qualifications of the administrative law judge. 
A.  The mayor, with the consent of the city council, shall appoint an administrative law judge to preside at administrative hearings. 
B.  The administrative law judge shall serve for a term of two years and, during that two-year term, shall be subject to removal by the mayor only for cause. 
C.  Cause for removal may be for any conduct unbecoming a hearing officer, dereliction of assigned duties or the existence of a bias or conflict of interest that might affect impartiality of decisions. The administrative law judge may appeal a removal for cause to the city council which shall uphold the removal if there is substantial evidence to support the mayor's decision. 
D.  A person appointed to serve as an administrative law judge shall either be law trained or have significant experience with the requirements and operation of administrative hearing processes. The person shall be free from any bias or conflict of interest that might affect impartiality of decisions. 
E.  An administrative law judge is subject to disqualification for bias, prejudice, interest or any other reason for which a judge may be disqualified in a court of law. The administrative law judge shall promulgate rules and procedures for disqualification and replacement. 
(Ord. 2004-03 (part))  
2.22.070 - Powers of administrative law judge. 
A.  An administrative law judge shall have authority to hold an administrative hearing for violations of this code and such other matters as specifically designated by ordinance. 
B.  An administrative law judge may continue a hearing for good cause shown by one of the parties or if the administrative law judge independently determines that due process has not been adequately afforded to a party. 
C.  At the request of any party to an administrative hearing, an administrative law judge may sign subpoenas for witnesses, documents, and other evidence where the attendance of the witness or the admission of evidence is deemed helpful by the administrative law judge to decide issues at the hearing. All costs related to the subpoena, including witness and mileage fees, shall be borne by the party requesting the subpoena. 
D.  The administrative law judge may modify civil fees or fines upon a finding of good cause. The administrative law judge may reduce the fines to what is just and equitable under the circumstances; however, in connection with an appeal regarding an itemized statement of costs, the administrative law judge may not order the responsible person to pay less than actual costs incurred by the city and shall require the responsible person to pay the administrative costs as established in the consolidated fee schedule. 
E.  The administrative law judge shall have the authority to reverse or modify the decision of a city official. 
F.  An administrative law judge has continuing jurisdiction over the subject matter of an administrative hearing for the purposes of: granting a continuance; ordering compliance by issuing an administrative order; ensuring compliance of that order; authorizing the city to enter upon private property to abate a violation; modifying an administrative order, assessing costs of abatement, assessing civil fines; or, where extraordinary circumstances exist, granting a new hearing. 
G.  An administrative law judge may require a responsible person to post a performance bond to ensure compliance with an administrative order, but only if agreed to by the enforcement official handling the matter for the city. 
H.  An administrative law judge shall not make any order that would require or allow a person to violate state law or city ordinance. 
(Ord. 2004-03 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2009-02, 3-26-2009)  
2.22.080 - Procedures at administrative hearing. 
A.  Administrative hearings are intended to be informal in nature. Formal rules of evidence and discovery shall not apply; however, upon request made in writing reasonably in advance of a hearing, the city shall provide to a person requesting a hearing the opportunity to review documents, photographs or other tangible evidence it intends to present at the hearing and shall provide a list of the witnesses it intends to call at the hearing. Failure to request discovery shall not be a basis for a continuance. Complainant information shall not be disclosed or released unless the complainant is a witness at the hearing. The procedure and format of the administrative hearing shall follow duly adopted policies and procedures. 
B.  The city shall bear the burden of proof to establish the existence of a violation of this code. 
C.  Such proof shall be established by a preponderance of the evidence. 
D.  Each party shall have the opportunity to cross-examine witnesses and present evidence in support of his case. A written declaration signed under penalty of perjury may be accepted in lieu of a personal appearance. Testimony may be given by telephone or other electronic means. 
E.  Administrative hearings shall be held at City Hall, open to the public and shall be recorded by audiotape; however, at the discretion of the administrative law judge, administrative hearings may be held at the location of a violation as long as adequate provision is made to preserve a verbatim record of the hearing. 
F.  The person shall have the right to be represented by an attorney or other advocate. If an attorney will be representing a responsible person at a hearing, notice of the attorney's name, address, and telephone number shall be given to the city attorney at least one day prior to the hearing. If such notice is not given, the hearing may be continued at the city's request, and all costs of the continuance shall be assessed to the person requesting the hearing. 
G.  The burden to prove any raised defenses shall be upon the party raising any such defense and shall be established by a preponderance of the evidence. 
H.  Administrative hearings may be held on Mondays through Fridays, excluding city holidays, between the hours of eight a.m. and nine p.m. 
(Ord. 2004-03 (part))  
2.22.090 - Failure to attend administrative hearing. 
A person who fails to appear at an administrative hearing shall be deemed to have waived all rights in connection with the hearing, including the right to appeal. Provided that proper notice of the hearing has been given as provided in Section 2.22.050, an administrative order may be entered against a person based upon the failure to appear. 
(Ord. 2004-03 (part))  
2.22.100 - Administrative order. 
A.  A person and the city may enter into a stipulated agreement, which shall be signed by both parties. Such agreement may be entered as an administrative order. Entry of such agreement shall constitute a waiver of the right to an administrative hearing and the right to appeal. 
B.  Within ten days after all evidence and testimony are presented, the administrative law judge shall issue a written administrative order that affirms, rejects or modifies the notice of violation and summons, itemized statement of costs, administrative citation, notice of emergency abatement or other municipal action. 
C.  If affirmed, the administrative order shall specify the evidence supporting the administrative law judge's decision and the action required to satisfy the order. 
D.  The administrative law judge may assign the party who prevails at the administrative hearing to prepare findings of fact and conclusions of law. 
E.  An administrative law judge may issue an administrative order that requires a person to cease from violating this code and to take any necessary corrective action. 
F.  An administrative law judge may order the city to enter the property and abate all violations, including the removal of animals in violation of an applicable code requirement. Whenever an order of abatement is entered, the administrative law judge shall order the responsible person to pay to the city the actual costs of the abatement and the administrative costs of the city to perform the abatement. 
G.  An administrative law judge may revoke a kennel permit, an animal license, the right to possess animals as provided in this code. 
H.  As part of an administrative order, an administrative law judge may establish specific deadlines for the payment of fees and costs, and condition the total or partial assessment of civil fees on the responsible person's ability to take necessary corrective actions by specified deadlines. Such fees shall continue to accrue until the responsible person complies with the administrative law judge's decision and corrects the violation. 
I.  An administrative order imposing civil fines for failure to abate a violation of the city code by a stated deadline, shall continue to accrue additional fines until the responsible person complies with the administrative law judge's decision and corrects the violation but shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
J.  An administrative law judge may schedule subsequent review hearings as may be necessary or as requested by the city to ensure compliance with an administrative order. 
K.  An administrative law judge may order a person to post a performance bond to ensure compliance with an administrative order, but only if agreed to by the enforcement official handling the matter for the city. 
L.  An administrative law judge may revoke or suspend a business license, a building permit, or permits for any alteration, repair, or construction pertaining to any existing or new structures or signs on the property, or any permits pertaining to the use and development of real property or a structure where a violation is located as provided in this code. 
M.  An administrative order shall become final on the date of signing by an administrative law judge. 
N.  An administrative order shall be served on all parties as provided in Section 2.22.030. 
O.  An administrative law judge may take any action reasonably necessary to obtain compliance with the applicable city ordinances. 
P.  An administrative law judge may assess civil fines and costs of abatement and administrative costs to a responsible person. 
(Ord. 2004-03 (part))  
2.22.110 - Failure to comply. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the terms and deadlines set forth in a final administrative order. 
B.  A violation of this section shall be a class B misdemeanor. 
C.  Upon failure of a person to comply with the terms and deadline set forth in the administrative order, the city may use all appropriate legal means to recover the civil penalties and administrative costs to obtain compliance. 
(Ord. 2004-03 (part))  
2.22.120 - Appeal. 
A.  Any person adversely affected by a final administrative order made in the exercise of the provisions of this chapter may file a petition for review in the district court. 
B.  The petition shall be barred unless it is filed within thirty (30) days after the administrative order is final. 
C.  In the petition, the person may only allege that the administrative order was arbitrary, capricious or illegal. 
D.  The court shall: 
1.  Presume that the administrative order is valid; 
2.  Review the record to determine whether the order was arbitrary, capricious, or illegal; and 
3.  Affirm the administrative order if it is supported by substantial evidence in the record. 
E.  Within one hundred twenty (120) days after submitting the petition, the party petitioning for appeal shall request a copy of the record of the proceedings, including minutes, findings, orders and, if available, a true and correct transcript of the hearing when necessary. 
1.  The city shall not submit copies of files or transcripts to the reviewing court until the party petitioning for appeal has paid all required costs. 
2.  The petitioning party's failure to properly arrange for copies of the record, or to pay the full costs for the record, within one hundred eighty (180) days after the petition for review was filed shall be grounds for dismissal of the petition. 
3.  Upon receipt of the payment of all required costs the city will transmit a true and correct copy of the administrative hearing transcript. 
F.  If the proceeding was tape recorded, a transcript of such tape recording shall be deemed a true and correct transcript for purposes of this subsection. If a transcript of a hearing cannot be prepared because the tape recording is incomplete or unintelligible, the district court may, in its discretion, remand the matter to the administrative law judge for a supplemental proceeding to complete the record. The district court may limit the scope of the supplemental proceeding to issues that, in the court's opinion, need to be clarified. 
G.  If there is a record, court review shall be limited to the record of the proceeding. The court may not accept or consider any evidence outside such record unless that evidence was offered to the administrative law judge and the court determines that the administrative law judge improperly excluded it. The court may call witnesses and take evidence if there is no record. 
H.  The filing of a petition for review with the district court does not stay execution of an administrative order. Before filing a petition, a person may request the administrative law judge to stay an administrative order. Upon receipt of a request to stay, the administrative law judge may order the administrative order to be stayed pending district court review if the administrative law judge finds such stay to be in the best interest of the city. 
(Ord. 2004-03 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2010-05, 4-28-2010)  
Chapter 2.24 - CITY ATTORNEY'S OFFICE 
Sections: 
 
2.24.010 - City attorney's office. 
A.  The department head will be the city attorney who is appointed, with the advice and consent of the city council, by and reports to the mayor. 
B.  Functional Responsibilities. This department's function is to provide for the proper administration of the legal services of the city. These services are subject to the limitations of applicable funds' appropriations, statutes and ordinances. These services include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Prosecution of violators of city ordinances and regulations. 
2.  Prosecution or defense of all actions and appeals involving the city. 
3.  Furnishing legal advice, counsel and assistance to the mayor, city council, and all other city officers, boards, commissions and agencies in relation to their duties and the business of the city. 
4.  Controlling and directing all legal services performed by any special counsel retained for the city. 
5.  Preparing and/or reviewing all proposed ordinances and resolutions presented to the mayor and city council. 
6.  Approving the form of all contracts entered into by the city. 
7.  Preparing the necessary affidavits and verification on behalf of the city in any and all proceedings. 
(Ord. 96-24 § 1 (5.7)) 
  UCA Reference: 10-3-928 Attorney duties—Deputy public prosecutor.  
Chapter 2.28 - CITY ENGINEER'S OFFICE 
Sections: 
 
2.28.010 - City engineer's office. 
A.  The department head will be the city engineer, appointed with the advice and consent of the city council, by and reporting to the mayor. 
B.  Functional Responsibilities. This department's function is to provide engineering services to the city. 
These  services are subject to the limitations of applicable funds' appropriations, statutes and ordinances. These services include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Reviewing, supervising and accepting of all engineering and architectural design and construction work for the city. Exception can be made when these functions are assigned to other departments or officers of the city. 
2.  Coordinating and supervising of all construction work done within the public rights-of-way of the city. 
3.  Maintaining of records of public improvements as prescribed by state statute. These include, but are not limited to, maps, plans, plats, profiles, drawings, final estimates, specifications and contracts. 
4.  Promoting efficient and safe usage and development of the city's transportation network. This will be done through transportation engineering techniques in accordance with the master street plan of the city. 
5.  That the city of South Salt Lake has a city engineer's office does not preclude the city from employing private engineers or engineering firms in accordance with city's needs and resources. 
(Ord. 96-24 § 1 (5.12)) 
  UCA References: 10-3-903 through 10-3-908.  
Chapter 2.30 - PUBLIC ASSETS DEPARTMENT 
 
2.30.010 - Public assets department. 
A.  The department head will be a city employee, appointed with the advice and consent of the city council, by and reporting to the mayor. 
B.  Functional Responsibilities. This department's function is to oversee the stewardship of the city's physical assets in the best interest of the taxpayers. The services of this department are subject to the limitations of applicable funds' appropriations, statutes, and ordinances. These services include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Create and maintain records of all city physical assets. 
2.  Identify and use best practices in servicing and maintaining all city physical assets. 
3.  Develop and oversee a city capital improvement plan. 
4.  Develop sound practices for the acquisition, leasing, renting, and disposal of city real property and public use facilities. 
5.  Determine and administer all legal compliance requirements associated with city-owned property. 
6.  Determine and administer best practices for all construction activity affecting the city's property assets. 
7.  Determine and administer best practices relating to emergency repairs and use of city property during emergencies. 
8.  Administer all purchases relating to property assets as required by city policy and ordinances. 
9.  Safeguard and secure the city's property assets. 
(Ord. No. 2014-19, 7-30-2014)  
Chapter 2.32 - OFFICERS GENERALLY 
Sections: 
 
2.32.020 - Travel compensation. 
Each member of the governing body shall receive mileage and per diem for all trips approved by the governing body according to the schedules adopted by the Utah Department of Finance. 
(Ord. 231 § 3, 1990)  
2.32.030 - Oath and bonds of officials. 
All officers of the city of South Salt Lake, whether elected or appointed, shall, before they enter upon the duties of the respective offices, take, subscribe and file the constitutional oath of office and the city treasurer and the city recorder each shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, execute a bond with good and sufficient sureties, payable to the city in such penal sum as may by resolution or ordinance be directed, conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of his office and the payment of all moneys received by such officer according to law and the ordinances of the city. The treasurer's bond, or the bond of any person who acts as municipal treasurer, shall be not less than the amount established by the state money management council, and the bonds for all other officers so designated by the city council shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). The premium charged by a corporate surety for any official bond shall be paid by the city. 
(Ord. 268 § 1, 1993; prior code § 1-4-27)  
2.32.040 - Adoption of Municipal Officers' and Employees' Ethics Act. 
The Municipal Officers' and Employees' Ethics Act codified at UCA 10-3-1301 through 10-3-1312 establishing the standards of conduct for municipal officers and employees and requiring those persons to disclose actual and potential conflicts of interest between their public duties and their personal interests is adopted by the city council of South Salt Lake. All future amendments and revisions of this act are adopted as well. 
(Ord. 96-16 § 2)  
2.32.050. - Elected officials' compensation commission. 
A.  There is hereby created an elected officials' compensation commission which shall consist of three residents of the city of South Salt Lake selected by the Mayor, three residents of the city of South Salt Lake selected by a majority of the city council, and one additional resident of the city selected by a majority of the other six members of the commission. 
B.  Prior to March of each year in which there is a mayoral election, the human resources division shall complete a salary and benefits survey of: 
1.  Mayors in similar cities in Utah with a full-time elected mayor; and 
2.  Council members in similar cities in Utah with part-time council members. 
C.  The elected officials' compensation commission shall review the results of the salary and benefits survey and, no later than the second regularly scheduled council meeting in April in each year of a mayoral election, recommend to the city council: 
1.  An annual salary for the mayor; 
2.  An annual salary for city council members; and 
3.  Any other compensation or benefits matters the commission considers pertinent. 
D.  After receipt of the recommendations of the Commission, the City Council shall consider the recommendations and establish by ordinance the mayor's and council members' annual compensation for the next four years. Compensation for the mayor and city council members shall be considered in two separate ordinances. The council is not bound to adopt the recommendations of the commission. 
E.  Compensation adjustments occurring under this section shall be effective: 
1.  At the beginning of the pay period that includes the first Monday in January of the following year for incumbents who are re-elected or continuing their term; and 
2.  On the first day of the term of office for newly elected officials. 
F.  The term of the elected officials' compensation commission members shall expire at the time the city council acts pursuant to subsection D of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2019-01, § 1, 2-13-2019)  
Chapter 2.36 - POLICE DEPARTMENT 
Sections: 
 
2.36.010 - Organization of department. 
The police department of the city of South Salt Lake shall consist of a chief of police and such other police officers as shall from time to time be deemed necessary. They shall serve at the discretion of the mayor and their salaries and allowances shall be fixed by and subject to change by resolution of the city council. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 8A-1-1)  
2.36.020 - Appointment and removal of chief of police. 
A.  On or before the first Monday in February following each official election, the city council shall appoint a competent person to act as chief of police who shall be a United States citizen of good repute and high moral character. The chief of police shall in the discharge of his duties have like powers and be subject to like responsibilities as sheriffs and constables in similar cases; and he shall suppress riots, disturbances and breaches of the peace and apprehend all persons committing any offense against the laws of the state or the ordinances of the city. And at all times he shall diligently and faithfully discharge his duties and enforce all ordinances and regulations of the city for the preservation of peace and good order and the protection of the rights and property of all persons. 
B.  He shall organize, supervise and be responsible for all of the activities of the police department, and shall define and assign the duties of the different police officers. He may make recommendations to the mayor or other authorized persons concerning changing of personnel within the department. He shall, when required, attend meetings of the mayor to consult with and advise the mayor on matters of public safety and shall execute all lawful orders of the mayor and see that all orders and judgments of the city court are carried into effect. 
C.  The mayor may at any time remove such chief of police without cause, without charges being preferred and without trial, hearing or opportunity to be heard whenever in the opinion of the mayor the good of the service will be served thereby, and the action of the mayor in making such removal shall be final and conclusive. The city recorder shall forthwith notify the chief of police in writing of his removal and from the time of his notification the person so removed shall in no case be entitled to any salary or compensation whatever. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 8A-1-2)  
2.36.030 - Ranking officers. 
A.  Command shall be exercised by virtue of office and special assignment of officers eligible by law and ordinance to command. The officers of the department shall rank in the following order: 
1.  First—Chief of police; 
2.  Second—Captains in line of seniority; 
3.  Third—Sergeants in order of seniority. 
B.  In the absence of the chief of police, performance of his duties shall devolve upon the next ranking officer. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 8A-1-3)  
2.36.040 - Removal of officers and disciplinary action. 
A.  All subordinate officers and employees in the police department shall be appointed and retained subject to approval of the mayor and city council, and may be disciplined for misconduct, incompetency or failure to perform the assigned duties or for failure to observe and obey the city ordinances, rules and regulations of the city council or the rules of the chief of police. 
B.  The chief of police shall have the control, management, direction of all members of his department and the lawful exercise of his functions with full power at any time to suspend any subordinate officer, employee or agent in the police department for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days, when in his judgment the good of the service requires it. During the time of such suspension the person or persons so suspended shall not be entitled to any salary or compensation whatever. In all cases of suspension the chief of police shall immediately report the same to the city recorder and to the mayor in writing. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 8A-1-4)  
2.36.050 - Duties of all police officers. 
All police officers of the city of South Salt Lake shall possess the powers conferred upon constables by law; they shall execute and serve all warrants, process, commitments and writs issued by the city council; they shall at all times preserve the public peace, prevent crime, detect and arrest offenders, suppress riots, protect persons and property, remove nuisances existing in the public streets, roads and highways, enforce every law, both state and municipal relating to the suppression of offenses, and the performance of all duties enjoined upon them by ordinance. 
(Prior code § 8A-1-5)  
2.36.070 - Acceptance of gifts—Penalty. 
No member of the police department shall receive other than his regular salary, any fee or compensation directly or indirectly from a city, county, state or individual for any service rendered or act done in connection with his duty as a police officer. This rule shall not apply to receipt of witness fees; to work unrelated with police duties; or to a gift of reward providing such gift is recommended by the chief of police and approved by the mayor and city council. 
(Prior code § 8A-1-7)  
2.36.080 - Right to arrest without a warrant. 
The several members of the police force shall have power and authority, without process, and upon presentation of proper credentials, to arrest and take into custody any person who shall commit or threaten or attempt to commit in the presence of such officer, or within his view, any breach of the peace or any offense directly prohibited by the laws of this state or by any ordinance of this city. 
(Prior code § 8A-1-8)  
2.36.090 - Arresting officer may summon assistance. 
Any police officer shall, when necessary in making an arrest, call upon any person or as many persons as he deems necessary to assist him in the execution of his duty. Every person over the age of eighteen (18) who neglects or refuses to aid and assist any police officer in preventing any breach of the peace or the commission of any criminal offense, being thereto lawfully required by the said police officer in the administration of justice, is punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred ninety-nine dollars ($299.00). 
(Ord. 270 § 1, 1993; prior code § 8A-1-9)  
2.36.100 - Record of arrests. 
The chief of police shall provide and cause to be kept a record of arrests. Upon such record shall be entered a statement showing the date of such arrests, the name of the person arrested, the name of the arresting officer, the offense charged and a description of any property found upon the person arrested. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 8A-1-10)  
2.36.110 - Property taken from person arrested—Triplicate receipts. 
With the exception of evidence, when money or other property is taken from a defendant arrested upon a charge of a public offense, the officer taking it must at the time give triplicate receipts therefor, specifying particularly the amount of money or the kind of property taken; one of which receipt he must deliver to the defendant, another he must forthwith file with the clerk of the court of which the compliant and other papers in the case are required by law to be sent, and another must be sent at once to the office of the chief of police. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 8A-1-11)  
2.36.120 - Register of property to be kept. 
The chief of police must enter in a suitable record a description of every article of property alleged to be stolen or embezzled and brought into his office, or taken from the person of a prisoner, and must attach a number to each article and make a corresponding entry thereof. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 8A-1-12)  
2.36.130 - Stolen property—Disposition. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to keep all lost or stolen property that comes into the possession of the police department or any of its members, and he shall make all reasonable effort to discover the owners thereof and restore said property to such owners. He shall not be obliged to keep said property longer than a period of six months; and if the owner cannot be found within this period, the chief of police must sell the same at public auction, as provided by law for the sale of personal property on execution. (See Rule 69 (e) Utah Rules of Civil Procedure.) The chief of police shall make a full report to the city treasurer of the articles sold and the amount received by him at any such sale, and the money received shall first be applied to the expenses of the sale and any balance shall go into the city treasury. 
(Prior code § 8A-1-13)  
2.36.140 - Special officers—Appointment and duties. 
A.  The mayor may at any time appoint policemen and police reserves or watchmen to serve as special police officers without pay from the city unless otherwise determined by the city council, said appointment is subject to revocation and removal as provided in this chapter. 
B.  The said policemen, police reserves and/or watchmen so appointed shall act as special police officers throughout the city or at a particular place therein as may be designated in the appointment. 
C.  The chief of police shall exercise general supervision over such policemen, police reserves and/or watchmen, and he may with the consent of the mayor, at any time remove such policemen, police reserves and/or watchmen and revoke the police powers conferred upon any such person before the period of his appointment expires without charges being preferred and without trial, hearing or opportunity to be heard, whenever in their opinion the good order and well-being of the city will be served thereby, and such removal and revocation shall be conclusive and final. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 8A-1-14)  
2.36.150 - Hiring of police officers with an alcohol-related driving conviction within three years, prohibited. 
No person shall be hired as a police officer if the person has been convicted of an alcohol-related driving offense, as defined in Section 2.36.160, within three years. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02, 5-9-2018)  
2.36.160 - Definitions. 
"Alcohol-related driving offense" means any offense listed in UCA 41-6a-501(2). 
(Ord. No. 2018-02, 5-9-2018)  
Chapter 2.40 - FIRE DEPARTMENT 
Sections: 
 
2.40.010 - Fire department established. 
There is established a fire department which shall be known as the "South Salt Lake Fire Department" and shall be composed of one chief and such other officers and firemen as shall be funded by the city council. 
(Ord. 2008-24 (part): editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 5-1-1)  
2.40.015 - Policies and practices established. 
A.  The operational policies, procedures and protocols of the South Salt Lake Fire Department are those established by the fire chief, printed in the fire department manual and published in the most recently adopted International Fire Code, copies of which are kept in the fire department office. 
B.  The fire department shall also establish qualifications, tests, standards, procedures and rules, to be applied to all department employees, prospective employees, and all applicants for promotions. 
(Ord. 2008-24 (part): Ord. 99-13; subsection A editorially added during 10/96 supplement)  
2.40.020 - Fire chief—Appointment. 
The mayor shall appoint, subject to approval by the city council, a chief of the fire department, who shall qualify by taking and subscribing the constitutional oath of office. 
The fire chief shall perform the duties as set forth by ordinance and the laws of the state of Utah. 
(Ord. 2008-24 (part): editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 5-1-2)  
2.40.030 - Fire chief—Duties and powers. 
A.  The duties of extinguishing fires, providing emergency medical care, including emergency medical transport, providing emergency rescue services, responding to hazardous materials incidents and otherwise protecting life and property within the city are entrusted to the chief of the fire department. He may make suitable regulations requiring officers and members of the department to wear an appropriate uniform or badge while on duty. He shall have sole and entire command over all officers and members of the department at fires; and shall have full charge at all times of all apparatus and equipment belonging to the department, and shall periodically examine and inspect the condition of such equipment. He shall adopt such measures as he shall deem expedient for the extinguishment of fires, providing emergency medical care, including emergency medical transport, providing emergency rescue services, responding to hazardous materials incidents, assuring the general protection and preservation of property, and the observance of duties required of him by the laws of the state and ordinances of the city. 
B.  It shall be the special duty of the chief of the fire department to see that at all times the provisions of this chapter relating to the protection and regulation of property are strictly enforced, as also all provisions of this chapter for the prevention of and the protection against fires. 
(Ord. 2008-24 (part): prior code § 5-1-3)  
2.40.040 - Fire chief—Power to appoint and remove. 
The chief of the fire department shall have power to appoint members and to remove any officer or member of the department at any time he sees fit in accordance with the personnel policies and procedures governing the department and the city. The chief may prescribe rules and examinations to determine the qualifications for fitness to be members of either the salaried or volunteer members of the fire department. 
(Ord. 2008-24 (part): editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 5-1-4)  
2.40.050 - Emergency medical services. 
A.  The fire department shall provide emergency medical services, including emergency medical transport. The fire chief shall assure that the department has sufficient staff, equipment, vehicles and supplies and that medical personnel are properly trained, certified and supervised in order to properly provide emergency medical services within the city, in accordance with the requirements of state rules, laws and licensure, and within the standards and protocols adopted by the department. 
B.  The fire chief shall also insure that the city fire department or any other contracted emergency medical or fire/rescue response entity providing said services to the city of South Salt Lake shall maintain properly configured and equipped fixed facilities. 
C.  These buildings shall be strategically located throughout the geographic boundaries of the city as needed to maintain prompt and efficient response times. This shall include, but not be limited to, facilities that can house medium to large size emergency vehicles and apparatus in heated bay areas that can maintain a minimum temperature of sixty (60) degrees F at all times. 
D.  The facilities shall also be capable of housing response personnel and shall be equipped with adequate sleeping facilities, kitchen areas, training rooms and other support areas within the building to support the emergency operational deployment needs on a twenty-four (24) hours per day and seven days per week basis. The building must meet all applicable fire, zoning and building codes and must be approved by the administrative officer of the city of South Salt Lake. 
(Ord. 2008-24 (part): prior code § 5-1-5)  
2.40.060 - Billing for emergency medical services. 
The department shall cause all recipients of emergency medical services to be billed for such services and supplies according to the fees established by state rule and law and shall provide a method to collect sums lawfully due and owing to the city. 
(Ord. 2008-24 (part): editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 5-1-6)  
2.40.070 - Right-of-way. 
It is provided that the fire trucks of the city of South Salt Lake shall have the right-of-way over all other vehicles of every kind in the city of South Salt Lake, and it shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any vehicle to drive or operate the same in front of a fire truck at a distance less than one hundred (100) feet or to follow the same at a distance closer than five hundred (500) feet, while the fire truck is enroute to a fire or other emergency. 
(Ord. 2008-24 (part): Ord. 272 § 1, 1993: prior code § 5-1-7)  
2.40.080 - Fire lanes. 
Whenever necessary in his judgment for the safety of persons or property in the event of a fire, and with reasonable regard for requirements of transportation, traffic and commerce, as determined in consultation with the city's safety committee, the fire chief shall be authorized to designate fire lanes along which the personnel and equipment of the fire department shall have unimpaired and ready access to any premises, buildings or structures, public or private, in which numbers of persons work, live or congregate, from time to time, for any purpose, including, but not limited to, factories, schools, hotels, hospitals, churches, theaters, restaurants and shopping centers and malls. Notice shall be given to persons in possession or control of such premises, buildings or structures as provided in this section and shall include a requirement that reasonable signs, notices, warnings, markings or other means be established and maintained to mark the designated fire lanes for the information and guidance of the person using such premises, buildings or structures. After such signs or markings are in place, any person who stops, stands or parks a vehicle in a designated fire lane, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or under the direction of a law enforcement or fire department officer or traffic control device, is guilty of a class C misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 2008-24 (part): Ord. 273 § 1, 1993; Ord. 66A § 1, 1980: prior code § 5-1-3A)  
2.40.090 - Blockading streets. 
Whenever a fire or other emergency shall occur it shall be lawful for the chief of the department or the officer in command to blockade any street, avenue, alley, sidewalk or other place if, in his judgment, it is necessary to insure the efficient working of the men, hose, engines or hook and ladder apparatus under his command and to protect the hose of said department from injury. He is authorized to request of the police department a detail of patrolmen sufficient, in his judgment, therefor, who for the time being shall act under the instruction of the chief of the fire department or officer in command. It shall be unlawful for any person to break through or attempt to break through the blockade mentioned in this section; or at any time to run over or attempt to run over the hose of the fire department with a motor vehicle, train or any other type of vehicle. 
(Ord. 2008-24 (part): prior code § 5-1-8)  
2.40.100 - Limits at fire. 
The fire chief or any police officer may prescribe the limits in the vicinity of a fire or other emergency within which no unauthorized person may enter. 
(Ord. 2008-24 (part): prior code § 5-1-9)  
2.40.110 - Removal of obstruction at fire. 
The chief of the fire department or other officer in command of the emergency response, may order the removal or destruction of any fence, building or structure, which he deems necessary in order to check the progress of the fire. All persons present at any fire shall be subject to the orders of the officer in charge of the removal and protection of the property and in extinguishing the fire. 
(Ord. 2008-24 (part): prior code § 5-1-10)  
2.40.120 - Demolishing buildings. 
In cases of imminent and urgent public necessity the chief of the fire department, or whoever is in command at the scene of the fire, may order any electric wires or poles in close proximity thereto to be cut or otherwise disposed of, and may also order the demolition of any building or other structure to prevent the spreading of an existing conflagration. In no case shall the chief or any officer or member of the fire department unnecessarily or recklessly destroy or injure any building, house or other property. 
(Ord. 2008-24 (part): prior code § 5-1-11)  
2.40.130 - Obstructing firemen in discharge of duties—Penalty. 
Every person who at the scene of any fire or other emergency disobeys the lawful orders of any public officer or fireman, or offers any resistance to or interference with the lawful efforts of any fireman, or company of firemen to extinguish the same, or engages in any disorderly conduct calculated to prevent the same from being extinguished, or who forbids, prevents or dissuades others from assisting to extinguish the same, is guilty of a class B misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 2008-24 (part): prior code § 5-1-12)  
2.40.140 - Disobedience of bystanders—Penalty. 
The fire chief, or any officer in charge at a fire or other emergency, after showing proper identification, at the scene of the incident may require the aid of each and every citizen, inhabitant or bystander in drawing any engine, vehicle or other fire apparatus to the fire, and, upon the refusal or neglect of any such person to immediately comply with such requirement, the offender shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor. All officers authorized to command the aid or assistance of any citizen, inhabitant or bystander are authorized likewise to arrest such citizen, inhabitant or bystander for refusal to obey any reasonable directions for the extinguishing of fire or the protection of life or property. 
(Ord. 2008-24 (part): prior code § 5-1-13)  
2.40.150 - Unlawful interference—Penalty. 
Any person who shall wilfully hinder any officer or fireman in the discharge of his duty at a fire or other emergency, or in any manner injure, deface or destroy any engine, hose or other fire apparatus belonging to the city, or who shall interfere with any fire company or person, or who shall wilfully break or injure any water pipe, or interfere with any of the fire or emergency apparatus, or in any way interfere with the water or its source of supply, shall be deemed guilty of a class B misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 2008-24 (part): prior code § 5-1-14)  
2.40.160 - False alarms and other fire offenses—Penalty. 
Any person who shall, without cause, give an alarm of fire or other emergency by outcry, telephone call, ringing of bells or otherwise shall be deemed guilty of a class B misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 2008-24 (part): prior code § 5-1-15)  
2.40.170 - Investigation after fire—Report. 
The fire chief, or in his absence his assistants in charge of the fire, shall, after its extinguishment, make prompt and thorough investigation of the cause of the fire, the time of breaking out, the amount of loss and insurance, a description of the affected buildings and premises, and shall secure all other useful information available, and record the same in a record book kept for that purpose in the office of the department and shall report the same to the city council at such time as it may direct. 
(Ord. 2008-24 (part): prior code § 5-1-16)  
2.40.180 - Right to enter upon and inspect premises. 
In the presence of either consent or exigent circumstances, the fire chief or his deputies upon presentation of proper credentials shall have the right to enter upon any premises at all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspecting the same. 
(Ord. 2008-24 (part): editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 5-1-17)  
2.40.190 - Fire inspections. 
A.  The fire chief or his designee, shall have the right and it shall be his duty to make any inspection to determine whether or not there has been compliance with the terms of this chapter or this code. If he should find that there is defective wiring or any other unsafe condition in said property, then he shall give the owner or the person operating the same five days' notice requiring said owner or person to make changes or alterations necessary to render any building or property safe, and if any person shall disregard said notice and refuse or neglect to comply with the terms and demands therein, he shall be deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor. In the alternative, the fire chief of designee shall have the authority to institute administrative enforcement proceedings to remedy the safety violation. The fire chief or designee shall have authority co-extensive with the building inspector. 
B.  Submission of Records by Others. 
1.  The fire chief or his designee may utilize a single-point repository service company for reporting, maintaining, organizing, and monitoring the services, testing. installation, repair, and or maintenance of fire prevention systems to commercial facilities within the city. If the fire chief or his designee utilizes a single-point repository system: 
a.  All certified contractors providing services, testing, installations, repair and/or maintenance of fire prevention systems to commercial facilities within the city are required to enroll and utilize the city approved single-point repository service company for reporting the rendered service information. This reporting information must be filed with the single-point repository service within five working days of these services being completed; 
b.  The single-point repository service company shall be a third party records repository which shall organize, maintain and monitor the received records, providing information to the city and the commercial facilities pertaining to the records status and timely notifications on required inspection timetables; 
c.  The single-point repository service company shall have permission to use the city logo and signature of the fire chief or his designee in all communications sent on behalf of the city in the above functions; 
d.  In addition, a copy of the record of each periodic inspection, test, servicing, repairs and maintenance shall be maintained on the commercial facilities premises, or other approved location, for a period of not less than three years, unless a different period of time is specified in the International Fire Code (IFC) or other appropriate standard. Records shall be made available to the Fire Official, and if requested, a copy provided to him; and 
e.  All applicable fees shall be paid directly from the contractor to the approved single-point repository service company. 
(Ord. 2008-24 (part): prior code § 5-1-18) 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, 12-12-2018)  
2.40.200 - Construction of buildings under inspection of fire department. 
All buildings in the city of South Salt Lake shall be constructed under the inspection of the fire department or the fire chief or his assistants to be appointed by him, and said persons shall have authority co-extensive with the building inspector to make corrections as stated in Section 2.40.190. 
(Ord. 2008-24 (part): prior code § 5-1-19)  
2.40.210 - Entering firehouses. 
It shall be and is declared unlawful for any person or persons to enter the fire department house or any place where the equipment and apparatus of the fire department is stored, at any time, except on business pertaining to the fire department or other city business. 
(Ord. 2008-24 (part): prior code § 5-1-20)  
2.40.220 - Causing injury to apparatus—Penalty. 
Whoever shall use any fire engine, hose, vehicle or other apparatus belonging to the city for any private purpose other than the extinguishment of fires, or whoever shall remove the same or any part thereof from its place of deposit, or having control thereof, permit such engine, hose, vehicle or other apparatus to be used for any private purpose other than as aforesaid, or shall in any manner injure a fire engine, hose equipment vehicle or other fire apparatus belonging to the city or remove any screw, bolt, nut or part of such engine or other fire apparatus or in any manner interfere with the same, whether in or out of use, shall upon conviction be guilty of a class B misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 2008-24 (part): prior code § 5-1-21)  
2.40.230 - Equipment to be standardized. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association to sell or offer for sale in the city or for any authority having charge of public property to purchase or procure any fire hose, fire hydrant, fire engine or other equipment with threaded parts, except adapters and caps, for fire protective purposes, unless it is fitted and equipped with the standard hydrant stem and cap nuts and standard threads for fire hose and fire hydrant couplings and fittings designated as the national standard and adopted by the National Board of Fire Underwriters, which standard is designated as the standard for such equipment in the city. 
(Ord. 2008-24 (part): prior code § 5-1-22)  
2.40.240 - Prohibition of smoking. 
Where conditions are found to justify the prohibition of smoking, the fire chief or his assistants shall order the owner or occupant of any establishment or area to post suitable signs or placards in each room, building, structure or place in which such prohibition of smoking shall be enforced. 
(Ord. 2008-24 (part): prior code § 5-1-24)  
2.40.250 - Noncompliance with code. 
Any building constructed or repaired in violation of any part of this code may be caused to be removed by order of the fire chief or destroyed pursuant to the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, or its successor, as adopted elsewhere in this code; all buildings and enclosures which are or may be in a dangerous state shall be put in a safe condition or removed by order of the fire chief. 
(Ord. 2008-24 (part): prior code § 5-1-23)  
2.40.260 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically provided, is guilty of a class C misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 2008-24 (part): prior code § 5-1-25)  
2.40.270 - Emergency responses—Cost recovery. 
A.  This section shall provide procedures for recovering costs incurred by the city for assistance rendered by the city in responding to hazardous materials emergencies, aggravated fire emergencies, and aggravated emergency medical responses. 
B.  Any person or entity who knowingly requests city fire department emergency medical services to respond to unnecessary, false, capricious or for non-emergency situations shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor. 
C.  For the purpose of this section, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
1.  "Hazardous material emergency" means a sudden or unexpected release of any substance that, because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, presents a direct and immediate threat to public safety or the environment and requires immediate action to mitigate the threat. 
2.  "Aggravated fire emergency" means a fire proximately caused by the owner or occupier of property or a structure, which present a direct and immediate threat to public safety and requires immediate action to mitigate the threat, and the fire: 
a.  Is caused or contributed to by the failure to comply with an order from any city agency, department or official; or 
b.  Occurs as a direct result of a deliberate act in violation of the ordinances or regulations of the city or state; or 
c.  Is caused by arson; or 
d.  An alarm that results in a city fire unit being dispatched and the person or entity transmitting or causing the transmission of the alarm knows, or has reasonable basis to believe at the time of the transmission, that no fire or fire-related emergency exists. 
3.  "Aggravated medical emergency" means an alarm that results in a city fire unit or an emergency medical unit being dispatched and the person or entity transmitting or causing the transmission of the alarm knows at the time of the transmission that there are no reasonable grounds for believing that a medical emergency exists. 
4.  "Expenses" means the actual costs of government personnel including the base hourly rate, federal and state payroll taxes, workers' compensation benefits, fringe benefits, administrative overhead, cost of equipment, cost of equipment operations, cost of material, cost of disposal, cost of any contract labor and materials, cost of materials including costs for equipment breakdown. Expenses also include costs incurred in providing food to government personnel and other incidental costs when the response extends for more than a four hour period. 
5.  "Non-emergency situation" includes but is not limited to alcohol intoxication, minor lacerations, minor contusions and sprains, minor illness, insect and animal bites not deemed emergencies, rashes, skin disorders, hives without difficulty breathing, home delivery to avoid doctor and hospital services, venereal disease, patients seeking non-emergency transportation, forehead and scalp lacerations only, cold, sore throat, earache, hiccough, nervousness, anxiety, toothache, minor bruises, non-life threatening overdoses and non-life threatening self-inflicted injuries. 
D.  Recovery Authorization and Procedure. The city is authorized to recover expenses incurred by virtue of the city's response to a hazardous materials emergency; aggravated fire emergency, aggravated medical emergency or non-emergency situation from any person, corporation, partnership or other entity that the city has reasonable grounds to believe caused such an emergency. The following procedure shall be followed to establish grounds: 
1.  The city fire department shall determine responsibility for the emergency or response as defined above and notify the responsible party by mail of the department's determination of responsibility and the expenses to be recovered by the city. 
2.  The notice shall specify that the determined responsible party may appeal the department's decision before the city's administrative law judge by paying the required filing fee and filing with the city recorder a request in writing detailing the reason for contesting the city's decision within ten days of receiving the notice from the city as provided in Section 2.22.040 of this code. 
3.  In the event the determined responsible party appeals the determination, the administrative law judge shall hold a hearing within twenty (20) days of the filing of the request to consider any issue raised by the appeal, at which hearing the appealing party and the city shall be entitled to present evidence in support of their respective position as provided in Sections 2.22.040 and 2.22.080 of this code. 
4.  After the hearing, the administrative law judge shall issue an administrative order within ten days as provided in Section 2.22.100 and shall serve a copy of the order upon the petitioner as provided in Section 2.22.030 of this code. In the order, the administrative law judge shall fix the reasonable amount of costs, if any, that the responsible is required to pay to the city. 
5.  After exhaustion of administrative remedies, the responsible party may appeal the decision of the administrative law judge to the district court as provided by law. If a responsible party fails to make a timely request for an administrative hearing, or determination of the city or, in the case of an administrative order, the order of the administrative law judge, shall be final without right to further appeal. 
E.  No Admission of Liability. The payment of expenses determined owing under this section does not constitute: 
1.  An admission of liability or negligence in any legal proceedings brought by third parties; or 
2.  An admission of criminal intent. 
F.  Action to Recover Expenses. In the event the parties determined to be responsible for the repayment of expenses incurred due to the city's response to such an emergency fail to make payment to the city within thirty (30) days after a final administrative determination of any appeal to the city or thirty (30) days from the deadline for the appeal in the event no appeal is filed, the city may initiate legal action to recover from the determined responsible parties the expenses determined to be owing, including the city's reasonable attorney's fees. 
G.  Fees. 
1.  Personnel (charged at the applicable rate for government personnel) and the cost of equipment and materials as per the consolidated fee schedule as outlined in subsection (C)(4) of this section. 
2.  The city is authorized to recover fees and expenses in behalf of other agencies that may be called upon to assist in the response. 
(Ord. 2008-24 (part): Ord. 2004-06, 2004)  
Chapter 2.42 - URBAN LIVABILITY 
Sections: 
 
2.42.010 - Director of urban livability—Appointment. 
The department head of the urban livability department shall be appointed, with the advice and consent of the city council, by and reports to the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 2010-08, 8-26-2010; Ord. No. 2020-01, § I, 1-8-2020)  
2.42.020 - Duties. 
The urban livability department, under the direction of the urban livability director, provides or coordinates community livability services in South Salt Lake City. These services are subject to the limitations of applicable funds and appropriations, statutes, and ordinances. These services include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Coordinate the enforcement of all municipal code sections relating to community livability, to include weed and other abatements, accumulated solid waste and litter, improper outdoor storage, storage of in-operable/un-registered vehicles, abandoned or vacant structures, graffiti removal, storm water, traffic calming, street lighting, public health complaints, zoning violations, snow removal, noise complaints, and so forth. 
2.  Oversee a code enforcement division, as directed by the mayor. 
3.  Under the mayor's direction, facilitate neighborhood, business district, and city department planning and problem-solving relating to community livability concerns. 
4.  Provide animal control services within the geographic boundaries of South Salt Lake City. 
5.  In conjunction with the police chief, promote the success of the city's landlord and tenant property programs. 
6.  Under the mayor's direction, facilitate city-wide livability initiatives in cooperation with the fire chief, police chief, public works director, community development director, economic development director, city attorney, and parks and recreation director. 
(Ord. No. 2010-08, 8-26-2010; Ord. No. 2020-01, § I, 1-8-2020)  
Chapter 2.44 - CITY RECORDS 
Sections: 
 
2.44.010 - Duplication fees. 
A.  The charges to be collected from any person, firm, corporation or company requesting the following documents are set by resolution of the city council: 
1.  8½? × 11? copy pages; 
2.  11? × 17? copy pages; 
3.  Police/fire reports; 
4.  Maps; 
5.  Zoning ordinances; 
6.  Sign ordinance; 
7.  Business license list; 
8.  Business license labels. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement: Ord. 248, 1992)  
Chapter 2.48 - ELECTIONS 
Sections: 
 
2.48.010 - Municipal government. 
The municipal government of the city of South Salt Lake shall be vested in a mayor and a city council to be composed of seven members, two to be elected at large and five to be elected from districts. 
(Ord. 2001-07 § 1: Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 1-2-1)  
2.48.020 - Municipal elections. 
A.  On Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 1973, and quadrenially thereafter, there shall be held in the city of South Salt Lake, a municipal election to fill the offices of mayor for a four-year term, and three city councilmembers each for a four-year term. 
B.  On Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 1971, and quadrenially thereafter there shall be held in the city of South Salt Lake a municipal election to fill the offices of four city councilmembers, each for a term of four years. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 1-2-2)  
2.48.030 - Primary elections. 
Primary elections for the municipal offices of the city of South Salt Lake shall be held in accordance with UCA 20A-9-404 (1995), as currently amended. 
(Editorially added during 10/96 supplement)  
2.48.040 - Terms of office of municipal officers. 
All officers of the city of South Salt Lake shall hold office for a the terms for which elected or appointed and until their respective successors are chosen and qualified. 
(Prior code § 1-2-3)  
2.48.050 - Eligibility of officers. 
All elective officers of the city of South Salt Lake shall be chosen by the qualified voters therein; and no person shall be eligible to any elective office who is not a qualified elector of the city of South Salt Lake, nor shall any person be eligible to any office who is a defaulter to the municipal corporation. 
(Prior code § 1-2-13)  
2.48.060 - Nominations. 
Candidates seeking office in the city of South Salt Lake shall be nominated in accordance with UCA 20A-9-203 (1995), as currently amended. 
(Editorially added during 10/96 supplement)  
2.48.090 - Certificates preserved two years. 
The city recorder shall cause to be preserved in his office for two years all declarations of candidacy filed therein under the provisions of this chapter. All such declarations shall be open to public inspection under proper regulations to be made by the officers with whom the same are filed. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 1-2-7)  
2.48.100 - List of nominees published and posted. 
Before an election to fill any public office the city recorder shall publish in at least one and not more than two newspapers published within the city, or post in at least six conspicuous places in the city of South Salt Lake a list of all nominations to offices certified to him under the provisions of this chapter and the name and the party or other designation of each candidate. Such publication shall be as near as possible in the form of the official ballots and shall be published three times where newspapers are published and circulated therein except as otherwise provided in this section; the first publication to be not less than six days and not more than ten days prior to the date of election. 
(Prior code § 1-2-8)  
2.48.110 - Sample ballots to be posted. 
The city recorder shall, at least four days before the election, send to the registration agent in each election district in this city at least five copies of the printed sample ballots required by law to be printed. Such sample ballots shall at least three days before the day of election be conspicuously posted by the registration agents in one or more public places in their respective election districts and one or more sample ballots shall be posted where such election is to be held. 
(Prior code § 1-2-9)  
2.48.120 - Objections to nomination certificate. 
All certificates of nomination which are in apparent conformity with the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be valid unless objection thereto shall be duly made in writing within three days after the filing of the same. In case such objection is made, notice thereof shall forthwith be mailed to all the candidates who may be affected thereby. The city recorder shall pass upon the validity of such objection and his decision shall be final; provided, that he shall decide such objection within forty-eight (48)/hours after the same is filed and any objection sustained may be remedied by an amendment of the original certificates or by filing a new certificate within three days after such objection is sustained. 
(Prior code § 1-2-10)  
2.48.130 - Declining nomination. 
Any person nominated may in writing duly signed and acknowledged notify the city recorder that he declines the nomination. In such event the nomination shall be void and the name shall not be printed on the party ticket certifying his nomination. 
(Prior code § 1-2-11)  
2.48.140 - Filling vacancy. 
If any person nominated declines his nomination or dies before election day or if any certificate of nomination is insufficient or inoperative the vacancy thus occasioned may be filled in the same manner required in the original nomination. 
(Prior code § 1-2-12)  
Chapter 2.50 - CAMPAIGN FINANCE DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS 
Sections: 
 
2.50.010 - Definitions. 
A.  "Candidate" means any person who files a declaration of candidacy for an elective office of the city, or receives contributions, or makes expenditures or consents to another person receiving contributions or makes expenditures, with a view to bringing about such person's election to office, or causes on his behalf, any written material or advertisement to be printed, published, broadcast, or distributed or disseminated which indicates an intention to seek such office. 
B.  "Contribution" means monetary and nonmonetary contributions such as in-kind contributions and contributions of tangible things but shall not include personal services provided without compensation by individuals volunteering their time on behalf of a candidate. 
C.  "Expenditure" means a purchase, payment, distribution, loan, advance, deposit or gift of money or anything of value made for the purpose of influencing the nomination or election of a candidate. 
(Ord. 2002-07 (part): Ord. 2001-08 (part))  
2.50.020 - Filing of disclosure reports. 
Each candidate for elective offices shall file with the city recorder, dated, signed and sworn, financial reports which comply with this chapter. 
(Ord. 2001-08 (part))  
2.50.030 - Time of filing. 
The reports required by this chapter shall be filed as follows: 
1.  Candidates at a general election shall file the required report seven days before the general election and thirty (30) days after the general election. 
2.  Candidates eliminated a primary election shall file the required report thirty (30) days after the primary election. 
(Ord. 2002-07 (part): Ord. 2001-08 (part))  
2.50.040 - Contents of statements. 
The statement filed seven days before the general election shall include: 
A.  A list of each contribution of more than fifty dollars ($50.00) received by the candidate, and the name of the donor; 
B.  An aggregate total of all contributions of fifty dollars ($50.00) or less received by the candidate; and 
C.  A list of each expenditure for political purposes made during the campaign period, and the recipient of each expenditure. 
The statement filed thirty (30) days after the general election shall include: 
(a)  A list of each contribution of more than fifty dollars ($50.00) received after the cutoff date for the statement filed seven days before the general election, and the name of the donor; 
(b)  An aggregate total of all contributions of fifty dollars ($50.00) or less received by the candidate after the cutoff date for the statement filed seven days before the election; and 
(c)  A list of all expenditures for political purposes made by the candidate after the cutoff date for the statement filed seven days before the election, and the recipient of each expenditure. 
The statement filed thirty (30) days after the primary election shall include: 
A.  A list of each contribution of more than fifty dollars ($50.00) received by the candidate, and the name of the donor; 
B.  An aggregate total of all contributions of fifty dollars ($50.00) or less received by the candidate; and 
C.  A list of each expenditure for political purposes made during the campaign period, and the recipient of each expenditure. 
(Ord. 2002-07 (part): Ord. 2001-08 (part))  
2.50.050 - Public information. 
The statements required by this ordinance shall be public documents and shall be available for public inspection and copying during all regular city business hours. 
(Ord. 2001-08 (part))  
2.50.060 - Penalty for noncompliance. 
Any candidate who fails to comply with the ordinance codified in this chapter is guilty of an infraction. 
(Ord. 2001-08 (part))  
Chapter 2.52 - REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY 
Sections: 
 
2.52.010 - City council designated acting body. 
The city council of the city of South Salt Lake, Salt Lake County, Utah, is designated as, shall be known as and shall act as the redevelopment agency of South Salt Lake and shall have the power to transact the business and exercise all the powers provided for by the Utah Neighborhood Development Act, UCA Sections 17A-2-1201 through 17A-2-1263. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; Ord. 104, 1982)  
Chapter 2.58 - NEIGHBORHOOD ADVISORY COMMITTEES 
Sections:  
Article I. - Neighborhood Advisory Committees. 
 
2.58.010 - Neighborhood advisory committees (NAC). 
A.  Within geographical boundaries set by the city, there are established neighborhood advisory committees (NACs). Each NAC shall consist of persons appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council, from residents living within the district, owners of property within the district or owners of businesses located within the district. NAC members shall select a chairperson from among their membership. 
B.  A city employee shall serve as a facilitator for the NACs. The facilitator shall provide information to each NAC, coordinate their meetings, serve as a point of contact with the city, and assist the NAC in accomplishing its objectives. 
(Ord. 2007-31 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2012-15, 9-13-2012)  
2.58.020 - NAC meetings. 
Each NAC shall meet regularly to investigate and discuss citizen concerns, new development, service opportunities and city programs operating within the NAC district. NAC meetings shall be open to the public. 
(Ord. 2007-31 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2012-15, 9-13-2012)  
2.58.030 - NAC member responsibilities. 
Members of the NAC are responsible for the following: 
1.  Attending NAC meetings on a regular basis; 
2.  Sharing information gained from the NAC meetings with members of their community; 
3.  Updating the city on issues of concern; and 
4.  Advising and commenting on master plans. 
(Ord. No. 2012-15, 9-13-2012) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-15, adopted Sept. 13, 2012, renumbered the former § 2.58.030—2.58.050 as §§ 2.58.040—2.58.060 and enacted a new § 2.58.030 as set out herein. The historical notation has been retained with the amended provisions for reference purposes.  
2.58.040 - Terms of NAC members. 
After the initial appointments, NAC members shall all serve two-year terms. Members may be reappointed to serve additional terms. 
(Ord. 2007-31 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2012-15, 9-13-2012) 
Note— See the editor's note to § 2.58.030.  
2.58.050 - Notices to NAC members. 
Agendas for city council, planning commission and citizen summit meetings and advance notice of all major public works projects within a NAC district will be sent to all NAC members. 
(Ord. 2007-31 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2012-15, 9-13-2012) 
Note— See the editor's note to § 2.58.030.  
2.58.060 - Limitation of authority of NAC members. 
NAC members may freely provide information or suggestions but are not to give direction to any city official or employee. 
(Ord. 2007-31 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2012-15, 9-13-2012) 
Note— See the editor's note to § 2.58.030.  
Article II. - Citizen Summit. 
 
2.58.110 - Citizen summit. 
There is established the "citizen summit." The citizen summit shall be a semi-annual joint meeting of the mayor and such other city officers and employees as he or she shall invite, city council, planning commission and NAC members. The two at-large city council members shall set the agenda for and preside over the citizen summit. The citizen summit shall consist of a review of the progress by the city in meeting the goals and objectives of the city's general plan and to review and adopt other recommendations made or to be made by the citizen summit to the city council and city administration. 
(Ord. 2007-31 (part))  
2.58.120 - NAC citizen summit meetings. 
Citizen summit meetings will comply with open meetings law including giving public notice of the yearly meeting schedule, giving at least twenty-four (24) hours notice of agendas, date, place and time for each meeting, keeping written minutes of each meeting and such other or additional requirements as the legislature may require by amendment to the open meetings law. Citizen summit meetings are open to the public. 
(Ord. 2007-31 (part))  
Article III. - General Provisions. 
 
2.58.210 - Prohibition of political activities. 
Neither meetings nor funds of the citizen summit or NAC may be used to support, oppose or discuss any political candidate, party, platform, issue, initiative, referendum, etc. and no citizen summit or NAC member shall use his or her official position to endorse any political candidate, party, platform, issue, initiative, referendum, etc. 
(Ord. 2007-31 (part))  
2.58.220 - Expenses. 
In its discretion, the city council may provide a budget to pay for necessary expenses of the NACs and citizen summit, such as agendas, notices, etc. 
(Ord. 2007-31 (part))  
Chapter 2.60 - PERSONNEL 
Sections: 
 
2.60.010 - Statement of policy. 
The following principles and policies are established: 
A.  Employment Based Upon Merit. Employment and promotion in city government shall be based on merit and fitness, free of personal and political considerations, and shall in no way be influenced by religion, creed, color, sex, age, national origin, ancestry, or disability. 
B.  Incentives and Conditions of Employment. Just and equitable incentives and conditions of employment shall be established and maintained to promote efficiency and economy in the operation of the city government. 
C.  Goals. The system shall provide the means to recruit, select, develop, and maintain an effective and responsive work force, and shall provide plans for employee hiring and advancement, training and career development, job classification, salary administration, vacations, sick leave, leaves of absence, retirement, fringe benefits, discipline, discharge, and other related activities. 
D.  Compensation Policy. 
1.  It is the compensation policy of the city that its goals for salary ranges average at or above the comparable average salary ranges for substantially similar positions, as verified by matching job descriptions and job qualifications, of the following governmental entities: Bountiful, Murray, Salt Lake City, Sandy, Salt Lake County, West Jordan, West Valley City, Provo, Layton, and Davis County. Other government agencies and private sector entities may be surveyed as deemed necessary. 
2.  It is the intent that all eligible full-time and part-time employees may receive a cost of living salary adjustment based on fifty (50) percent of the average cost of living increase as determined by the combined National Consumer Price Index and Wasatch Front Consumer Index. 
3.  All salary adjustments and cost of living adjustments may be subject to availability of funds and other factors. 
E.  Tenure. Tenure of employees covered by the personnel management system shall be subject to good behavior, satisfactory work performance, necessity for performance of work and the availability of funds. 
F.  Equal Employment Opportunity. It is the policy of the city to comply with equal employment opportunity (EEO) standards in all phases of personnel administration: job structuring, recruitment, examination, selection, appointment, placement, training, upward mobility, discipline, etc., without unlawful regard to race, color, religion, sex, age, physical or mental disability, national origin or veteran status. It is the obligation of officers, managers, supervisors, and employees of the city to conduct themselves in conformity with the principle of EEO. 
G.  Affirmative Action. It is the goal of the city to conform with federal, state, and local guidelines, and to seek qualified applicants from minority groups and protected classes to attain a work force mixture in city departments which closely approximates the relevant labor market. This goal is accomplished through steps outlined in the city's affirmative action plan. 
H.  Alcohol and Drug Free Workplace. The city finds that a healthy and productive work force, safe working conditions free from the effects of drugs and alcohol, and maintenance of the quality of city services, are important to the city, its employees, and the general public. The city further finds that the abuse and misuse of drugs and alcohol create a variety of workplace problems, including increased injuries on the job, increased absenteeism, increased financial burden on health and benefit programs, increased workplace theft, decreased employee morale, decreased productivity, and a decline in the quality of services. The city also recognizes alcohol and drug abuse as a health hazard and encourages employees to seek help. 
Therefore, in balancing the interests of the city, its employees, and the welfare of the general public, and to further implement its drug-free workplace policy, the city finds that fair and equitable testing for drugs and alcohol in the workplace is in the best interest of all concerned. 
The unlawful manufacture, distribution, possession, and the illegal use, abuse, or misuse of a controlled substance is prohibited. The use of drugs or alcohol, or being under the influence of drugs or alcohol, while on city premises or while conducting city business off city premises is prohibited. A violation of this policy will result in disciplinary action, up to and including termination. Drug and alcohol test results obtained under this policy will not be used against the employee in any criminal proceeding. However, any employee who violates any law is subject to prosecution just like any other citizen, and each employee of the city must understand that illegal conduct which is proven independently of the city's enforcement of this policy will be subject to prosecution. 
All recruitment announcements for any position of employment in the city, including in-house recruitments and promotions, shall disclose that a chemical screen test is required. 
(Ord. 2007-03: Ord. 98-15 § 2 (part))  
2.60.020 - Employee hiring. 
A.  Employment. Job descriptions defining the essential functions of the vacant position shall be drafted and adopted before the vacancy is posted or otherwise advertised internally or externally. 
B.  Recruitment. 
1.  Internal Advertising. 
a.  It is the city's policy to give first consideration to fill a job position to regular full-time or part-time employees, as long as they have completed their probationary period and they were initially hired through an external advertising process. 
b.  A written notice of the opening will be posted for no less than five weekdays where all city employees will have notice of an opportunity for promotion. 
2.  External Advertising. 
a.  Only the human resource department, or designee, is authorized to place advertisements and respond to inquiries from employment agencies and/or job applicants. 
b.  Job opening notices indicating the appropriate qualifications must be advertised in accordance with the city's affirmative action plan, as deemed by the human resource department, on at least three separate days. 
C.  Selection. 
1.  Nepotism. 
a.  It is the policy of the city to comply with the provisions of Section 52-3-1 et seq., Utah Code Annotated, as amended, prohibiting the employment of relatives. Except as allowed by state law, the city prohibits city employees from employing, appointing, voting for the appointment of, directly supervising, or being directly supervised by their relative. In addition, no relative of an elected or appointed city officer or the relative's spouse shall be employed by the city, whether in a seasonal, temporary, part-time or full-time status. 
b.  As used in this section, "relative" means a father, mother, husband, wife, spouse, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, nephew, niece, first cousin, father-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, life partner, cohabitant, ward, fiancé, grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, stepparent, and stepchild. "City officer" means any elected or appointed officer, and shall include the mayor, city council, and all appointed city officials. 
c.  No relative of an appointed or elected city officer or the relative's spouse employed by the city prior to November 1, 2016 or prior to the election of the city officer shall be affected by this section. 
2.  Employment of Minors. It is the policy of the city that no one under the age of fourteen (14) shall be hired for any position. 
3.  All individuals considered for any position must meet the minimum requirements as outlined in the job description and determined by the human resource department. 
4.  Selection Process. 
a.  If three or more current, qualified city employees apply for the position through the internal advertising process, as described above, then no external advertising will occur and the department head, or designee, shall select the person from the top three candidates, as determined by an interviewing process or similar mechanism. 
b.  If fewer than three current, qualified city employees apply for the position, then the human resource department shall conduct an external advertising of the position. Any current city employee applying through the internal advertising process shall be guaranteed to be one of the top three candidates from which the department head, or designee, may select, provided that employee meets the minimum requirements for the position. 
D.  Placement. 
1.  Rejection Letters. Within five working days after the job offer has been accepted, non-selected job applicants shall be notified. The human resource department, or designee, will send a job rejection letter to each job applicant who was not selected for a job opening. 
2.  Job Offers. The job offer letter shall clearly state that the offer is not accepted until the candidate signs the written form and returns it to the city by the requested date. 
3.  Medical Examinations. Once the city has extended a conditional job offer to the job applicant, a medical interview or examination may be conducted by a health professional chosen by the city to determine a job applicant's ability to fulfill essential job related requirements. Only the human resource department, or designee, may authorize such interviews or physical examinations. All costs for required medical interviews or physical examinations will be borne by the city. The prospective employee must sign a written release of this information to the city. 
4.  Reinstatements. Employees who are reinstated into the city may maintain their original anniversary date for seniority purposes as well as for those benefit programs governed by the anniversary date. The policy will be as follows: 
a.  Layoffs. Employees who terminate because of reduction in work force will maintain their original anniversary date for seniority purposes if they are re-employed by the city within one year after date of termination. 
b.  Voluntary Resignations. Employees who voluntarily terminate their employment with the city may maintain their original anniversary date, subject to human resource department or designee's approval, if they are re-employed by the city within six months after date of termination. 
5.  Orientation. Newly hired employees shall complete all required paperwork and receive orientation as a new employee of the city on their first day of work, or as soon thereafter as possible. 
6.  Probationary Period. 
a.  All police or fire new employees shall be subject to a one-year probationary period, except persons hired as such who have a conviction for an alcohol-related driving offense, as defined in Section 2.36.160, within the previous three years shall serve an eighteen-month probationary period. 
All other new employees shall be subject to a six-month probationary period. During this period, probationary employees may be terminated with or without notice for any or no reason without any right to due process, notice, explanation, or appeal in connection with said termination. 
b.  Present employees who are transferred or promoted to another position shall be on probation until the completion of their initial probationary period or for a period of three months, whichever is longer. Present employees who are transferred or promoted to a police department position shall be on probation for a one-year period beginning at the time of transfer or promotion. 
E.  Volunteers. Volunteers are considered employees of the city only for the purposes of: 
1.  Workers compensation benefits for compensable injuries sustained by the volunteer while acting in the scope of employment. 
2.  Operating city-owned vehicles or equipment when the volunteer is properly licensed to do so. 
3.  Liability insurance coverage offered employees. 
(Ord. 98-15 § 2 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2016-24, 10-26-2016; Ord. No. 2018-02, 5-9-2018)  
2.60.030 - Employee code of conduct. 
A.  Professionalism. The city is a professional association whose purpose, among others, is to provide professional services to its citizens. Its employees must adhere to high standards of public service that emphasize professionalism, courtesy, and avoidance of even the appearance of illegal or unethical conduct. Employees are required to carry out efficiently the work items assigned as their responsibility, be punctual, and to do their part in maintaining good relationships with their supervisors and fellow employees, the public, and other member employees and officials. All employees are expected to maintain a neat and clean personal appearance. Standards of dress shall be appropriate to the job and the tasks to be accomplished. 
B.  Privileged Information. The city employees involved with information of significant public interest may not use this privileged information for personal gain, nor to benefit friends or acquaintances. If an employee has an outside interest which could be affected by any city plan or activity, this situation must be reported to the mayor immediately. Each employee is charged with the responsibility of ensuring that only information that should be made available to the general public is released as defined in the Government Records Access and Management Act (GRAMA). 
C.  Confidentiality. Employees have an unquestionable right to expect all personal information about themselves, their illness, their family and financial circumstances to be kept confidential. Every employee has an obligation to protect this confidence. Never discuss privileged information with others who are not authorized to receive it, either inside or outside the workplace. 
D.  Gifts and Gratuities. 
1.  City employees are prohibited from soliciting or accepting any gift, gratuity, favor, entertainment, loan or item of monetary value from any person seeking to obtain business with the city, or from any person within or outside the city employment whose interests may be affected by the employees' performance or nonperformance of official duties. 
2.  City employees will not accept gifts or gratuities except under circumstances allowed by the Municipal Officers' and Employees' Ethics Act, Sections 10-3-1301 et seq., Utah Code Annotated, as amended, or any other applicable federal, state, or local law. 
E.  Harassment. 
1.  City employees should not use harassing, libelous, threatening, abusive, foul, or offensive or obscene speech, conduct, or otherwise. Among those things which are considered offensive are any verbal or nonverbal communications which contain sexual implications, racial slurs, gender-specific comments, or any other comment that offensively addresses someone's age, sexual orientation, religious or political beliefs, national origin, or disability. 
2.  The giving or withholding of tangible job benefits based on the granting of sexual favors and any behavior or conduct of a sexual/gender based nature which is demeaning, ridiculing, or derisive and results in a hostile, abusive or unwelcome work environment constitutes sexual harassment. 
3.  False or bad faith claims regarding harassment shall result in disciplinary action, up to and including termination, against the complainant. 
4.  Retaliation or reprisals are prohibited against any employee who opposes a forbidden practice, has filed a charge, testified, assisted or participated in any manner in an investigative proceeding or hearing under this policy. 
5.  Reporting Procedure. 
a.  Any employee who experiences an unwelcome, harassing or hostile work environment or who has personal knowledge of clearly offensive conduct should address such behavior/conduct through the formal remedial process. 
b.  Formal complaints should be in writing and specify: 
i.  The identity of the complainant. 
ii.  The identity of the offending employee. 
iii.  The offensive behavior that the employee engaged in. 
iv.  The frequency of the offensive behavior. 
v.  Damage the complainant suffered as a result of the offensive behavior. 
vi.  How the complainant would like the matter settled, or what the complainant would like to see happen. 
c.  Complainants will be allowed a reasonable amount of time during work to prepare a formal complaint. 
d.  Formal Remedial Process. 
i.  The complainant should submit the formal written complaint to any one of the following individuals: 
(A)  The employee's immediate supervisor. 
(B)  The department head. 
(C)  The human resource department. 
(D)  The city attorney. 
ii.  The submitted complaint immediately should be forwarded to the human resource department to conduct a confidential investigation into the allegations. The human resource department shall notify the department head and city attorney of the complaint, except where the allegations involve such entity. If the allegations involve the human resource department, the complaint should go to the city attorney. 
iii.  The human resource department and department head, with the assistance of the city attorney, will conduct an investigation into the formal written complaint. If either one of these three entities are involved in the allegations, that entity will be excluded from the investigation process. 
iv.  Determination of the Investigation. 
(A)  If it is determined that the allegations have merit, then the human resource department and department head will determine the severity of discipline which should be imposed upon the accused employee. The department head will thereafter impose this discipline. 
(B)  If it is determined that the allegations have no merit, then the human resource department will notify the complainant of this conclusion within five business days of the determination of the investigation. 
v.  If either the accused employee or the complainant disagree with this determination, then each shall have the right to appeal this determination in accordance with the appeal procedures outlined in subsection F of this section. 
6.  Confidentiality. 
a.  Information related to any harassment complaint, proceeding, or resolution shall be maintained in separate and confidential harassment complaint files. This information shall not be placed or maintained in any employee's personnel file. 
b.  Information contained in the harassment complaint files shall be released only with the written authorization of the complainant and the human resource department, or designee. 
c.  Participants in any harassment proceeding/investigation shall treat all information related to that proceeding/investigation as confidential. 
d.  Complainants of alleged sexual harassment shall not be required to confront the accused outside of a formal proceeding. 
e.  The accused shall not contact the complainant regarding the alleged harassment. 
7.  Employees found engaging in harassing or retaliatory behavior against employees asserting their rights under this section may face disciplinary action up to, and including, termination based on all the circumstances of the case, as well as the offending employee's work history. 
F.  Outside Activities. City employees shall not use city-owned property in support of outside interests and activities when such use would compromise the integrity of the city or interfere with the employee's duties. Outside employment must not be of a type that would reasonably give rise to criticism or suspicion of conflicting interests or duties. 
G.  Political Activity of Career Service Employee. 
1.  No employee in merit service shall be an officer of a political party. No city employee or official shall solicit orally, or by letter, or be in any other manner concerned in obtaining any assessments, contributions or services for any political party from any employee in the career service. 
2.  Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed to restrict the right of the employee to hold membership in, and support a political party, to vote as he chooses, to express privately his opinions on all political subjects and candidates, to maintain political neutrality, and to attend political meetings after working hours. 
3.  Any merit service employee who wishes to seek election to a political office shall request and obtain a leave of absence from the career service appointment no later than the day following the primary election for such office. 
(Ord. 98-15 § 2 (part))  
2.60.040 - Disciplinary action. 
A.  General Policy. 
1.  It is the policy of the city that management will inform its employees about what is expected at work, what constitutes employee misconduct, what management and the employee may do to correct any misconduct, and what the employee's rights are if disciplined. 
2.  It is the responsibility of all employees to observe rules of conduct necessary for the proper operation of city government. Administrative procedures have been established for the handling of disciplinary measures when required. All such measures shall follow the presentation of charges to the employee. 
3.  Disciplinary action, up to and including termination, may be imposed for misconduct. 
4.  Written documentation concerning employee disciplinary action imposed will become a permanent part of an employee's personnel record. 
B.  Types of Disciplinary Action. 
1.  Verbal Warning. 
a.  Whenever grounds for disciplinary action exist, and the department head determines that more severe action is not immediately necessary, the deficiency demonstrated should be verbally communicated to the employee. 
b.  A memorandum of the date and content of the verbal warning shall be written by the department head, or designee. This memorandum shall be placed in a separate verbal warning folder in the human resource department and is not part of the employee's personnel file. 
2.  Written Reprimand. 
a.  The department head, or designee, may reprimand employees for cause. The department head, or designee, shall furnish the employee with an employee written reprimand notification setting forth the reason(s). 
b.  A copy of the employee written reprimand notification, signed by the department head, or designee, and the employee, shall be sent to the human resource department and be permanently placed in the employee's personnel file. If the employee refuses to sign the form, the department head, or designee, will so state. 
3.  Suspension. 
a.  The department head, or designee, after consultation with human resource department and the city attorney, may suspend employees with or without pay. 
b.  When suspending an employee, the department head, or designee, shall follow the due process proceedings hereinafter set forth in subsection E of this section, entitled, Imposing Disciplinary Action. 
c.  On or before the effective date of the suspension, the department head, or designee, shall furnish the employee with a written employee suspension notification setting forth the reason(s) for suspension. 
d.  A copy of the employee suspension notification, signed by the department head, or designee, and the employee, shall be sent to the human resource department and be permanently placed in the employee's personnel file. If the employee refuses to sign the form, the department head, or designee, will so state. 
e.  Employees on suspension shall be responsible for making full-time employee contributions to their employee insurance benefits. 
4.  Demotion. 
a.  If in the best interest of both the employee and the city, the department head, or designee, after consultation with human resource department and the city attorney, may demote or reduce in grade employees for cause, or provide for reasonable accommodation in appropriate circumstances. 
b.  When demoting an employee, the department head, or designee, shall follow the due process proceedings hereinafter set forth in subsection E of this section, entitled, Imposing Disciplinary Action. 
c.  On or before the effective date of the demotion, the department head, or designee, shall furnish the employee with a written employee demotion notification setting forth the reason(s) for demotion. 
d.  A copy of the employee demotion notification, signed by the department head, or designee, and the employee, shall be sent to the human resource department and be permanently placed in the employee's personnel file. If the employee refuses to sign the form, the department head, or designee, will so state. 
5.  Transfer for Cause. 
a.  If in the best interest of both the employee and the city, the department head, or designee, after consultation with human resource department and the city attorney, may transfer employees (except a probationary employee) by furnishing the employee with a written employee transfer notification. 
b.  A copy of the employee transfer notification, signed by the department head, or designee, and the employee, shall be sent to the human resource department and be permanently placed in the employee's personnel file. If the employee refuses to sign the form, the department head, or designee, will so state. 
6.  Termination. 
a.  The department head, or designee, after consultation with human resource department and the city attorney, may terminate employees for cause. 
b.  When terminating an employee for cause, the department head, or designee, shall follow the due process proceedings hereinafter set forth in subsection E of this section, entitled, Imposing Disciplinary Action. 
c.  On or before the effective date of the termination for cause, the department head, or designee, shall furnish the employee with a written employee termination notification setting forth the reason(s) for termination. 
d.  A copy of the employee termination notification, signed by the department head, or designee, and the employee, shall be sent to the human resource department and be permanently placed in the employee's personnel file. If the employee refuses to sign the form, the department head, or designee, will so state. 
e.  Any employee who has been terminated for cause is not eligible for any city position for a period of one year. 
C.  Causes for Disciplinary Action. Causes for disciplinary action, up to and including termination, may include but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Violation of the laws, regulations, or ordinances of the city, the state of Utah, or the United States, other than minor traffic offenses. 
2.  Any violation of the employee code of conduct. 
3.  Any violation of this personnel policies and procedures manual. 
4.  Conduct which endangers the peace and safety of others or poses a threat to the public interest. 
5.  Any type of inappropriate behavior while on the job or related to the job. 
6.  Unauthorized absence. 
7.  Falsification or unauthorized alteration of records. 
8.  Falsification of employment application. 
9.  Knowingly marking the time slip of another employee, authorizing one's time slip to be marked by another employee, unauthorized alteration of a time slip. 
10.  Gambling or engaging in a lottery at any city work area. 
11.  Misusing, destroying, or damaging any city property or the property of any employees. 
12.  Sleeping during working hours, with the obvious exception of firefighters. 
13.  Inability to perform the essential functions of the job, with reasonable accommodation for a legally recognized disability. 
D.  Conducting an Investigation. 
1.  The department head, or designee, shall conduct an investigation into the allegations which form the grounds for disciplinary action. 
2.  The department head, or designee, may place employees on paid administrative leave during an investigation to determine the facts upon which disciplinary action may be imposed. 
3.  Disciplinary action shall not be imposed until a hearing, with appropriate written notice, has been held pursuant to subsection E of this section, entitled Imposing Disciplinary Action. The investigation shall include an opportunity for the employee to respond to the allegations. 
E.  Imposing Disciplinary Action. 
1.  The department head, or designee, shall conduct disciplinary action in a consistent manner. 
2.  Each employee shall be afforded prior access to city's rules, policies, and procedures. 
3.  The employee shall receive timely notice of the pre-disciplinary meeting, overview of allegations, and potential disciplinary action. 
4.  Prior to imposing the disciplinary action, the employee shall have the opportunity to review the disciplinary action with the department head, or designee. The employee shall have the opportunity to respond to the allegations. The employee's written response, if any, and other related documents shall be placed in the employee's personnel file. 
5.  In determining the type and severity of the disciplinary action, the department head, or designee, may consider aggravating and mitigating circumstances such as: the repeated nature of misconduct; prior disciplinary action imposed; the severity of the misconduct; the employee's work record; the effect on city operations; and/or the potential of the misconduct to harm person(s) or property. 
6.  For disciplinary action other than a verbal warning, the department head, or designee, shall notify the employee, in writing, of the findings of the investigation. The written statement shall include: 
a.  The grounds for disciplinary action, including a description of the specific misconduct for which the disciplinary action is being imposed. 
b.  Any prior disciplinary action imposed. 
c.  The disciplinary action to be imposed. 
d.  The effective date and duration of the disciplinary action. 
e.  The corrective action necessary for the employee to avoid further disciplinary action. 
7.  The department head, or designee, may note the disciplinary action on their personal notes at the time the disciplinary action is imposed and/or on the employee's performance evaluation form. 
F.  Appeal Procedures. 
1.  Employee Appeals Board. 
a.  The employee appeals board for the city of South Salt Lake shall consist of the city's administrative law judge ("ALJ") appointed pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 2.22 of this code. 
2.  Nonappealable Actions. 
a.  No probationary, temporary/seasonal, or part-time employee, or appointed employee has the right to appeal any disciplinary action. 
b.  No employees have appeal rights for verbal warnings, written reprimands, or involuntary reassignment for disciplinary purposes which does not affect the employee's rate of pay. 
c.  Unless specifically provided by this section, no employee has the right to appeal a termination, transfer or pay reduction which is made for a non-disciplinary reason, such as a reduction in force, furlough, reorganization, or a broadly applicable reduction in salary which affects multiple employees in a department. 
d.  No employees have appeal rights for suspension from employment without pay for two days or less. 
e.  No appeal is allowed from discharge or involuntary reassignment due to loss of state or federal licensure or certifications which are required for the employee's position. 
3.  Appealable Rights for Merit Employees. 
a.  Merit employees have the right to appeal any disciplinary action resulting in: 
i.  Dismissal, termination or release from employment; 
ii.  Demotion; 
iii.  Suspension from employment without pay for more than two days; or 
iv.  Involuntary transfer for a disciplinary purpose to a position with less remuneration. 
4.  Appealing to the ALJ. 
a.  Employees desiring to file an appeal must submit their written notice of appeal, describing in detail the grounds for the appeal with any supporting documentation, to the city recorder within ten calendar days following the disciplinary action giving rise to the appeal, or an employee will be deemed to have waived all appeal rights. 
b.  A copy of the appeal shall also be filed with the employee's supervisor and the human resource department. Upon receipt by the city recorder of the employee's appeal, a date and time shall be set for the ALJ to convene a hearing to hear the appeal. All appeal documents will then be forwarded to the ALJ. 
c.  Hearings and decision of the ALJ shall be held and rendered as soon as reasonably practicable, with no unreasonable delay. The ALJ may allow an enlargement of time for hearing preparations, if good cause is shown, but this subsection may not extend the amount of time during which an appealing employee may timely submit a notice of appeal. 
d.  All parties to the appeal shall be entitled to appear at the appeals hearing in person and to be represented by counsel, to have the hearing open to the public, to confront witnesses whose testimony is to be considered, and to examine the evidence to be considered by the ALJ. 
e.  The ALJ may request the appointment of independent medical or other technical experts, in the ALJ's sole discretion, if the ALJ believes that the expert's opinion is necessary for the resolution of the case. 
f.  Submission of Documentation: 
i.  All documentation to be presented at the appeals hearing shall be made available by each party upon written request of the party seeking the documentation at least five business days prior to the scheduled hearing date; all requests for documents shall be considered to be ongoing up to and through the time of the hearing. 
ii.  Any party to any appeal may, no later than five business days prior to the date of the appeal hearing or cutoff date for a decision, submit to the ALJ a written brief, no more than ten pages in length, with supporting documentation, which articulates that party's arguments and position regarding the subject matter of the appeal. 
iii.  Copies of all written briefs shall be concurrently forwarded to the opposing party, and a reply brief may be submitted in response no later than two business days prior to the hearing date or cutoff date for a decision. 
g.  The Utah Rules of Evidence, Utah Rules of Civil Procedure, and Utah Administrative Code do not apply to administrative hearings. Hearings are conducted to be fundamentally fair to the parties and to provide due process. The ALJ may entertain objections in order to maintain decorum and to address issues of relevance. 
h.  With the exception of a request for an order requiring the release of documents which have been requested or scheduling matters, no prehearing motions shall be entertained by the ALJ. 
i.  In the ALJ's discretion, parties may convene for a prehearing conference with the ALJ to discuss relevant issues, such as anticipated witnesses or the scope of the appeal. 
j.  Record of the Hearing. An audio recording of the hearing shall be kept and all exhibits received in evidence at the hearing shall be maintained. 
5.  Appeals from Disciplinary Actions. The proceedings for appeals from disciplinary actions are bifurcated. 
a.  During the first phase of the proceedings, the ALJ considers evidence of the charges upon which the discipline was based. The city bears the burden of proving the charges by a preponderance of the evidence. 
i.  If the ALJ sustains all of the charges, then it shall proceed to the second phase of the hearing, described in subsection F.5.b. 
ii.  If the ALJ sustains none of the charges, then the ALJ shall overturn the disciplinary action, as provided in subsection F.7.b. 
iii.  If the ALJ sustains some, but not all, of the charges, then the ALJ shall refer the decision back to the department director for reconsideration of the disciplinary decision, in light of the ALJ's findings. A referral back to the department director is an interlocutory order, and is not subject to appeal. The department director may decrease the severity of, modify, withdraw, or retain the disciplinary decision previously made. If the department director fails to respond to the ALJ within three working days from the ALJ's referral, then the ALJ shall proceed as if the department director has not changed the disciplinary decision. 
b.  During the second phase of the proceedings, the ALJ considers whether the misconduct warranted the sanction imposed by the department director. The ALJ gives broad deference to the department director's choice of punishment, and reviews that decision for an abuse of discretion. The disciplined employee bears the burden of proving an abuse of discretion by clear and convincing evidence. 
i.  A department director abuses his or her discretion if the sanction is arbitrary, capricious or illegal. 
ii.  When considering whether the sanction is arbitrary, capricious or illegal, the ALJ may consider whether the discipline imposed is: 
(A)  Disproportionate in light of the circumstances: or 
(B)  Inconsistent with previous sanctions imposed by the department upon similarly situated employees pursuant to the department's or city's own policies. 
iii.  If the ALJ finds that the disciplined employee has carried the burden of establishing an abuse of discretion, then the ALJ shall overturn the disciplinary action. 
c.  The disciplined employee may waive challenge to either phase of the proceedings at any time. In the absence of a clear, written waiver, the proceedings will proceed through both phases. 
6.  Appeals from discharge or reassignment due to fitness for duty determinations. 
a.  Notwithstanding subsection F., in cases of discharge or transfer to a position of less remuneration due to a determination that the individual is unfit to report to duty due to a medical condition, the employee has the right to appeal that decision, as provided in subsection F.4. 
b.  In cases of fitness for duty appeals, the city bears the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the circumstances warrant the action taken. 
7.  The ALJ shall render a final decision in writing and may: 
a.  Sustain the city's action; or 
b.  Overturn the city's action; 
i.  If the city's action is overturned, the human resource department, or designee, shall remove the record of the overturned action from the employee's personnel file and retain it separately, which record shall be designated as private pursuant to Utah law. 
ii.  The ALJ shall reinstate any loss of pay associated with an overturned action, but in the case where an employee has taken employment elsewhere, the amount shall be reduced by any amounts the employee earned from other employment during this period of time. 
iii.  If a department director reduces the severity of the disciplinary decision pursuant to subsection F.5.a.iii., then the ALJ shall reinstate any loss of pay which would not have been incurred, if the reduced discipline had been initially imposed. 
8.  The ALJ shall transmit a copy of its decision to the employee, the department director, the human resources department, and the city recorder for certification. The city recorder shall certify the decision by placing the city's official seal on the document, and the date of certification. 
9.  The written ruling filed by the ALJ pursuant to subsection F.8. shall be the final administrative decision of the city and the decision may be appealed by either party to the Utah Court of Appeals within thirty (30) days from the date on which the ALJ's decision is certified by the city recorder. 
(Ord. 2008-23: Ord. 98-15 § 2 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2015-08, 5-13-2015)  
2.60.050 - Grievance procedures. 
A.  General Policy. 
1.  Employees who perceive that they have a grievance against the city should exhaust the administrative procedure set forth in the body of this policy before addressing their grievance through any other forum. Employees may file a grievance with the human resource department about any perceived work related injustice or oppression resulting from an act, occurrence, omission, condition, or unfair labor practice. Issues addressable throughout the grievance process include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Employee-supervisor relationships. 
b.  Duty assignments not affecting job classification. 
c.  Shift and job location assignments. 
d.  Working conditions. 
e.  Practices affecting granting of leave. 
2.  Grievances should be resolved at the lowest administrative level possible. Employees and supervisors shall attempt to resolve grievances informally by discussing the grievance issues before any formal written grievance is filed. Each employee pursuing a formal grievance must prepare and submit a separate written grievance. Written grievances shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
a.  Name of the employee. 
b.  Date the occurrence or action underlying the grievance occurred. 
c.  Nature of the grievance. 
d.  Historical information related to the grievance. 
e.  Requested resolution. 
f.  Steps taken to resolve issue prior to filing of written grievance. 
g.  Signature of the employee filing the grievance and date filed. 
3.  Employee grievances must be filed with the human resource department within ten calendar days of the occurrence or event giving rise to the grievance, or within ten calendar days of the employee's acquiring knowledge of the occurrence or event giving rise to the grievance. Human resource department shall promptly send a copy of the employee's written grievance to the department head and supervisor. 
4.  At each level of the grievance process, after a supervisor has received an employee grievance, the supervisor shall have ten business days to respond in writing to the grievance. 
5.  If a supervisor is unable to answer the grievance within the specified time period due to exigent circumstances, the supervisor may take an additional ten business days to answer the grievance if they notify the employee in writing of the exigent circumstances and that the extension is being exercised. If the grievance remains unresolved or the decision is considered unacceptable, the employee may appeal the decision to the next level of appeal. 
6.  Absent exigent circumstances, if the supervisor fails to respond within the allotted time, the employee may proceed to the next level of appeal. 
7.  Only the issues presented in the original grievance may be considered throughout the appellate process. A grievance and any necessary appeals shall be processed through the following chain of command, if applicable: 
a.  Immediate Supervisor. In an effort to resolve the problem, the immediate supervisor will consider the facts, conduct an investigation, and review the matter with the human resource department. 
b.  Department Head. In an effort to resolve the problem, the department head will consider the facts, conduct an investigation, and review the matter with the human resource department. 
c.  Quality Committee. The quality committee will review the matter and may act as a mediator between the employee and department head and/or the mayor. 
d.  Mayor. 
8.  The decision of the mayor constitutes the final level of appeal and is final and non-appealable. 
B.  Confidentiality. 
1.  Written grievance forms shall be private data under the Government Records Access Management Act (GRAMA) of the state of Utah. The mayor or city council may declare the grievance documents to be confidential and/or order the entire record, or any part of it, sealed. 
2.  If any disciplinary action against an employee is rescinded as a result of the grievance process, the record of the disciplinary action shall be removed from the employee's personnel file. 
3.  If any disciplinary action against an employee is modified as a result of the grievance process, the unmodified record of the disciplinary action shall be removed from the employee's personnel file and the modified record of the disciplinary action shall be placed in the employee's personnel file. 
4.  No document relating to a grievance shall be placed in the employee's personnel file. 
(Ord. 98-15 § 2 (part))  
2.60.060 - Employment classification. 
A.  General Policy. The city will pay at least minimum wages and overtime to all employees except those who are specifically exempt from minimum wage and overtime requirements under the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) of 1938. The city will also provide equal pay to all employees doing similar work which requires substantially equal skill, effort, responsibility, and performed under similar working conditions, in accordance with the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 and the Equal Pay Act of 1963. 
B.  Employment Classifications. There are three classifications of employees within the city: 
1.  Full-Time. Employees hired for an indefinite period in a position for which the normal work schedule is forty (40) hours per week. Full-time employees may or may not qualify for specific city benefits and/or be members of the merit personnel system. 
2.  Part-Time. Employees hired for an indefinite period in a position for which the normal work schedule is less than forty (40) hours per week. Part-time employees may or may not qualify for specific city benefits and/or be members of the merit personnel system. 
3.  Temporary/Seasonal. Employees hired for a position which is required for only a specific, known duration, usually less than six months. Temporary/seasonal employees may or may not qualify for specific city benefits and/or be members of the merit personnel system. 
C.  Employment Status. 
1.  To facilitate provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act, employees shall also be classified as either exempt or nonexempt, with respect to eligibility for overtime payment. They shall be defined as: 
a.  Exempt. Positions of a managerial, administrative, or professional nature, as prescribed by federal and state labor statutes shall be exempt from minimum wage and mandatory overtime payment regulations. 
i.  Exempt employees have no right to overtime or compensatory time; however, the mayor may authorize compensatory time plans for exempt employees. 
ii.  Exempt employees may accrue compensatory time for hours in excess of forty (40) hours worked per week up to a maximum of eighty (80) hours of compensatory time. This time shall be calculated at a straight time rate. 
iii.  Exempt employees who accrue compensatory time have no property right or cash value in the accrued time. Use and/or scheduling of compensatory time is solely within the mayor's discretion. 
iv.  Upon termination of employment, for whatever reason, an exempt employee is not entitled to cash or other compensation in exchange for unused, accrued compensatory time. 
b.  Nonexempt. Positions of a clerical, technical, or service nature, as defined by federal and state labor statutes, which are covered by provisions for minimum wage and mandatory overtime payment regulations. 
2.  Positions Not in Merit Service and Exempt from FLSA. The following permanent full-time positions of employment in city government shall not be merit service, are exempt from the protections described in Utah Code Title 10, Chapter 3, Sections 1105 and 1106, and are exempt from FLSA: 
a.  Elected members of the city council, and staff; 
b.  The mayor, and his or her executive secretary/assistant; 
c.  The following heads of departments and administrators appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council: 
i.  Police chief; 
ii.  City attorney; 
iii.  City engineer; 
iv.  City recorder; 
v.  City treasurer; 
vi.  Director of community and economic development; 
vii.  Director of urban livability; 
viii.  Director of finance; 
ix.  Director of public works; 
x.  Fire chief; 
xi.  Justice court judge; 
xii.  Recreation director; 
xiii.  Human resources and information services director; 
xiv.  Justice court administrator; 
xv.  Deputy city attorney; 
xvi.  Public assets director; 
xvii.  Deputy community and economic development director/housing administrator; 
xviii.  One confidential secretary or assistant to any of the foregoing officials as deemed necessary by the city council; 
xix.  Members of policy, advisory, review, and appeal boards, or similar bodies, who do not perform administrative duties as individuals. 
3.  Merit, Full-time Positions Exempt From FLSA. The following permanent full-time positions of employment in city government shall be exempt from FLSA provisions and shall be members of the merit personnel systems with the benefits accorded thereby: 
a.  Assistant city attorney/prosecutor; 
b.  Deputy city attorney; 
c.  Fire battalion chief; 
d.  Human resource administrator; 
e.  MIS coordinator; 
f.  Police captain; 
g.  Programs director; 
h.  Public works supervisor; 
i.  Senior accountant. 
4.  Positions Not in Merit Service. The following positions of employment in city government shall not be merit service: 
a.  People employed to make or conduct temporary and special inquiries, investigations or examinations on behalf of the mayor or city council; 
b.  Volunteer personnel who receive no regular compensation from the city; 
c.  Regular part-time and temporary/seasonal employees. 
(Ord. 98-15 § 2 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, 5-28-2014; Ord. No. 2014-19, 7-30-2014; Res. No. 2015-07, 2-11-2015)  
2.60.070 - Salary planning. 
A.  General Policy. The human resource department, in conjunction with the city council, shall be responsible for the development and maintenance of a uniform and equitable pay plan for the city which shall consist of minimum and maximum rates of pay for each position and such intermediate steps as deemed necessary and equitable. Salaries shall be linked directly to the position classification plan and shall be determined with due regard to the following considerations: 
1.  Ranges of pay for other positions. 
2.  Prevailing rates of pay for similar employment in both public and private organizations. 
3.  Cost of living factors. 
4.  Other benefits received by employees. 
5.  The financial policy and economic conditions of the city. 
B.  Pay Plan Development And Allocation. 
1.  The human resource department, or designee, shall conduct a study of salary levels of comparable positions in the public and private sector and shall make adjustment recommendations to the city council annually. Implementation of adjustments are subject to the availability of funds. 
2.  The human resource department, or designee, shall assign each position level to a pay range based upon the levels' relationship to other levels as defined in the position level plan and by market data. 
C.  Appointment. 
1.  Pay for newly hired or promoted employees shall normally be set at the minimum of the pay range assigned to a job class. However, the mayor may approve hires up to the range of midpoint, as warranted by job qualifications and experience, subject to the availability of funds. 
2.  The mayor shall not authorize hiring above the midpoint of a pay range except in unusual circumstances. 
D.  Merit Increase. 
1.  The mayor, upon approval of the city council, shall adopt merit increase guidelines effective July 1st of each calendar year subject to funding in the approved budget. 
2.  Regular full-time and regular part-time employees are eligible to receive a merit one-step increase annually in connection with their original hire date and conditional upon an "acceptable" performance evaluation. 
3.  Temporary/seasonal, probationary, or employees at or above the pay range maximum and employees whose performance is rated less than successful, shall not be eligible to receive a merit increase. 
4.  The department head, or designee, must complete an employee's performance evaluation within thirty (30) calendar days preceding the effective date of a merit increase. 
5.  A merit increase shall not exceed the range of maximum assigned to a position level. 
E.  Promotion. Employees promoted to another position will receive an increase of five percent (then to the next step) or the minimum of the pay range assigned to the job class, whichever is greater. 
F.  Order of Salary Calculation. Multiple categories of pay increases awarded simultaneously shall be calculated in the following order: 
1.  Market. 
2.  Merit. 
3.  Promotion. 
G.  Reassignment. Except when due to a demotion or a disciplinary action, employees who are reassigned shall be paid the same salary received prior to the assignment. 
H.  Reclassification. 
1.  Upon recommendation by the human resource department, the mayor may reclassify a position to a higher level. If reclassified, the human resource department shall adjust the incumbent's salary to at least the minimum of the new range or may give a zero to ten percent salary increase, based upon increased responsibility. 
2.  A reclassification increase is subject to the availability of funds. 
3.  If the mayor reclassifies a position to a lower level, the incumbent's salary shall remain the same. If the incumbent's salary exceeds the maximum of the new range, the incumbent is ineligible to receive a salary increase until the salary range increases to incorporate the incumbent's pay rate. 
I.  Demotion. If an employee is demoted, either voluntarily or involuntarily, the human resource department may treat the employee's salary according to subsection (H)(3) of this section, or reduce the salary. 
J.  Benefits. 
1.  Suspended Employee. 
a.  Employees suspended for disciplinary reasons shall continue to be eligible to receive city retirement, health, dental, disability and life insurance programs subject to the conditions set forth in subparagraph (b) of this subsection. 
b.  The employee shall pay the employee portion of insurance premium to continue coverage through the period of suspension. 
(Ord. 98-15 § 2 (part))  
2.60.080 - Leaves of absence. 
A.  Absent Without Leave. Except if department head finds extenuating circumstances exist, any employee who is absent for three or more consecutive work days without authorized leave shall be deemed to have resigned without notice. 
B.  Vacation Leave. 
1.  The city provides annual vacation leave for each full-time employee which may be taken as earned. Each full-time employee shall receive vacation leave at the following rate: 
a.  For zero to five years of service, ninety-six (96) hours of vacation leave shall accrue at the rate of eight hours per month for each month worked. 
b.  For six to ten years of service, one hundred twenty (120) hours of vacation leave shall accrue at the rate of ten hours per month for each month worked. 
c.  For eleven (11) to fifteen (15) years of service, one hundred forty-four (144) hours of vacation leave shall accrue at the rate of twelve (12) hours per month for each month worked. 
d.  For sixteen (16) to twenty (20) years of service, one hundred sixty-eight (168) hours of vacation leave shall accrue at the rate of fourteen (14) hours per month for each month worked. 
e.  For over twenty (20) years of service, one hundred ninety-two (192) hours of vacation leave shall accrue at the rate of sixteen (16) hours per month for each month worked. 
2.  The city provides annual vacation leave for each part-time employee on a pro rata basis of the schedule above. 
3.  Persons hired on an emergency, temporary/seasonal, or contract basis shall not accrue vacation leave. 
4.  Individual department heads will issue approval or disapproval on all vacation leave requests. 
5.  The maximum vacation leave which can be accrued and carried forward from calendar year to calendar year is one hundred sixty-eight (168) hours. Any accrued vacation leave in excess of one hundred sixty-eight (168) hours shall be forfeited on January 1st of the year following the calendar year in which the leave was accrued and no compensation shall be paid for such leave. 
6.  A holiday which falls during an employee's vacation leave shall be counted as a paid holiday and not as vacation leave. 
7.  Employees who are separated from employment shall be compensated for all accrued vacation leave. 
8.  All vacation leave requests should be submitted a reasonable time in advance of the desired time off to the department head, or designee. If an excessive (being the number of requests if granted that would render the department or organization ineffective) number of employees request leave for the same time period, leave shall be granted in order of application (first-come-first-served) at the discretion of the department head, or designee. 
9.  Official vacation records will be maintained and kept current by the department head, or designee. 
C.  Holiday Leave. 
1.  Full-time employees receive eight hours holiday pay for the holidays below. Part-time employees receive a pro rata holiday pay for the holidays below. 
2.  Holidays: 
a. 	New Year's Day 	January 1st 
b. 	Human Rights Day 	3rd Monday in January 
c. 	President's Birthday 	3rd Monday in February 
d. 	Memorial Day 	Last Monday in May 
e. 	Independence Day 	July 4th 
f. 	Pioneer Day 	July 24th 
g. 	Labor Day 	1st Monday in September 
h. 	Veteran's Day 	November 11th 
i. 	Thanksgiving 	4th Thursday in November and the day following Thanksgiving Day 
j. 	Christmas Eve Day 	December 24th 
k. 	Christmas 	December 25th 
 
3.  If any of the above holidays falls on Saturday, then the preceding Friday shall be the holiday. If any of the above holidays falls on Sunday, then the following Monday is the holiday. 
D.  Sick Leave. 
1.  Purpose. Sick leave shall not be considered as a privilege which employees may use at their discretion, but shall be allowed only in case of necessity and actual sickness or disability of the employee, employee's children, employee's parents or spouse's parents, or a family member residing with the employee. 
2.  Use of Sick Leave. Sick leave may be used at any time with approval of the department head, or designee, for any of the following reasons: 
a.  When employees are unable to perform their regular duties or other temporary work because of sickness or injury to which they may be assigned. 
b.  Visits to hospitals, clinics, doctors' and dentists' offices for diagnosis or treatment of illness or injury or examination of the employee's children or parents, or a family member residing with the employee. The minimum time that may be taken for any of these purposes is one hour. 
3.  Eligibility. Sick leave shall be available to all full-time and part-time employees, including probationary employees. Temporary/seasonal, provisional, and emergency employees are not eligible for sick leave. 
4.  Accrual. Sick leave is accrued at the rate of eight hours per month or ninety-six (96) hours per year for full-time employees and a pro rata basis for part-time employees. The employee will begin to accrue sick leave immediately upon being hired by the city. Sick leave shall not accrue if an employee is in a leave of absence without pay status. Records will be kept by the department head or designee. 
5.  Use. Sick leave shall be charged against employees in not less than a one-hour minimum. Advancing unearned sick leave is not allowed. 
6.  Termination. Upon separation from employment with the city, employees will receive compensation for fifty (50) percent of sick leave balance, not to exceed ninety-six (96) hours. 
7.  Payments. 
a.  In order to qualify for sick leave payments, employees must notify the department head, or designee, no later than one hour after normal starting time on each day of absence unless the circumstances surrounding the absence make such notification impossible. The department head, or designee, should also be kept advised of the employee's progress and expected date of return to duty. 
b.  Any absence for illness beyond accrued sick leave will result in the employee being carried on vacation leave status until all vacation leave has expired, then be carried in a leave-without-pay status. 
8.  Certification of Illness. For sick leave in excess of five consecutive working days, or if abuse of sick leave is indicated, the department head, or designee, may require a certificate from the attending physician stating that such illness prevented the employee from working. 
9.  Reporting Absences. Employees will be paid only when the employee (or a member of his or her immediate family if the employee is incapacitated) notifies the department head, supervisor, or designee, within one hour after the employee's scheduled reporting time. Continued reporting for more than a one-time absence will be accomplished as directed by the department head or designee. 
10.  Cash-Out. Any unused sick leave may be carried over to the following year up to a maximum of ninety-six (96) hours. Upon recommendation by the mayor and as approved by the city council each year, sick leave in excess of ninety-six (96) hours at the end of the last full pay period in March may be cashed out at forty (40) percent the employee's hourly rate. If recommended and approved, employees will receive a cash out of excess sick leave on or about May 15. 
11.  Sick Leave Bank. Employees who have utilized all accumulated vacation and sick leave may be awarded additional sick leave in instances of serious personal illness or injury. 
a.  The human resource department shall establish a citywide sick leave bank program. Donations of sick leave will not be accepted. Donations of vacation leave will be accepted as follows: 
i.  Donations will be on a voluntary basis. 
ii.  Donations will be accepted during the months of June and December only, except as specified in subparagraph v of this subsection. 
iii.  Employees must have a combination of at least eighty-eight (88) hours of vacation time and sick time left after any donations are made. 
iv.  Leave will be donated and awarded on an hourly basis. 
v.  Donations will be accepted on an as-needed basis if the reserve in the sick leave bank will not cover a needed award. 
b.  The sick leave bank may be used by any city employee for personal catastrophic illness or non-job related injury of an acute nature. 
i.  The sick leave bank shall not be used for dependent care. 
ii.  The sick leave bank shall not award any sick leave in excess of the balance in reserve. 
c.  Employee requesting leave from the sick leave bank must complete a sick leave bank request form and submit it to the department head. 
i.  Sick leave bank request forms shall be submitted within fifteen (15) days of the date when the employee could reasonably be presumed to have had knowledge of the need for additional sick leave. 
ii.  The department head shall be responsible for submitting request forms to the sick leave bank committee within five calendar days from receipt. 
iii.  Sick leave bank request forms may be submitted by the petitioning employee, a member of the petitioner's immediate family, or by the employee's immediate supervisor. 
iv.  The sick leave bank committee will make award decisions at the next regularly scheduled employee quality committee meeting. 
d.  Employees shall not be eligible to use the sick leave bank unless they have exhausted their own vacation and sick leave. Employees will continue to accrue all benefits while on leave. 
e.  Sick leave awards shall be approved by the sick leave bank committee. 
i.  The sick leave bank committee shall be made up of the persons serving on the employee quality committee. 
ii.  Leave awards shall be given on an individual circumstance basis, with as much leave to be awarded as deemed necessary by the sick leave bank committee. 
iii.  The department head that submitted the request for leave will be consulted regarding the employee during the award determination process. 
iv.  A majority vote by a quorum of the sick leave bank committee will determine awards. 
f.  Donated hours are not tax deductible. 
g.  Sick leave bank committee decisions and awards are not grievable. 
12.  Income Continuation Plans. In those instances where employees are disabled due to illness, accident or job-related accident, employees will be compensated through either the city's disability plan or worker's compensation. 
E.  Maternity Leave. 
1.  Employees who become pregnant may continue working until such time as they can no longer satisfactorily perform their duties, at which time they may file a claim with the city's disability plan. 
2.  For other benefits, refer to Family and Medical Leave Act section in the personnel manual. Regulations governing sick leave, annual leave, and leave-without-pay will apply. During leave-without-pay in excess of thirty (30) calendar days, vacation leave, sick leave, or time toward annual performance evaluation shall not accrue. 
F.  Workers Compensation Leave. Employees injured on the job, however slightly, must report the fact immediately to their supervisor and the human resource department. It shall be the duty of the injured employee's supervisor to obtain information regarding the accident or injury and to complete such reports as are required. Employee becomes eligible for worker's compensation and they shall be paid that compensation as provided by law. However, when an employee on worker's compensation whose compensation payments reach the statutory cap, the city will pay to that employee the difference between the statutory cap and the figure representing sixty-six and two thirds (66 2/3 ) percent of said employee's actual salary. Unused sick leave or vacation leave may be granted in accordance with applicable rules and regulations. 
G.  Emergency Leave. The mayor, or designee, may allow a regular or probationary employee reasonable time off, not to exceed five working days with pay, in case of an emergency. The mayor shall have the authority to grant longer leaves in unusual circumstances in which an emergency exists. During an emergency leave period in excess of thirty (30) calendar days, vacation leave, sick leave, or time toward yearly evaluation shall not accrue. 
H.  Military Leave. A regular or probationary employee shall be granted leave with compensation for the difference in salary for active duty, for service in the National Guard or in the Armed Forces reserves for the purpose of fulfilling annual field training. Paid military leave shall not exceed eleven (11) working days in any single calendar year. (Sections 39-3-1 and 39-3-2, Utah Code Annotated, as amended). Any employee requesting such leave must provide a copy of the military orders placing him or her on active duty status. 
I.  Jury Leave. A regular or probationary employee may be granted leave with full pay when performing jury duty or when required to serve as a witness in any municipal, county, state, or federal court, or before an administrative tribunal. Any compensation, including travel and expense allowance, received by the employee for jury duty must be turned back to the city. Paid leave will not be granted when the employee is serving as party, witness, or otherwise, in any personal civil or criminal matter. 
J.  Administrative Leave. A regular or probationary employee may be granted administrative leave with pay to perform authorized duties in connection with the city business, attend trade or professional meetings which relate to official duties, participate in recognized and authorized training programs, or facilitate the needs of the city. 
K.  Funeral Leave. The department head, or designee, shall grant an employee up to five days of funeral leave with pay to attend the funeral of the employee's spouse, child, stepchild, daughter-in-law or son-in-law, parent, stepparent, grandchild, mother-in-law or father-in-law, sister-in-law or brother-in-law, grandparent, spouse's grandparent, brother or sister. Such leave shall not be charged against accrued sick or annual leave. 
L.  Leave Without Pay. 
1.  Upon recommendation of the mayor and approval of the city council, employees may be granted leave without pay for a specified period of time, not to exceed one year. At the expiration of a leave without pay, the employee shall return to the same position, where feasible, or to a similar position. Failure of the employee to report promptly at the expiration of such leave without pay shall be considered a resignation without notice. 
2.  A leave without pay shall not constitute a break in service. However, during leave without pay in excess of thirty (30) calendar days, vacation leave, sick leave, and time toward annual performance evaluation shall not accrue. 
3.  Leave without pay shall be granted for education purposes when the employee's course of study will be of direct benefit to the city, his or her absence will not be a hardship for his or her department, and the employee agrees to return to work at the end of the leave without pay period. 
4.  To attend funerals not covered by the funeral leave policy. 
5.  To attend to an ill or injured member of the employee's immediate family when such absence is not covered by sick leave. 
6.  Employees are expected to apply for absences in advance and in writing, giving as much detail about the absence as possible so that the mayor, or designee, may decide whether the leave without pay is warranted. 
M.  Documentation of Leave. Some of the above absences must be supported by a copy of the official paperwork causing the absence. Such paperwork must be submitted to the department head, or designee, as soon as possible. In some cases where official paperwork is not available, the department head, or designee, will request that the employee supply additional information in writing to support the absence. 
(Ord. 98-15 § 2 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, 3-11-2015)  
2.60.090 - Personnel manual adopted. 
The personnel management system of the city is represented by the currently approved and adopted Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual for the City of South Salt Lake, copies of which can be found in the city recorder and human resources offices. 
(Ord. 98-15 § 2 (part))  
2.60.100 - Severance pay. 
An appointed at-will department head or director, city recorder, city treasurer, or city engineer who has been employed full-time by the city for at least one year and who is involuntarily terminated for any reason other than criminal wrongdoing shall be entitled to receive severance pay. Severance pay is in addition to any accrued vacation owing at the time of termination. Severance pay is based on the employee's final salary as follows: 
A.  If the appointed at-will employee is terminated after fewer than two years' full-time employment, the employee shall receive an amount equivalent to two months' salary. 
B.  If the appointed at-will employee is terminated after more than two years' full-time employment, the employee shall receive an amount equivalent to the final salary rate prorated at one months' pay for each full year of service, up to a maximum of four months' salary. 
(Ord. No. 2017-25, 10-25-2017)  
Chapter 2.64 - CONSTITUTIONAL TAKINGS 
Sections: 
 
2.64.010 - Purpose. 
The guidelines of this chapter are adopted pursuant to the requirements of UCA Sections 63-90a-1 through 4. This chapter does not apply to formal eminent domain proceedings. 
(Ord. 96-24A § 1(A))  
2.64.020 - Intent. 
Private property owners should be treated fairly and should not be unconstitutionally deprived of real property interests without just compensation. This chapter shall be construed to provide for the objective and fair review of claims by persons asserting deprivation of vested real property rights or interests, without just compensation. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to limit the ability of the city to lawfully fulfill its duties and functions or to exercise its power of eminent domain. 
(Ord. 96-24A § 1(B))  
2.64.030 - Review of decision by mayor. 
Any owner of private real property or a real property right who claims there has been an unconstitutional taking of their property, without just compensation, shall petition for a review of a final decision of any city officer, employee, board, commission, or the city council. Appeals of actions regarding constitutional takings shall be made using the administrative hearing process outlined in Chapter 2.22 of the city code. A hearing request shall be in writing and must be received no later than ten days following such actions. 
(Ord. 2008-21 (part): Ord. 96-24A § 1(C))  
2.64.040 - Review procedures. 
The following procedures for review of a final decision shall be followed: 
A.  Final Decision. The person petitioning for review shall obtain a final decision before requesting review. 
B.  Petition for Review. Within thirty (30) days from the date of the final decision, the person requesting the review shall file, in the office of the city recorder, a written petition for review of that decision. A copy shall also be filed with the city attorney. 
C.  Hearing Date. The mayor, or the mayor's designee, shall set a time to review the decision that gave rise to the petition as soon as reasonably practical. The mayor, or the mayor's designee, shall hear and consider the evidence related to and submitted by the petitioner, the city or other interested parties. In the discretion of the mayor, or the mayor's designee, the hearing may be oral or based upon written submittals. 
D.  Applicant Information Submittal. 
1.  Initial Filing Information. In addition to the petition for review, the petitioner shall submit, within seven days prior to the date of review, the following: 
a.  The name of the petitioner requesting review; 
b.  The name and business address of the current owner of the property; the form of ownership, i.e., whether sole proprietorship, for-profit or not-for-profit corporation, partnership, joint venture or other; and if owned by other than a real person, the name and address of all partners or shareholders owning ten percent of the outstanding shares; 
c.  A detailed description of the factual and legal grounds for the claim that there has been an unconstitutional taking within just compensation; 
d.  A legal description of the property allegedly taken and a detailed description of the nature of the property; and 
e.  A description of the protectable property interest claimed to be affected. 
2.  Supplemental Information. If the mayor, or the mayor's designee, determines that there may be an unconstitutional taking, and additional information is needed, the mayor, or the mayor's designee, may further require the following to be submitted: 
a.  The evidence and documentation as to the value of the property interest claimed taken, including the date and cost at the date the property was acquired. This material should include any evidence of the value of that same property before and after the alleged unconstitutional taking; the name of the party from whom purchased, including the relationship, if any, between the person requesting a review; and the party from whom the property was acquired; 
b.  The terms, including sale price, of any previous purchase or sale of a full or partial interest in the property during the three years prior to the date of application; 
c.  All appraisals of the property prepared for any purpose, including financing, offering for sale, or ad valorem taxation, within three years prior to the date of application; 
d.  The assessed value of, and ad valorem taxes on, the property for the previous three years; 
e.  All information concerning current mortgages or other loans secured by the property, including the name of the mortgagor or lender, current interest rate, remaining loan balance and term of the loan and other significant provisions, including, but not limited to, the rights of the purchasers to assume the loan; 
f.  All listings of the property for sale or rent, price asked and offers received, if any, within the previous three years; 
g.  All studies commissioned by the petitioner or agents of the petitioner within the previous three years concerning feasibility of the development or utilization of the property; 
h.  For income producing property, itemized income and expense statements from the property for the previous three years; 
i.  Information from a title policy or other source showing all recorded liens or encumbrances affecting the property; and 
j.  The mayor, or the mayor's designee, may request additional information reasonably necessary, in their opinion, to arrive at a conclusion concerning the nature of, and the value of, the alleged unconstitutional taking. 
(Ord. 96-24A § 1(D))  
2.64.050 - Reviewing guidelines. 
The mayor, or the mayor's designee, shall review the facts and information presented by the petitioner and determine if the action by the city constitutes an unconstitutional taking. In doing so, the city attorney's office shall serve as legal counsel and shall be consulted. The mayor, or the mayor's designee, shall review the facts in light of the applicable state and federal constitutional law. 
(Ord. 96-24A § 1(E))  
2.64.060 - Time for final decision. 
If the mayor, or the mayor's designee, fails to hear and decide the petition within fourteen (14) days after the filing of the petition, the administrative decision of the city officer, employee, board, commission or the city council shall be deemed approved; provided, however, the mayor, or the mayor's designee, may extend the time to reach a decision, not exceeding an additional one hundred twenty (120) days following the receipt of the information required pursuant to this chapter, if prior to the expiration of the fourteen-day period, the mayor, or the mayor's designee notifies the petitioner, in writing, of such extension. 
(Ord. 96-24A § 1(F))  
2.64.070 - Results of review. 
After completing the review, the mayor, or the mayor's designee, shall make a determination regarding the petition and, if determined to be necessary and appropriate, make a recommendation to the city council or the appropriate officer, employee, board or commission. 
(Ord. 96-24A § 1(G))  
2.64.080 - Guidelines advisory. 
The guidelines adopted and decisions rendered pursuant to the provisions of this chapter are advisory, and shall not be construed to expand or limit the scope of the city's liability for an unconstitutional taking of a vested property interest. The decision rendered pursuant to the provisions of this chapter is not admissible in court for any purpose other than to demonstrate that the petitioner has exhausted the requisite administrative remedies, and in no event shall any recommended compensation be admissible into evidence. 
(Ord. 96-24A § 1(H))  
Chapter 2.68 - PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD 
Sections: 
 
2.68.010 - Created—Composition—Appointment. 
There is created and established a body to be designated as the parks and recreation advisory board and shall be composed of seven voting members, all of which shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council, and the parks and recreation director as nonvoting members. Five voting members appointed shall be residents of the city, one from each respective council district. Two members shall be appointed at large who shall represent the commercial/business community of the city. The membership of the board should be representative of the broad spectrum of leisure time, sports and recreational aspects usually associated with public parks, similar facilities, activities and programs. 
(Ord. 2000-15 § 1 (part))  
2.68.020 - Mission—Powers and duties. 
The mission of the parks and recreation advisory board is to: 
A.  Actively promote the use of city parks and recreational facilities; 
B.  Actively promote recreational and leisure time activities and programs for all residents and citizens; 
C.  Examine the present and future demand for publicly owned recreational facilities for the citizens and patrons of the city; and 
D.  Review and recommend policies and procedures to improve the parks and recreation system of the city, including existing facilities as well as future projects such as the Jordan River Parkway. 
(Ord. 2000-15 § 1 (part))  
2.68.030 - Term—Removal—Vacancies—Qualifications. 
Appointed members shall serve for a term of three years and may be removed by the mayor and city council only for cause, with the provision that the first appointment of two members shall be for a term of one year; the first appointment of two members shall be for a term of two years; the first appointment of the remaining three members shall be for a term of three years; thereafter the members shall be appointed for three-year terms. Vacancies occurring through expiration of terms of appointment, death, disability, resignation or removal from the city, if applicable, shall be filled by appointment of the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. Members shall not serve more than two consecutive terms. "Term," as used in this chapter shall mean serving on such advisory board for at least eighteen (18) months. The members of this board shall be resident voters and taxpayers of the city and shall be selected without regard to political considerations and solely on the basis of qualifications for the position. 
(Ord. 2000-15 § 1 (part))  
2.68.040 - Rules of procedure, meetings, etc. 
The board shall formulate its own rules for selection of a chairman, time, place and manner of calling of meetings and other procedural matters; provided, that there shall be at least one meeting each month. 
(Ord. 2000-15 § 1 (part))  
2.68.050 - Salary. 
No member of the board shall receive compensation for service on the advisory board. 
(Ord. 2000-15 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 2.69 - ARTS BOARD 
 
2.69.010 - Creation and purpose. 
There is hereby recognized a separate, non-profit corporation known as the South Salt Lake City Arts Board ("board") to supplement, expand and broaden the community arts within the city and the state of Utah. The board is a wholly-owned city instrumentality which is a separate entity and which is organized and operated exclusively for purposes described in Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, or the corresponding provisions of any future United States Internal Revenue Law. 
(Res. No. R2013-22, 10-23-2013)  
2.69.020 - Composition. 
The board shall consist of a seven trustees, which shall include the city's chief executive officer ("CEO"), who shall be the South Salt Lake City Mayor; an executive arts director; and five additional board members, the appointment of whom shall be set forth in the board's bylaws. City personnel may be utilized as deemed necessary by the trustees and CEO to assist the board. The CEO shall annually submit the arts board budget to the city council for approval. 
(Res. No. R2013-22, 10-23-2013)  
2.69.030 - Bylaws. 
Provisions for the regulation of the internal affairs of the board shall be set forth in the board's by-laws. 
(Res. No. R2013-22, 10-23-2013)  
2.69.040 - Arts advisory council. 
At the discretion of the arts board and the CEO, a community-based arts advisory council may be established and directed by the arts board. The arts advisory council should include residents and businesses of the city. 
(Res. No. R2013-22, 10-23-2013)  
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE 
Chapters:  
Chapter 3.04 - FISCAL PROCEDURES 
Sections: 
 
3.04.010 - Uniform Fiscal Procedures Act adopted. 
The Uniform Fiscal Procedures Act for Utah Cities codified at UCA 10-6-101 through 10-6-159 providing uniform accounting, budgeting, and financial reporting procedures for Utah cities is adopted by reference by the city council of South Salt Lake. All future amendments and revisions to this act are adopted as well. The procedures and officers' duties set forth in this act shall be adopted and employed by the city of South Salt Lake. 
(Ord. 96-15 § 2)  
Chapter 3.08 - SALES AND USE TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.08.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Sales and Use Tax Ordinance of the City of South Salt Lake." 
(Ord. 221 § 1, 1990)  
3.08.020 - Purpose. 
A.  The Utah Legislature has authorized the counties and municipalities of the state of Utah to enact sales and use tax ordinances imposing a one percent tax. 
B.  It is the purpose of this chapter to conform the sales and use tax of the municipality to the requirements of the Sales and Use Tax Act, Chapter 12 of Title 59, UCA, 1953, as currently amended. 
C.  The Utah Legislature has further authorized certain municipalities to enact a local option sales and use tax ordinance imposing an addition .20 percent tax through June 30, 2016. The City of South Salt Lake qualifies as one of these authorized municipalities. 
D.  It is the further purpose of this chapter to impose the local option sales and use tax of .20 percent beginning January 1, 2011 and continuing until the authority to impose that tax expires. Should the Utah Legislature extend the period of time for which this tax may be imposed, this chapter shall remain in effect. 
(Ord. 221 § 2, 1990) 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 7, 9-9-2010)  
3.08.030 - Sales and use tax. 
A.  1.  From and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, there is levied and there shall be collected and paid a tax upon every retail sale of tangible personal property, services and meals made within the municipality at the rate of one point two (1.20) percent. 
2.  An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this municipality of tangible personal property from any retailer on or after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter at the rate of one point two (1.20) percent of the sales price of the property. 
3.  For the purpose of this chapter all retail sales shall be presumed to have been consummated at the place of business delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be as determined under the rules and regulations prescribed by and adopted by the state tax commission. Public utilities as defined by Title 54, UCA, 1953, shall not be obligated to determine the place or places within the county or municipality where public utilities services are rendered, but the place of sale or the sales tax revenue arising from such service allocable to the city shall be as determined by the state tax commission pursuant to an appropriate formula and other rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by it. 
B.  1.  Except as provided in this chapter, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of the Sales and Use Tax Act, all of the provisions of Chapter 12, Title 59, UCA, 1953, as amended, and in force and effect on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, insofar as they relate to sales taxes, excepting Sections 59-12-101 and 59-12-119 thereof, are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. 
2.  Wherever, and to the extent that in Chapter 12 of Title 59, UCA, 1953, the state of Utah is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this municipality shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this subsection B. shall be deemed to require substitution of the name of the municipality for the word "state" when that word is used as part of the title of the state tax commission, or of the Constitution of the state of Utah, nor shall the name of the municipality be substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the municipality or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the state tax commission in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter. 
3.  If an annual license has been issued to a retailer under Section 59-12-106 of the UCA 1953, an additional license shall not be required by reason of this chapter. 
4.  There shall be excluded from the purchase price paid or changed by which the tax is measured: 
a.  The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state of Utah upon a retailer or consumer; 
b.  The gross receipts from the sale of or the cost of storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property upon which a sales or use tax has become due by reason of the sale transaction to any other municipality and any county in the state of Utah, under the sales or use tax ordinance enacted by that county or municipality in accordance with the Sales and Use Tax Act. 
(Ord. 221 § 4, 1990) 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 7, 9-9-2010)  
3.08.040 - Violation—Penalty. 
In addition to any fines, fees or penalties applicable for violations enumerated in the Utah Code, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine in an amount less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 221 § 5, 1990) 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 7, 9-9-2010)  
Chapter 3.10 - MUNICIPAL ENERGY SALES AND USE TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.10.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to adopt a municipal energy sales and use tax ordinance, pursuant to, and in conformance with, Utah Code Annotated Section 10-1-301 et seq., the Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax Act. 
(Ord. 97-15 (part))  
3.10.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Consumer" means a person who acquires taxable energy for any use that is subject to the municipal energy sales and use tax. 
"Contractual franchise fee" means: 
1.  A fee: 
a.  Provided for in a franchise agreement; and 
b.  That is consideration for the franchise agreement; or 
2.  a.  A fee similar to subdivision (1) of this definition; or 
b.  Any combination of subdivisions (1) or (2) of this definition. 
Delivered Value. 1. "Delivered value" means the fair market value of the taxable energy delivered for sale or use in the municipality and includes: 
a.  The value of the energy itself; and 
b.  Any transportation, freight, customer demand charges, service charges, or other costs typically incurred in providing taxable energy in usable form to each class of customer in the municipality; 
2.  "Delivered value" does not include the amount of a tax paid under Part 1 or Part 2 of Chapter 12, Title 59 of the Utah Code Annotated. 
"Energy supplier" means a person supplying taxable energy, except for persons supplying a de minimis amount of taxable energy, if such persons are excluded by rules promulgated by the State Tax Commission. 
"Franchise agreement" means a franchise or an ordinance, contract or agreement granting a franchise. 
"Franchise tax" means: 
1.  A franchise tax; 
2.  A tax similar to a franchise tax; or 
3.  Any combination of subdivisions (1) or (2) of this definition. 
"Person" means and includes any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, this state, any county, city, municipality, district, or other local governmental entity of the state, or any group or combination acting as a unit. 
"Sale" means any transfer of title, exchange or barter, conditional or otherwise, in any manner, of taxable energy for a consideration. It includes: 
1.  Installment and credit sales; 
2.  Any closed transaction constituting a sale; 
3.  Any transaction under which right to acquire, use or consume taxable energy is granted under a lease or contract and the transfer would be taxable if an outright sale were made. 
"Storage" means any keeping or retention of taxable energy in this city for any purpose except sale in the regular course of business. 
"Taxable energy" means gas and electricity. 
Use. 1. "Use" means the exercise of any right or power over taxable energy incident to the ownership or the leasing of the taxable energy. 
2.  "Use" does not include the sale, display, demonstration or trial of the taxable energy in the regular course of business and held for resale. 
(Ord. 97-15 (part))  
3.10.030 - Municipal energy sales and use tax levied. 
There is levied, subject to the provisions of this chapter, a tax on every sale or use of taxable energy made within the city of South Salt Lake equaling six percent of the delivered value of the taxable energy to the consumer. This tax shall be known as the municipal energy sales and use tax. 
A.  The tax shall be calculated on the delivered value of the taxable energy to the consumer. 
B.  The tax shall be in addition to any sales or use tax on taxable energy imposed by the city of South Salt Lake authorized by Title 59, Chapter 12, Part 2 of Utah Code Annotated, the Local Sales and Use Tax Act. 
(Ord. 2004-08; Ord. 97-15 (part))  
3.10.040 - Exemptions. 
A.  No exemptions are granted from the municipal energy sales and use tax except as expressly provided in Utah Code Annotated Section 10-1-305(2)(b); notwithstanding an exemption granted by Section 59-1-104 of the Utah Code. 
B.  The following are exempt from the municipal energy sales and use tax, pursuant to Utah Code Annotated Section 10-1-305(2)(b): 
1.  Sales and use of aviation fuel, motor fuel and special fuels subject to taxation under Title 59, Chapter 13, of the Utah Code Annotated; 
2.  Sales and use of taxable energy that is exempt from taxation under federal law, the United States Constitution or the Utah Constitution; 
3.  Sales and use of taxable energy purchased or stored for resale; 
4.  Sales or use of taxable energy to a person, if the primary use of the taxable energy is for use in compounding or producing taxable energy or a fuel subject to taxation under Title 59, Chapter 13 of the Utah Code Annotated; 
5.  Taxable energy brought into the state by a nonresident for the nonresident's own personal use or enjoyment while within the state, except taxable energy purchased for use in the state by a nonresident living or working in the state at the time of purchase; 
6.  The sale or use of taxable energy for any purpose other than as a fuel or energy; and 
7.  The sale of taxable energy for use outside the boundaries of the city of South Salt Lake. 
C.  The sale, storage, use or other consumption of taxable energy is exempt from the municipal energy sales and use tax levied by this chapter, provided: 
1.  The delivered value of the taxable energy has been subject to a municipal energy sales or use tax levied by another municipality within the state authorized by Title 59, Chapter 12, Part 3 of the Utah Code Annotated; and 
2.  The city of South Salt Lake is paid the difference between the tax paid to the other municipality and the tax that would otherwise be due under this chapter, if the tax due under this chapter exceeds the tax paid to the other municipality. 
(Ord. 97-15 (part))  
3.10.050 - No effect upon existing franchises—Credit for franchise fees. 
A.  This chapter shall not alter any existing franchise agreements between the city of South Salt Lake and energy suppliers. 
B.  There is a credit against the tax due from any consumer in the amount of a contractual franchise fee paid if: 
1.  The energy supplier pays the contractual franchise fee to the city of South Salt Lake pursuant to a franchise agreement in effect on July 1, 1997; 
2.  The contractual franchise fee is passed through by the energy supplier to a consumer as a separately itemized charge; and 
3.  The energy supplier has accepted the franchise. 
(Ord. 97-15 (part))  
3.10.060 - Tax collection contract with State Tax Commission. 
A.  On or before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter the city shall enter into an agreement with the State Tax Commission to perform all functions incident to the administration and collection of the municipal energy sales and use tax of the city. That contract is confirmed and the mayor is authorized to enter into such supplementary agreement with the State Tax Commission as may be necessary to the continued administration and operation of the municipal energy sales and use tax ordinance as enacted by this chapter. 
B.  An energy supplier shall pay the municipal energy sales and use tax revenues collected from consumers directly to the city of South Salt Lake monthly if: 
1.  The city of South Salt Lake is the energy supplier; or 
2.  a.  The energy supplier estimates that the municipal energy sales and use tax collected annually from its Utah consumers equals one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) or more, and 
b.  The energy supplier collects the municipal energy sales and use tax. 
C.  An energy supplier paying the municipal energy sales and use tax directly to the city of South Salt Lake may deduct any contractual franchise fees collected by the energy supplier qualifying as a credit and remit the net tax less any amount the energy supplier retains as authorized by Section 10-1-307(4), Utah Code Annotated. 
(Ord. 97-15 (part))  
3.10.070 - Incorporation of Part 1, Chapter 12, Title 59, Utah Code, including amendments. 
A.  Except as herein provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of the Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax Act, all of the provisions of Part 1, Chapter 12, Title 59 of the Utah Code Annotated 1953, as amended, and in force and effect on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, insofar as they relate to sales and use taxes, excepting Sections 59-12-101 and 59-12-119 thereof, and excepting for the amount of the sales and use taxes levied therein, are adopted and made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. 
B.  Wherever, and to the extent that in Part 1, Chapter 12, Title 59, Utah Code Annotated 1953, as amended, the state of Utah is named or referred to as the "taxing agency," the name of the city of South Salt Lake shall be substituted, insofar as is necessary for the purposes of that part, as well as Part 3, Chapter 1, Title 10, Utah Code Annotated 1953, as amended. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to require substitution of the name of the city of South Salt Lake for the word "state" when that word is used as a part of the title of the State Tax Commission, or of the Constitution of Utah, nor shall the name of the city of South Salt Lake be substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city of South Salt Lake or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Tax Commission in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter. 
C.  Any amendments made to Part 1, Chapter 12, Title 59, Utah Code Annotated 1953, as amended, which would be applicable to the city of South Salt Lake for the purposes of carrying out this chapter are incorporated herein by reference and shall be effective upon the date that they are effective as a Utah Statute. 
(Ord. 97-15 (part))  
3.10.080 - No additional license or reporting requirements. 
No additional license to collect or report the municipal energy sales and use tax levied by this chapter is required, provided the energy supplier collecting the tax has a license issued under Section 59-12-106, Utah Code Annotated. 
(Ord. 97-15 (part))  
Chapter 3.11 - CONSOLIDATED FEE SCHEDULE[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2020-02, § V, adopted Jan. 8, 2020, repealed Ch. 3.11, §§ 3.11.010—3.11.130. Section V(Exh. D) of said ordinance reenacted Ch. 3.11 as set out herein. Former Ch. 3.11 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2018-10, Exhs. A, B(§§ I—IX, XI, XII), adopted June 14, 2018 and Ord. No. 2019-04, § II, adopted April 3, 2019. 
 
3.11.010 - Animal Services. 
A.  Licenses. 
Altered * Dog 	$15.00/year 
 Discount for microchipped, altered dogs 	$5.00/year discount 
Altered * Dog—Senior citizen (65+) (lifetime license) 	$20.00 
Unaltered dog 	$40.00/year 
Unaltered dog—Senior citizen (65+) 	$20.00/year 
Guard dog (kept overnight at business) 	$120.00/year 
Altered * Cat 	$15.00/year 
 Discount for microchipped, altered cats 	$5.00/year discount 
Altered * cat—Senior citizen (65+) (lifetime license) 	$20.00 
Unaltered cat 	$40.00/year 
Unaltered cat—Senior citizen (65+) 	$20.00/year 
Ferret (rabies vaccination and microchip required) 	$15.00/year 
Service animal (altered * ) 	$0.00 
Nuisance animal license 	Additional $100.00 and proof of $25,000.00 insurance 
Late fee (expired for more than 30 days) 	$10.00/month 
 
* Altered animals have been either spayed or neutered. 
B.  Permits. 
Type of Permit 	Initial 	Renewal 
 Hobby/private cattery 	$75.00 	$30.00 
 Urban poultry 	$75.00 	$30.00 
 Beehive 	$75.00 	$30.00 
 
C.  Adoptions. 
Dog (if received by City as pre-chipped, altered) 	$18.00 
Dog (surgery and microchip upon adoption) 	$100.00 
Cat (if received by City as pre-chipped, altered) 	$8.00 
Cat (surgery and microchip upon adoption) 	$68.00 
Scientific animals (adopter pays all veterinary fees) 	$20.00 
Other (rabbit, bird, reptile, etc.) 	$10.00 
 
D.  Impounds. 
Dogs and cats: 	
 First impound 	$25.00 + $8.00/day 
 Second impound 	$50.00 + $8.00/day 
 Third impound 	$150.00 + $8.00/day 
 Fourth and each subsequent impound 	$300.00 + $8.00/day 
Small livestock—Per animal (chicken, sheep, goat, rabbit, etc.) 	$30.00 + $10.00/day 
Large livestock—Per animal (horse, cow, llama, etc.) 	$60.00+ $12.00/day 
Sterilization deposit 	$100.00 
 
E.  Turnover. 
Residents 	
 Licensed and rabies—Vaccinated dog or cat 	$0.00 
 Unlicensed and unvaccinated dog or cat 	$10.00 
 Litter (2 or more animals) 	$15.00 
Non-residents (dog, cat, or litter) 	$50.00 
 
F.  Services. 
Microchip 	$15.00 
Animal trap deposit (refundable) 	$50.00 
Euthanasia (resident cat/dog) 	$10.00 
Euthanasia (non-resident cat/dog) 	$100.00 
Carcass pickup—Current license/vaccination 	$0.00 
Carcass pickup—No current license/vaccination 	$20.00 
Cremation (URNS NOT PROVIDED) 	
 Individual (single animal, ashes returned) 	$75.00 
 Communal (same owner, multiple animals, ashes returned) 	$75.00 + $30.00 each 
additional 
Disposal 	$20.00 
 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § V(Exh. D), 1-8-2020)  
3.11.020 - General fees. 
A.  Records and Information Services. 
Research/compilation/duplication/redaction costs: 
The City charges the cost of redaction, compilation, research and duplication in excess of fifteen minutes, at the salary of the lowest paid employee who has the necessary skills and training to perform the request. This fee is incurred regardless of the format in which the documents ultimately will be produced. 
Paper copies 
B&W: 8.5 × 11" or 8.5 × 14" pages 	$0.25/page 
B&W: 11 × 17" pages 	$0.50/page 
Color: 8.5 × 11" or 8.5 × 14" pages 	$0.50/page 
Color: 11 × 17" pages 	$1.00/page 
Maps (depends upon size/color) 	$5.00—$10.00 
Electronic copies 
CD/DVD production 	$10.00/disc 
Video cassette production 	$20.00/tape 
Audio cassette production 	$10.00/tape 
Facsimile transmission 	$2.00 for 10 pages, additional pages $0.50/page 
E-mail transmission (files of less than 10 MB) 	No additional charge 
 
B.  Administrative Hearings. 
Administrative hearing filing fee 	$25.00 
Copies of files and transcript for appeal from decision 	$15.00, plus actual costs of transcript preparation 
Deposit required before City will arrange for transcript (applied toward ultimate cost of transcript) 	$75.00 
 
C.  Other Fees. 
Returned check charge 	$20.00/check 
Direct pay ACH return 	$20.00/return 
Returned checks on xpressbillpay 	
 Invalid account/unable to locate account 	$8.00 
 Insufficient or closed account 	$14.00 
 Customer stop payment 	$29.00 
Mailing 	Actual cost 
Notary service (if notary is available) 	Free 
 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § V(Exh. D), 1-8-2020)  
3.11.030 - Business licensing. 
A.  General License Fees. 
Business license fees cover regulatory costs and partially recover disproportionate costs of providing services to the businesses in each category. Licenses are issued and the fee charged for a license period of one year. 
Initial license application fees are prorated for the remainder of the year starting with the month of application unless otherwise provided in the Code. There is no prorating for businesses that close during the year. 
Amusement Device 	$147.00 
Automotive sales, repair, towing, rental, leasing 	$173.00 
Bar Establishment, Tavern 	$1,550.00 
Bowling alley, recreational establishment 	$1,354.00 
Check cashing and pawn 	$422.00 
Child Care Center 	$369.00 
Construction, manufacturing, and contracted services 	$302.00 
Convenience stores: 	
 No fuel pumps 	$1,860.00 
 Fueling with pre-pay required 	$2,281.00 
 Fueling without pre-pay required 	$4,318.00 
Drug store 	$2,052.00 
Equestrian Facility 	$180.00 
Fast food 	$1,093.00 
Financial 	$719.00 
Golf 	$781.00 
Indoor sports training 	$1,720.00 
Large grocery 	$1,818.00 
Large retail 	$1,633.00 
Live entertainment 	$147.00 
Lodging: 	
 Long-term 	$147.00 + $89.00/unit 
 Short-term 	$147.00 + $7.00/unit 
Markets, bakeries, and cafés 	$231.00 
Mini-storage 	$147.00 + $0.30/unit 
Mobile food services 	$147.00 
Mobile home park 	$147.00 + $101.00/pad 
Movie theatre 	$4,470.00 
Moving and warehouse 	$312.00 
Nursing home 	$147.00 + $50.00/unit 
Personal services 	$291.00 
Professional and business services 	$225.00 
Restaurant 	$432.00 
Retail general 	$372.00 
Sexually Oriented Business 	$1,550.00 
Wholesale 	$366.00 
 
B.  Rental Housing Licenses. 
Single-family rental 	$375.00/unit 
 Reduced rate for good landlord certification 	$30.00 + $30.00/unit 
Duplex or triplex 	$101.00/unit 
 Reduced rate for good landlord certification 	$40.00 + $30.00/unit 
Owner-occupied duplex/triplex 	$60.00/unit 
 Reduced rate for good landlord certification 	$24.00/unit 
Quadplex 	$150.00 + $151.00/unit 
 Reduced rate for good landlord certification 	$100.00 + $30.00/unit 
Apartments (5+ rental units) 	$150.00 + $151.00/unit 
 Reduced rate for good landlord certification 	$125.00 + $30.00/unit 
Good landlord certification reinstatement fee 	$100.00 
 
C.  Penalties. 
Penalties are owed in addition to and separate from other license and regulatory fees. 
Operating business prior to obtaining license 	100% of fee 
Late renewal (30 days past due) 	50% of overdue fee 
Late renewal (60 days past due) 	100% of overdue fee 
Doing business without a license 	$500.00 
 
D.  Regulatory Fees. 
Regulatory fees are in addition to the business license fees above. Regulatory fees are not pro-rated. 
Alcoholic Beverage Uses 	License - 
Initial 	License - Renewal 
City beer license—Off-premise Beer 	$500.00 	$300.00 
City beer license—Beer Wholesaler 	$2,000.00 	$1,000.00 
City beer license—Beer Recreational 	$500.00 	$300.00 
City beer license—Tavern 	$1,500.00 	$1,000.00 
City beer license—Restaurant (Beer Only) 	$1,000.00 	$500.00 
City liquor license—Restaurant (Limited Service) 	$1,250.00 	$750.00 
City liquor license—Restaurant (Full Service) 	$1,750.00 	$1,000.00 
City liquor license—Manufacturer 	$2,000.00 	$1,000.00 
City liquor license—Banquet & Catering 	$1,000.00 	$500.00 
City liquor license—Bar Establishment 	$2,500.00 	$1,750.00 
City liquor license—Hotel 	$2,500.00 	$1,750.00 
City liquor license—Liquor Warehouse 	$1,000.00 	$750.00 
City liquor license—Package Agency 	$250.00 	$100.00 
City liquor license—Local Industry Representative 	$150.00 	$50.00 
City special-use license—Educational 	$250.00 	N/A 
City special-use license—Industrial/Manufacturing 	$250.00 	N/A 
City special-use license—Religious 	$250.00 	N/A 
City special-use license—Scientific 	$250.00 	N/A 
City single event alcoholic beverage license 	$250.00 	N/A 
 
Sexually-oriented businesses 	
Adult business 	$300.00 
Semi-nude dancing bar 	$300.00 
Employee/owner work card 	$25.00 
Other fees 	
Home occupation (Category II): 	
 New application 	$43.00 
 Renewal 	$18.00 
 New child care 	$249.00 
 Renewal child care 	$224.00 
Booth rental in licensed Day Spa or Barber Shop/Hair Salon 	$18.00 each 
Fire damage and close-out sale 	$25.00 for 30 days; $10.00 for 30-day renewal 
Fireworks stands 	$94.00 + $50.00 deposit 
Tobacco 	$30.00 
Request for nuisance determination 	$50.00 
Business license list (printed) 	$20.00 
 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § V(Exh. D), 1-8-2020)  
3.11.040 - Building, Planning, and Zoning. 
A.  Reserved. 
B.  Building Permits and Other Planning and Zoning Fees. Building permit fees are calculated based upon the most current International Code Council Building Valuation Data (ICCBVD). 
Plan review fees are calculated at sixty-five (65) of the total building permit fee, based upon the most current International Code Council Building Valuation Data (ICCBVD). 
Refunds for permits issued will be limited to eighty (80) percent of permit, not later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the date of fee payment. No refunds for plan review costs will be given if the plan review has been conducted. A one-hour minimum fee will be charged on all building permits. 
Certain routine or simple projects are eligible for an over-counter flat fee in lieu of a calculated fee, which schedule is maintained by the City at the Community Development Department. 
Other fees: 
State of Utah surcharge 	1% additional 
Consultant fees (expedited, complicated, or unusual structures or projects) 	City's actual cost 
Additional hourly fees (beyond three reviews) 	$56.00/hour 
Inspection re-fee 	$56.00 
Commencing construction prior to issuance of permit 	additional 100% of building fee 
 
C.  Building Department. 
Building Plan review deposits*(maximum) 	Deposit 
 Residential 	$500.00 
 Residential remodel, attached/detached garage 	$500.00 
 Commercial building, Multifamily, Industrial 	Full Plan Review Fee 
 Tenant improvements 	Full Plan Review Fee 
 Miscellaneous 	$56.00 
 
* Deposits shall be applied to the cost of the issuance of the permit provided that the building permit is issued within six months after submission of plans to be checked. If the building permit is not issued within six months, the deposit shall be forfeited. 
Demolition permit (per building) 	
 Commercial demolition 	$60.00 
 Two-family or more 	$60.00 
 Single family/accessory building 	$30.00 
 Interior demo (plans and inspection required) 	$20.00 
Sign permits (not including electrical work, if needed) 	
 Building mounted 	$100.00 
 Freestanding (ground, pole, monument, etc.) 	$200.00 
 Billboard (off-premise sign) 	$500.00 
Other fees 	
3 rd and subsequent business license inspection 	$50.00/appointment 
Certificate of Occupancy inspection 	$56.00/occurrence 
 
D.  Impact Fees. 
Impact fees are applicable if construction is taking place within the specific fee's service area. 
Culinary water impact fee 	
 ¾" meter 	$733.00 
 1" meter 	$1,557.00 
 1.5" meter 	$5,690.00 
 2" meter 	$7,611.00 
 3" meter 	$16,664.00 
 4" meter 	$28,558.00 
 6" meter 	$46,676.00 
 Other meter connection 	$733.00/ERC, determined by director 
 
Impact fees are applicable if new Development is taking place within the specific fee's service area. 
Sanitary sewer impact fee (meter size) 	City multiplier 	Impact fee 
¾" meter 	1.00 	$1,063.00 
1" meter 	2.12 	$2,259.00 
1.5" meter 	7.76 	$8,252.00 
2" meter 	10.38 	$11,038.00 
3" meter 	22.73 	$24,167.00 
4" meter 	38.96 	$41,417.00 
6" meter 	63.68 	$67,694.00 
 
Parks impact fee 	Fee per household 
 Single-family 	$1,677.00 
 Multi-Family 	$1,608.00 
 
E.  Fire Marshal Inspections. 
Automatic sprinkler systems 	
 Up to 8,000 square feet 	$150.00 
 Over 8,000 square feet 	$300.00 
 Third and subsequent submittal 	40% of prior fee 
Clean agent systems/hood systems/paint booths 	$200.00 
Fire alarm systems 	
 Up to 5,000 square feet 	$120.00 
 Over 5,000 square feet 	$300.00 
Tent and membrane structures 	
 Up to 700 square feet 	$120.00 
 Over 700 square feet 	$120.00 + ($0.02/additional square feet 
State licensed healthcare 	
 Day care facility (6 or less children) 	$29.00 
 Day care facility (7 or more children) 	$58.00 
 Group homes, offices 	$58.00 
 Counseling services/group therapy 	$58.00 
 Nursing home facility 	$116.00 
 Greater than 10,000 square feet 	Additional $300.00 
Fuel tanks 	
 1—2 tanks installed/removed 	$250.00/site 
 Additional tanks (3+) 	$200.00/tank 
 Re-inspection fee 	$100.00 
 
F.  Planning and Zoning Fees. 
Allowed Use Applications 	$150.00 
Conditional Use Applications 	$600.00 + $10.00/unit 
Subdivision and Platting 	
 Predevelopment review 	$50.00 
 Plat 	$1000.00 + $20.00/lot 
 Recording fees 	At City's cost 
 Vacating, altering, or amending a subdivision plat 	$1000.00 
Development Review 	$500.00 
 Concept review 	$50.00 
 Design review—Planning Commission 	$500.00 
 Historic and Landmark Commission review 	$400.00 
 Design review—Design review committee 	$400.00 
Other 	
 Zoning/Ordinance change request 	$1000.00 
 Variance 	$300.00 
 Non-conforming use determinations 	$500.00 
 General plan amendment 	$1000.00 
 Consultant fees (expedited, complicated, or unusual projects) 	City's actual cost 
Documents 	
 Zoning map 	$10.00 
 General plan 	$20.00 
 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § V(Exh. D), 1-8-2020)  
3.11.050 - Administrative Enforcement. 
A.  Code Enforcement. 
Civil fine for code violations 	
 First offense within 12 months 	$50.00 
 Second offense within 12 months 	$100.00 
 Third and subsequent offense within 12 months 	$200.00 
Daily fine for failure to comply with notice of violation (each day is a new violation) 	$40.00 
Administrative costs for nuisance abatement 	$100.00 
Inspection fee for code violations 	$35.00 
Itemized statement of costs late fee 	$15.00 
 
B.  Building Securing Permit. 
Tier 1(vacant) 	No fee 
Tier 2 (nuisance) 	$150.00/year 
Tier 3 (boarded) 	$350.00/year 
Tier 4 (compromised) 	$350.00/year + $300.00 fine 
Boarding without a permit fine 	$250.00 
Permit late fee (more than 60 days delinquent) 	100% permit cost 
 
C.  Illicit Discharge or Connection into Storm Water System. 
Fine for negligent discharge of non-hazardous waste 	$75.00 
Fine for negligent discharge of hazardous waste/sewage 	$250.00 
Fine for intentional discharge of non-hazardous waste 	$150.00 
Fine for intentional discharge of hazardous waste/sewage 	$500.00 
Daily fines for failure to comply with notice of violation (each day represents a new violation) 	
 Non-hazardous discharge/connection 	$100.00 
 Hazardous or sewage discharge/connection 	$1,000.00 
 
D.  Violations of Posted Orders. 
Unlawful to do business 	$300.00/day 
Stop work order 	
 Contractor/manager/site supervisor 	$500.00 
 Employee of contractor 	$50.00 
 Property owner/tenant 	$50.00 
Closed to occupancy 	$150.00/day 
 
E.  Violations of Emergency Management Act. 
First offense during declared emergency 	$500.00 
Second offense declared emergency 	$750.00 
Third or subsequent offense during declared emergency 	1,000.00 
 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § V(Exh. D), 1-8-2020; Ord. No. 2020-05, § II(Exh. B), 4-8-2020)  
3.11.060 - Courts, City Attorney, and Recreation. 
A.  Justice Court. 
Fines and bails 	As set by Utah Administrative Office of Courts 
Filing fees 	As set by Utah Code Ann. § 78A-2-301.5 
Record production fees 	As set by Utah R. Jud. Admin. 4-202.08 
Traffic school tuition 	$50.00 
Trust check processing fee 	$10.00 
Fingerprinting fee 	$10.00 
 
B.  City Attorney. 
Discovery in criminal cases * 	
 Class C/infraction-level cases 	$10.00 
 Other criminal cases 	$15.00 
 Audio/video/color copies/etc. 	See Section 3.11.020 
Debt-collection account administrative fee 	$25.00 
 
* Fees in criminal cases shall not be assessed to or collected from defendants found indigent by the court in which their case is pending; however, duplicates/replacements of materials already provided to indigent defendants shall be charged at the standard rates above. Fee includes cost of mailing, and will provide all reports received by the prosecution office for the case requested. 
C.  Recreation. 
Youth Programs (uniform, team photo, award, practices and games) 	Enrollment fee * 
 One child 	$25.00 
 Second child in family 	$20.00 
 Third and subsequent child in family 	$15.00 
 
* Scholarships covering all or part of youth program fees are available based upon income eligibility. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § V(Exh. D), 1-8-2020)  
3.11.070 - Police Department. 
A.  Reports and Documents. 
DI-9 (crash) reports 	$15.00 (provided at station) 
 Crash reports available at https://crashreport.utah.gov 	$9.50 (provided online) 
Police reports (includes research/redaction costs) 	
 <50 pages 	$10.00 
 50—100 pages 	$20.00 
 101—200 pages 	$30.00 
 201+ pages 	As quoted 
Dashboard/body/security/other video/audio recording (including disc, research/redaction, staff time) 	$45.00 per recording device 
 
B.  Work Cards. 
Work/ID card (sexually oriented businesses) 	$25.00 
Duplicate work/ID cards 	$10.00 
 
C.  Sex Offender Registration. 
Sex offender registration fee 	$25.00 
DNA collection fee 	$125.00 
 
D.  Police Equipment and Personnel 
Police chief 	$80.00/hour 
Deputy police chief 	$70.00/hour 
Lieutenant 	$60.00/hour 
Sargent 	$55.00/hour 
Officer 	$50.00/hour 
K-9 and handler 	$50.00/hour 
SWAT unit 	$50.00/hour 
Mobile Incident Command vehicle 	$40.00/hour 
 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § V(Exh. D), 1-8-2020)  
3.11.080 - Fire Department. 
A.  Hazardous Material Permits. 
HM storage site category I 	$125.00 
HM storage site category II 	$250.00 
HM disposing/use site category I 	$125.00 
HM disposing/use site category II 	$300.00 
HM production/processing 	$350.00 
Explosive blasting permit (single event) 	$150.00 
Explosive blasting permit (annual) 	$300.00 
Fireworks aerial display 	$75.00 
Fireworks proximate audience 	$55.00 
Flame effects 	$55.00 
Late penalty for lapsed permits (more than 90 days) 	100% of fee 
 
B.  Hazardous Materials Incident Cost Recovery. * 
Absorbent 	$8.00/container 
Atmospheric monitoring 	$50.00 
Barrier tape 	$17.00 
Containment drum 	$186.00 
Foam 	$30.00/container 
Boom 	$40.00 
Patch kit 	$100.00 
Boots 	$15.00 
Goggles 	$8.00 
Neoprene boots 	$70.00 
Nitrile gloves 	$15.00 
Tyvek type suit 	$56.00 
Level A suit 	$800.00 
Level B suit 	$110.00 
Broom 	$25.00 
Shovel 	$35.00 
 
* Charges apply when fire department responds to an incident or event that requires the use of specialized hazardous materials, supplies, or equipment. Listed materials are not for sale. 
C.  Fire Equipment and Personnel * 
Class A engine (4 firefighters/EMT's) 	$275.00/hour 
Class A engine (2 firefighters/2 paramedics) 	$375.00/hour 
85 ft. aerial platform ladder truck 
(2 firefighters/2 paramedics) 	$450.00/hour 
Fire chief 	$80.00/hour 
Deputy fire chief 	$70.00/hour 
Battalion chief 	$60.00/hour 
Captain 	$55.00/hour 
Paramedic 	$50.00/hour 
Hazmat technician 	$50.00/hour 
Technical rescue technician 	$50.00/hour 
Fire fighter 	$40.00/hour 
Investigator/inspector 	$45.00/hour 
Hazmat squad (2-handed) 	$175.00/hour + $40.00/hour for each 
additional technician 
Grass truck/auxiliary 	$175.00/hour 
Ground ambulance with crew 	$225.00/hour 
 
* Charges apply when fire department responds to an incident/event that is extraordinary or is in the category of cost recovery. This applies to charges to be made to another city, county, forest service, etc. if the fire department responds to a wildfire. Whenever the fire department can bill for services rendered, these rates apply. 
D.  Ground Ambulance Transport and Phlebotomy. 
Ambulance transportation rates and charges are calculated in the amount established by the state department of health through administrative rule regulating ambulance transport, mileage and surcharges. 
Ambulance supplies are charged according to reasonable and customary standards in the profession. 
Phlebotomy services for substance level testing shall be assessed through the medical billing process. This fee is charged separately from ambulance transportation. 
E.  Other Fees/Fines. 
Gas tank removal or inspection 	$125.00/tank 
Nuisance alarm/malicious call response fee 	$450.00 
Fire reports (includes research/redaction costs) 	$20.00/report 
 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § V(Exh. D), 1-8-2020)  
3.11.090 - Public Works. 
A.  Permits. 
Curb and gutter 	$0.25/square feet ($50.00 minimum) 
Sidewalk 	$0.25/square feet ($50.00 minimum) 
Street cut fee 	$0.25/square feet ($150.00 minimum) 
Excavation inspection 	$60.00 
 
B.  Closures. 
Sidewalk closure 	$50.00 per block per day 
Lane closure 	$125.00 per lane per block per day 
Full street closures 	
 Local street 	$150.00 per block per day 
 Collector street 	$200.00 per block per day 
 Arterial street 	$250.00 per block per day 
 
C.  Sewer Connection Fees. 
Sewer connection 	$500.00 per connection 
Sampling manhole 	$400.00 per manhole 
 
D.  Water Connection Fees. 
Installation of 1" water meter by City 	$3,000.00 
Meter purchases (all other sizes) 	As per cost to City 
Water connection inspection (includes excavation inspection) 	$240.00 
 
E.  Miscellaneous. 
Inspection of new fire line installation (outside of building) 	$50.00 + excavation permit 
Meter certification 	As per cost to City 
Fire flow test 	$150.00 
Fire hydrant repair 	$3,500.00 
Repair of broken riser valve 	$300.00 
Tampered meter fine 	$300.00 + calculated monthly water usage 
Tampered fire line fine 	$500.00 + calculated monthly water usage 
Contractor hydrant meters (excludes water usage) 	$1,500.00 refundable deposit 
 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § V(Exh. D), 1-8-2020)  
3.11.100 - Utilities. 
A.  Water. 
Culinary water 	
Meter size (5,000-gallon allowance for all meters) 	Minimum monthly fee * 
 0.75" meter 	$13.00 
 1" meter 	$21.00 
 1.5" 	$34.00 
 2" meter 	$49.00 
 3" meter 	$91.00 
 4" meter 	$138.00 
 6" meter 	$269.00 
 Metered hydrant use 	$91.00 
Excess water (all meter sizes and uses) 	
 Usage between 5,000 and 30,000 gal. 	$2.25 per 1,000 gallons 
 Usage greater than 30,000 gal. 	$2.75 per 1,000 gallons 
 
* Includes monthly $2.00 fluoride charge 
Fire line 	
 3" line 	$13.65/month 
 4" line 	$18.15/month 
 6" line 	$27.22/month 
 8" line 	$36.29/month 
 10" line 	$45.36/month 
 12" line 	$54.44/month 
 16" line 	$72.58/month 
 22" line 	$99.80/month 
 36" line 	$163.31/month 
 Tampered fire line fee 	$100.00 
 Inspection of new fire line installation 	$50.00 
 Fire flow test 	$50.00 
 
Other fees 	
Reconnection and new service reconnection 	
 Monday—Friday 8:00 a.m.—3:00 p.m. 	$25.00 
 Monday—Friday after 3:00 p.m.; any time on weekends or 
holidays 	$65.00 
Tenant water deposit 	$75.00 
Active deployment fee waiver 	$75.00/month waived 
Bankruptcy deposits (based on prior 12 months' history) 	60-day usage 
Service of disconnection notice w/in 12 months of prior notice 	$15.00 
 
B.  Sewer and Industrial Waste. 
User fee (all users) 	Base fee 
Base User Fee (calculated using average winter water usage or actual usage, whichever is greater) * 	$7.00 per 1,000 gallons 
Beginning July 1, 2020, Base User Fee (calculated using average winter water usage or actual usage, whichever is greater)* 	$9.00 per 1,000 gallons 
 
* New residential accounts are charged based on actual usage or for 5,000 gallons per unit per month until an average winter water usage amount is determined, whichever is greater. New accounts for multi-family residential dwellings are calculated using previous average winter water usage or 5,000 gallons per unit per month, whichever is greater. New business accounts are charged based on the average winter consumption for the previous business or the actual monthly consumption if the business type has changed, until a winter average history can be obtained. Average winter water usage may be prospectively adjusted during the year if the customer provides proof of leakage, repair, and data supporting lower water usage. 
C.  Industrial Waste Fee. 
Additional fees for industrial waste: 
Sewer connections, which are included in the categories below, will be subject to an industrial waste fee based on a strength multiplier. The base user fee will be multiplied by the following multiplier based on category: 
Large grocery stores with meat/bakery functions 	1.22 
Nursing homes/care centers 	1.23 
Restaurants/fast food/food preparation facilities 	1.34 
 
D.  High Strength Contributors Fee. 
Certain connections are considered high strength contributors and will be assessed a strength component based on individual samples and the information below: 
Additional fees for industrial waste 
Total suspended solids 
(TSS) 	(Sample in mg/l - 250) × 8.34 × (sewer average in thousands of gals./1,000,000) × (rate assessed by Central Valley) 
Biochemical Oxygen 
Demand (BOD) 	(Sample in mg/l - 200) × 8.34 × (sewer average in thousands of gallons/1,000,000) × (rate assessed by Central Valley) 
 
* Classification and frequency of sampling is determined by the City. 
E.  Cost Recovery Fees. 
Sample costs 	As per cost to City 
Labor charge 	
 Composite 	$154.00/sample 
 Grab 	$77.00/sample 
 
F.  Household Waste and Recyclable Waste Containers. 
Residential service (including one waste container, one recyclable) 	$10.00/month * 
Additional waste container (waste or recycling) 	$10.00/month per additional can * 
New can delivery fee/redelivery fee after nonpayment 	$25.00/trip 
Late payment fee 	$10.00 
Special permit inspection fee 	$25.00 
 
* Billing for owner-occupied homes will be sent quarterly, and billing for rental homes will be sent annually. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § V(Exh. D), 1-8-2020; Ord. No. 2020-03, § I, 2-12-2020)  
3.11.110 - Parks and Community Centers. 
A.  Resident Rate. The "resident" rate applies only in cases in which: (1) a person residing in the City of South Salt Lake schedules a facility for a private, personal or family event; (2) a business located in South Salt Lake schedules a facility for an employee social event. A person residing in the City or a business licensed in the City may not schedule a facility for an entity/organization/institute event or function or for a business enterprise at the "resident" rate. 
B.  Non-profit. The "non-profit" rate applies only in cases where a non-profit entity schedules a facility for purposes that do not include fundraising or revenue generation for the entity. Any non-profit entity that schedules a facility for purposes that include fundraising shall pay the "commercial" fee. A non-profit entity that collects a participation fee from those attending an event for the purpose of covering the cost of the event shall not be considered fundraising. Proof of non-profit 501(c)(3) status must be provided, such as a certificate issued by the state or the United States. Government agencies may receive the "non-profit" rate, upon request. 
C.  Deposits. The City may retain all or part of a deposit when the event causes damage to property, additional costs for clean up or room restoration, or if the event is cancelled less than fourteen (14) calendar days prior to the scheduled date. The City reserves the right to recover its costs if the deposit does not cover damage or other costs resulting from the event. If the event occupies the facility beyond the scheduled time, the deposit will be used to pay for additional time, in one-hour increments. 
D.  Insurance. All parties are required to demonstrate to the City adequate insurance coverage. 
E.  Security. For large or high-risk events, the City may require the requesting entity to provide appropriate security. A security plan may be required by the police department and is subject to approval by the police department. 
F.  After Hours. Any person or organization that receives approval to use facilities under this Section after normal hours of operation shall pay an additional, non-refundable fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per hour for use of the facility. An offer by an organization or person to pay this additional fee does not obligate the City to schedule after hours events. 
G.  Limited Waiver. With the approval of the City Attorney, rental fees under this Section may be waived where the requested and scheduled use of facilities supports a free expression event, and where: (1) the meeting is open to all members of the community; (2) no fee or admission charge is required to attend; and (3) no donation are accepted or expected. 
H.  City Departments. City departments shall not be charged a rental fee for use of any parks or facilities. However, City departments must comply with facility scheduling and use requirements. City departments shall also be responsible for costs associated with damage or excessive maintenance relating to the department's use. 
I.  Limited Fee Reductions. A forty-percent reduction in rental fees for a community center facility is authorized where the scheduling party pays in advance a non-refundable payment for scheduled time of ten or more hours in any one calendar month. A twenty-percent reduction in rental fees for a community center facility is authorized where the scheduling party pays in advance a non-refundable payment for scheduled time of five to nine hours in any one calendar month. 
J.  Conferences or Large Events. For a conference or large event, where an organization intends to use a group of rooms and/or facilities at any of the City's community centers and parks, the overall rate for such multi-room/facility use shall be reduced by forty (40) percent of the cumulative rental rate of the several rooms and facilities. In such cases, the required fee must be paid in advance and will be non-refundable. 
K.  Community Parks. 
Fitts Park Facilities (per day) 	Resident 	All others 
 Lions Pride Pavilion 	$30.00 	$60.00 
 Wandamere Pavilion 	$25.00 	$50.00 
 Xango Pavilion 	$20.00 	$40.00 
 Swire Pavilion 	$25.00 	$50.00 
 
L.  Community Centers. 
Columbus Community Center 	Hourly Rate 	Deposit 
Auditorium 		
 Commercial 	$140.00 	$200.00 
 Non-profit 	$100.00 	$200.00 
 Resident 	$80.00 	$200.00 
 Kitchen (available for rent with auditorium only) 	$80.00/reservation 
Patio 		
 Commercial 	$90.00 	$200.00 
 Non-profit 	$65.00 	$200.00 
 Resident 	$25.00 	$200.00 
Gymnasium for sports 		
 Commercial 	$100.00 	$200.00 
 Non-profit 	$25.00 	$200.00 
 Resident 	$25.00 	$200.00 
 Tables and chairs for events in gym 	$40.00/reservation 
Gymnasium for events 		
 Commercial rate 	$160.00 	$200.00 
 Non-profit rate 	$140.00 	$200.00 
 Resident 	$100.00 	$200.00 
Meeting rooms 101,104,105 		
 Commercial rate 	$50.00 	$200.00 
 Non-profit rate 	$35.00 	$200.00 
 Resident rate 	$25.00 	$200.00 
Meeting rooms 106, 102/103 		
 Commercial rate 	$75.00 	$200.00 
 Non-profit rate 	$50.00 	$200.00 
 Resident rate 	$40.00 	$200.00 
Meeting accessories and equipment (per day) 		
 TV/VCR/DVD equipment 	$25.00 
 Microphone and speaker 	$35.00 
 Dry erase board 	$15.00 
 Projector 	$25.00 
 Piano 	$20.00 
 All linen for tables 	$10.00/linen 
 Napkins 	$0.50 each 
Central Park Community Center (PAL) 	Hourly Rate 	Deposit 
Gymnasium for Sports 		
Commercial 	$100.00 	$200.00 
Non-profit 	$25.00 	$200.00 
Resident 	$25.00 	$200.00 
Gymnasium for events 		
Commercial 	$160.00 	$200.00 
Non-profit 	$140.00 	$200.00 
Resident 	$100.00 	$200.00 
Athletic field 		
Commercial 	$60.00 	$200.00 
Non-profit 	$40.00 	$200.00 
Resident 	$30.00 	$200.00 
Historic Scott School 	Hourly rate 	Deposit 
Great Hall 		
 Commercial 	$50.00 	$200.00 
 Non-profit 	$35.00 	$100.00 
 Resident 	$25.00 	$100.00 
Cottage 		
 Commercial 	$50.00 	$200.00 
 Non-profit 	$35.00 	$100.00 
 Resident 	$25.00 	$100.00 
Board room 		
 Commercial 	$25.00 	$200.00 
 Non-profit 	$15.00 	$100.00 
 Resident 	$15.00 	$100.00 
Studio 		
 Commercial 	$25.00 	$200.00 
 Non-profit 	$15.00 	$100.00 
 Resident 	$15.00 	$100.00 
Patio and lawn 		
 Commercial 	$75.00 	$200.00 
 Non-profit 	$50.00 	$100.00 
 Resident 	$35.00 	$100.00 
 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § V(Exh. D), 1-8-2020)  
3.11.120 - Mayor Authority to Amend or Adjust Fees. 
A.  The Mayor shall have authority to recommend new fees, as the Mayor deems necessary. 
B.  Any fee added by the Mayor to this fee schedule shall be effective as specified by the enacting ordinance or resolution. The consolidated fee schedule shall thereafter be presented to the City Council as soon as possible to address the new fees. 
C.  Upon a recommendation from the City Attorney, the Mayor under Section 3.11.110 may approve the use of facilities by a non-profit entity for less than the approved fee schedule where: (1) such entity agrees to provide the City needed/requested in-kind services; (2) the in-kind services are of equivalent value to the reduction in fee; (3) the in-kind services measurably reduce the cost to the taxpayers of previously planned and budgeted government services; (4) the in-kind services are included in an agreement between the City and the non-profit entity; and (5) the fee reduction will not apply to any non-profit activity or event that includes fundraising or generates revenue for the non-profit entity. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § V(Exh. D), 1-8-2020)  
3.11.130 - Other Fees. 
This consolidated fee schedule does not repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other resolutions, ordinances, or laws, except to effect modification of the fees reflected above. The fees listed in the consolidated fee schedule supersede present fees for the services specified, but all fees not listed remain in effect. Where this schedule imposes a higher fee than is imposed or required by existing provisions of resolutions, ordinances or laws, the provisions of this schedule shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § V(Exh. D), 1-8-2020)  
Chapter 3.12 - PURCHASING AND PROCUREMENT* 
Sections: 
 
3.12.010 - Definitions. 
The terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings: 
"Bid," "proposal" or "offer" means an offer to perform. 
"Bidding" means procedure used to solicit quotations on price and delivery from various prospective suppliers of supplies, equipment, and contractual services. 
"Business" means any corporation, partnership, individual, sole proprietorship, joint stock company, joint venture or any other legal entity. 
"City" means the city of South Salt Lake, the redevelopment agency of South Salt Lake City and all departments, divisions and enterprise funds of the city. 
"Contract" means all types of city agreements, regardless of what they may be called, for the purchase or disposal of supplies, services or construction. It includes awards and notices of award; contracts of a fixed-price, cost, cost-plus-a-fixed-fee, or incentive type; contracts providing for the issuance of job or task orders; leases; letter contracts; and purchase orders. It also includes supplemental agreements with respect to any of the foregoing. 
"Contractor" means any person having a contract with a governmental body. 
"Debarment" means the disqualification of a person, firm, business, supplier, etc., to receive invitations for bids or requests for proposals, or the award of a contract by the city, for a specified period of time commensurate with the seriousness of the offense or the failure or the inadequacy of performance. 
"Designee" means a duly authorized representative of a person holding a superior position. 
"Employee" means an individual drawing a salary from a governmental body, whether elected or not, and any nonsalaried individual performing personal services for any governmental body. 
"Enterprise fund" means a special fund as defined in Section 10-6-106, Utah Code Annotated. An example of such fund include the water and sewer funds. 
"Invitation for bids" means all documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting bids. 
"Person" means any business, individual, union, committee, club, or other organization or group of individuals. 
"Procurement" means the buying, purchasing, renting, leasing, or otherwise obtaining any supplies, services or construction. It also includes all functions that pertain to the obtaining of any public procurement, including description of requirements, selection and solicitation of sources, preparation and award of contract, and all phases of contract administration. 
"Professional services" means those services that are provided by a person skilled in the practice of advanced or technical discipline. Providers of professional services often require prolonged and specialized intellectual training, and profess attainments in special knowledge as distinguished from mere skills. Discipline may include, without limitation, accounting, auditing, architecture, court reporting, engineering, experts in a specialized field, finance, law, materials testing, medicine, planning, surveying and others. 
"Purchasing agent" means any person authorized by a governmental body, in accordance with procedures prescribed by regulations, to enter into and administer contracts and make written determinations and findings with respect thereto. The term also includes an authorized representative acting within the city limits of authority. 
"Request for proposals" or "RFP" means soliciting to receive sealed proposals. 
"Responsible bid" means an offer, submitted by a responsible bidder to furnish supplies, equipment or contractual services in conformity with the specifications, delivery terms and conditions and other requirements included in the invitation for bids. 
"Responsible bidder" means a bidder who submits a responsible bid who has furnished, when requested, information and data to prove that said financial resources, production or service facilities, service reputation and experience are adequate to make satisfactory delivery of the supplies, equipment or contractual services on said bids, and who has not violated or attempted to violate any provisions of this chapter and who has the reliability which will assure good faith performance. 
"Services" means the furnishing of labor, time or effort by a contractor, not involving the delivery of a specific end product other than reports which are merely incidental to the required performance. This term shall not include employment agreements or collective bargaining agreements. 
"Specification" means any description of the physical or functional characteristics, or of the nature of a supply, service, or construction item. It may include a description of any requirement for inspecting, testing, or preparing a supply, service or construction item for delivery. 
"Supplies" means all property, including, but not limited to, equipment, printing, insurance, and leases on real property, excluding land or permanent interest in land. 
"Suspension" means the disqualification of a person to receive invitations for bids or requests for proposals, or the award of a contract by the city for a temporary period pending the completion of an investigation, and any legal proceedings that may ensue because a person is suspected upon probable cause of engaging in criminal, fraudulent, or serious improper conduct or failure of adequacy of performance which may lead to debarment. 
(Ord. 2008-13 (part))  
3.12.020 - Purchasing agent. 
The city recorder is the purchasing agent of the city. 
(Ord. 2008-13 (part))  
3.12.030 - Purchasing agent—Authority. 
A.  The city recorder or designee shall administer the purchasing system provided by this chapter. 
B.  All rights, powers, duties and authority relating to the procurement of supplies, materials, and equipment and the management, control, warehousing, sale and disposal thereof, regardless of source of funding, are assigned to the purchasing agent. 
(Ord. 2008-13 (part))  
3.12.040 - Purchasing agent—Scope of responsibilities and duties. 
The scope of the purchasing agent's responsibilities and duties are to: 
A.  Serve as the central procurement officer for the city; 
B.  Administer and maintain the purchasing system and other rules and regulations established by this chapter and its authority; 
C.  Prescribe and maintain such forms as reasonably necessary to the operation of this chapter; 
D.  Recommend to the city such new or revised purchasing systems, rules and regulations as deemed desirable and in conformance with other statutory requirements, and to interpret the provisions of this chapter and applicable statutes; 
E.  Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, i.e., prices, market conditions, new products, etc.; 
F.  Seek to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases; 
G.  Negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for the purchase of supplies, materials and equipment; 
H.  Supervise the inspection and testing of all supplies and equipment to assure conformance with specifications; 
I.  Transfer surplus or unused supplies and equipment between departments as needed; 
J.  Maintain a bidder's list, vendor's catalog file and other records needed for the efficient operation of the purchasing system. 
(Ord. 2008-13 (part))  
3.12.050 - Civil and administrative remedies. 
A.  Civil and administrative remedies which are in existence on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall not be impaired under the direction of the purchasing agent. 
B.  Suspension of all purchasing transactions with a vendor may be imposed during an investigation of charges based on probable cause indicating the existence of a breach of ethical standards under this section or other irregularities which would affect the integrity of the city's purchasing procedure. 
C.  In addition to existing remedies of this section or regulations promulgated thereunder, the city may impose any one or more of the following sanctions against a vendor that is a party to a violation of this chapter: 
1.  Written warnings or reprimands; 
2.  Termination of the questioned transaction; or 
3.  Suspension or debarment from contracting with the city. 
D.  Appeals from a decision of the purchasing agent pursuant to this section shall be made to the administrative law judge. 
E.  All procedures under this section shall be in accordance with due process requirements, including, but not limited to, a right to notice and an opportunity for a hearing prior to imposition of any remedies provided in this section. 
F.  The value of anything transferred or received in breach of ethical standards of this section or regulations promulgated thereunder by an employee or a nonemployee may be recovered from both the employee and the nonemployee. 
(Ord. 2008-13 (part))  
3.12.060 - Correction of errors, modification of submissions. 
After the time for submission, a bid, proposal or other offer of submission may be modified as follows: 
A.  Confirmation of Bid, Proposal or Other Matter. When it appears a mistake has been made, or when the city desires an assurance of any matter, the city may request a bidder or offeror to confirm the bid, proposal or other offer or submission in writing. 
B.  Notification of Error. A bidder or offeror shall notify the purchasing agent of any error contained in a bid, proposal or other offer or submission within two business days after bid opening or the time for submitting proposals unless the purchasing agent waives this requirement. The purchasing agent shall have sole discretion to determine whether to permit any modification or withdrawal. 
C.  Modification by Agreement. The purchasing agent may agree with a bidder or offeror to any modifications as long as they do not prejudice fair competition or the city's interests. Modifications may include such matters as: 
1.  Time for Accepting. The purchasing agent and bidder or offeror may agree that a bid, proposal or other offer of submission will remain effective for a longer period of time than that stated in the bid, proposal or other offer or submission. 
2.  Subcontractor or Supplier Changes. Any proposed change in subcontractors or suppliers must be submitted to the purchasing agent, and the purchasing agent may reject any such proposed change. The bidder or offeror will receive no additional compensation as a result of a change to any subcontractors or suppliers, and must continue to meet the requirements of any federally mandated program and other contractual and legal requirements. 
3.  Change in Specification. The purchasing agent and bidder or offeror may agree to a change in specification when such a change is in the city's interest in fair competition. 
D.  City's Correction of Ministerial Mistakes. The purchasing agent may at any time correct mistakes in a bid or proposal that are of a ministerial or minor nature as follows: 
1.  Ministerial Mistakes. Ministerial or minor informalities are clerical errors and matter of form, rather than substance, that are evident from the document, or insignificant mistakes or informalities that can be waived or corrected without prejudice to other bidders or offerors. They generally do not have a substantial effect on process. Examples include a failure to: 
a.  Sign the bid, the proposal, or other submissions requiring signature, but only where they are accompanied by other materials indicating an intent to be bound; 
b.  Acknowledge receipt of an addendum, but only if the materials demonstrate the bidder or offeror received the addendum and intended to be bound by it, or the addendum has a negligible effect on the bid, proposal or other offer or submission. 
2.  Mistakes Where Intent is Evident. If the intent of the bid, proposal or other offer or submission is clearly evident on the face of the document, the purchasing agent shall correct it as intended and it may not be withdrawn. Examples include: 
a.  Typographical errors; 
b.  Errors in extending unit process; 
c.  Transposition errors; 
d.  Arithmetical errors; 
e.  Differences in written and numerical process (written shall control). 
3.  Mistakes Where Intent Not Evident. If the bidder or offeror's intent is not clearly evident on the face of the document, the bid, proposal or other offer or submission may not be withdrawn except as agreed by the purchasing agent. 
E.  Correcting Errors in Judgement. Errors in judgement may not be corrected and the bid, proposal or other offer or submission may not be withdrawn, except as agreed by the purchasing agent. The purchasing agent may allow correction of an error in judgement if it can be done without prejudice to other bidders or offerors. The purchasing agent may allow withdrawal if it is in the city's interest. 
(Ord. 2008-13 (part))  
3.12.070 - Authority to resolve controversy. 
The purchasing agent or an appropriate designee is authorized, prior to commencement of an action in court concerning the controversy, to settle and resolve a controversy which arises between the city and a contractor under or by virtue of a contract between them. This includes, without limitation, controversies based upon breach of contract, mistakes, misrepresentation, or other cause for contract modification or rescission. 
(Ord. 2008-13 (part))  
3.12.080 - Retention of records. 
The purchasing agent shall keep records of all public contracts and related bid documents for four years or the applicable record retention schedule period. 
(Ord. 2008-13 (part))  
3.12.090 - Sole source purchasing. 
A contract in any amount may be awarded to a sole supplier for supplies, materials or equipment if the requesting department justifies in writing to the satisfaction of the city purchasing agent that there is only one source for the supply, service or item sought. 
(Ord. 2008-13 (part))  
3.12.100 - Purchases under two thousand dollars. 
Purchases of supplies, materials, or equipment having a total value of less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) may occur without informal or formal bid procedures. 
(Ord. 2008-13 (part))  
3.12.110 - Informal bid procedure—Purchases generally between two thousand dollars and ten thousand dollars. 
A.  Except as provided in Section 3.12.120, purchases of supplies, materials or equipment valued between two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) and ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) may be made by informal bid procedure as provided in this section. 
B.  Price quotation bids shall be solicited from prospective vendors by written or telephone requests or by published notices as the city purchasing agent may determine. 
C.  Informal bid purchases shall be selected from at least three price quotation bids, and shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. 
(Ord. 2008-13 (part))  
3.12.120 - Formal bid required. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided herein, a purchase of supplies, materials, or equipment of a cost in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) shall comply with formal bidding procedures. 
B.  Purchases may not be split or divided to avoid this requirement. 
C.  If the mayor determines that the safety of police personnel or operatives or criminal investigations would be compromised by the publicity inherent in the competitive bidding process, the police department may request the purchase of items for security or investigative purposes without the necessity of competitive bidding. 
(Ord. 2008-13 (part))  
3.12.130 - Special procedures for public works projects and building improvements, including the construction or repair of a public building. 
A.  Except as provided in subsections B and D of this section, all purchases of supplies, materials, or equipment shall be made according to the same regulations described in Sections 3.12.100, 3.12.110 and 3.12.120. 
B.  All public works projects or building improvements shall adhere to the bidding requirements of Utah State Code Title 11, Chapter 39 and Title 72, Chapter 6, Sections 108 and 109. 
C.  Prior to undertaking a public works project or building improvement, the city shall require plans and specifications to be made and prepare an estimate of the cost of the public works project and/or building improvement. 
D.  Public works projects and building improvements are subject to the following bidding requirements: 
1.  Public works projects and building improvements at or below thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00), based on the city's prepared estimate, are not subject to the bidding requirements of this section. 
2.  All public works projects and building improvements falling below the state limit requiring a formal bid and above thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00), based on the city's prepared estimate, shall be required to follow the informal bidding procedures of Section 3.12.110, except as provided in subsection 4. 
3.  All public works projects and building improvements in excess of the state bid limit, based on the city's prepared estimate, require a formal bidding procedure as set forth in Utah State Code Ann 11-39-103 and 72-6-108. 
4.  Public works projects and building improvements falling below the state bid limit may be awarded to a contractor pursuant to a current, state-procured agreement for job order contracting, without following the bidding procedures of this chapter. The city shall follow the procedures established in the state contract when utilizing these agreements. 
E.  Notwithstanding Section 3.12.150, a public works project or building improvement shall be awarded as follows: 
1.  When the city undertakes a city-funded public works project or building improvement under two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00), based on the city's prepared estimate, the city shall award the contract to the lowest responsive responsible bidder; 
2.  When the city undertakes a city-funded public works project or building improvement over two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00), based on the city's prepared estimate, the city shall seek bids inquiring as to the preferences outlined in 3.12.130(F)(1) and apply the preference system of Section 3.12.130(F)(2) in determining award of the contract. 
F.  Preference System. 
1.  When soliciting bids for public works projects or building improvements exceeding two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00), the contractor and every subcontractor, if any, shall certify to the Purchasing Agent and provide appropriate documentation whether they have and will maintain the following preference criteria: 
a.  An offer of qualified health insurance available to a contractor's and subcontractor's covered employees and the employee's dependents; 
b.  A drug and alcohol testing policy during the period of the contract that: 
i.  Applies to all covered employees of the contractor and any subcontractor; and 
ii.  Requires covered employees to submit to random testing under the drug and alcohol testing policy; 
c.  A program to actively recruit and employ veterans; 
d.  A federal or state recognized job training program or a city-approved job training program; 
e.  A safety program; and 
f.  A formal policy of nondiscrimination consistent with federal, state, and local law. 
2.  The purchasing agent shall apply the preference system by designating one point for each of the preference criteria set forth in Subsection (F)(1) that both the contractor and all subcontractors, if any, qualify for. In awarding a contract, the purchasing agent shall give preference to the responsible bidder who qualifies for the most points based on the preference criteria and whose bid is within one hundred four (104) percent of the lowest responsive responsible bid. In the event of a tie, the bid shall be awarded to the lowest of those bidders. 
3.  The failure of a contractor or subcontractor to meet the requirements of this section: 
a.  May not be the basis for a protest under this chapter or other action; 
b.  May not be used as the basis for any action or suit that would suspend, disrupt, or terminate a building improvement or public works project; and 
c.  May not be used by an employee of a contractor or subcontractor or any other third party as a basis for any private action or suit against the city for damages for the failure of a contractor or subcontractor to meet the requirements of this section. 
4.  Should the city determine that any contractor or subcontractor, deemed to be the lowest responsible bidder under subsection F(2), inappropriately certified the preference criteria listed in Subsection F(1), the Purchasing Agent, at the city's sole discretion and in addition to any other remedies available at law, may: 
a.  Terminate the contract for the contractor's failure to comply with the terms of the bid; 
b.  Suspend or debar the contractor and/or subcontractor from contracting with the city; 
c.  Immediately award the contract to the next lowest responsible bidder; 
d.  Order an audit, at the sole expense of the contractor or subcontractors, to determine the extent of the inappropriate certification; or 
e.  Bring legal action against the contractor or subcontractor, on behalf of the city and affected employees, for monetary damages. 
5.  All procedures under Subsection F(4) shall be in accordance with Section 3.12.050. 
G.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to: 
1.  A change order or a modification to an existing contract; 
2.  A sole source contract; 
3.  An emergency procurement contract; and 
4.  A contract subject to a grant requirement or other legal obligation that the city must honor as a condition of receiving the grant or other funds. 
H.  As used in this section: 
1.  "Bid limit" means the estimated dollar cost of a building improvement or public work project which, if exceeded, requires bids to be requested for the project, and which shall be as follows: 
a.  For a building improvement: 
i.  For the year 2003, forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00); and 
ii.  For each year after 2003, the amount of the bid limit for the previous year, plus an amount calculated by multiplying the amount of the bid limit for the previous year by the lesser of three percent or the actual percent change in the Consumer Price Index during the previous calendar year; and 
b.  For a public works project: 
i.  For the year 2003, one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars ($125,000.00); and 
ii.  For each year after 2003, the amount of the bid limit for the previous year, plus an amount calculated by multiplying the amount of the bid limit for the previous year by the lesser of three or the actual percent change in the Consumer Price Index during the previous calendar year. 
2.  "Building improvement" means the construction or repair of a city building or structure. 
3.  "City-funded" means the use of funds from a budget approved by the city council to pay a contractor or subcontractor for work on a building improvement or public works project regardless of whether city obtains funds from a state or federal government grant, or any other source of funds, to pay the cost of a particular project. 
4.  "Consumer Price Index" means the "Consumer Price Index For All Urban Consumers" as published by the bureau of labor statistics of the United States Department of Labor. 
5.  "Contractor" means a person or entity who is or may be awarded a construction contract for a building improvement or a public works project. 
6.  "Covered employee" means an individual who provides part time or full time services directly related to a construction contract for a contractor or subcontractor, including, but not limited to, an individual in a safety sensitive position such as a design position responsible for the safety of a building improvement or public works project. 
7.  "Drug and alcohol testing policy" means a policy under which a contractor or subcontractor tests a covered employee to establish, maintain, or enforce the prohibition of: 
a.  The manufacture, distribution, dispensing, possession, or use of drugs or alcohol, except the medically prescribed possession and use of a drug, and 
b.  The impairment of judgment or physical abilities due to the use of drugs or alcohol. 
8.  "Health benefit plan" means an insurance policy that provides healthcare coverage, including major medical expenses, or that is offered as a substitute for hospital or medical expense insurance, such as a hospital confinement indemnity or limited benefit plan; but a health benefit plan does not include an insurance policy that provides benefits solely for accidents, dental, income replacement, long term care, a Medicare supplement, a specific disease, vision, or a short term limited duration where it is offered and marketed as supplemental health insurance. 
9.  "Lowest responsive responsible bidder" means a prime contractor who: 
a.  Has submitted a bid in compliance with an invitation to bid and within the requirements of the plans and specifications for a building improvement or public works project; 
b.  Is the lowest bidder that satisfies the requirements of this chapter relating to financial strength, past performance, integrity, reliability, and other factors used to assess the ability of a bidder to perform fully and in good faith the contract requirements; 
c.  Has furnished a bid bond or equivalent in money as a condition to the award of a prime contract; and 
d.  Furnishes a payment and performance bond as required by law or city policy. 
10.  "Public works project" means the construction, replacement, or repair of: 
a.  A park or recreational facility; 
b.  A pipeline, culvert, dam, canal, or other system for water, sewage, stormwater, or flood control; 
c.  Class "C" roads, including maintenance and resurfacing; and 
d.  Any other city facility except a building improvement. 
11.  "Qualified health insurance coverage" means at the time a contract is entered into or renewed: 
a.  A health benefit plan, not including dental coverage, and employer contribution level with a combined actuarial value at least actuarially equivalent to the combined actuarial value of the benchmark plan under Utah Code Ann. section 26-40-106, as amended, and a contribution level of fifty (50) percent of the premium for the employee and the dependents of the employee who reside or work in the state of Utah under which: 
i.  The employer pays at least fifty (50) percent of the premium for the employee and the dependents of the employee who reside or work in the state of Utah; and 
ii.  For purposes of calculating actuarial equivalency under this provision, rather than benchmark plan's deductible and the benchmark plan's out-of-pocket maximum based on income levels: 
(1)  The annual deductible is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per individual and three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per family; and 
(2)  The annual out of pocket maximum is three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per individual and nine thousand dollars ($9,000.00) per family; or 
b.  A federally qualified high deductible health plan, not including dental coverage, that, at a minimum: 
i.  Has a deductible that is either: 
(1)  The lowest deductible permitted for a federally qualified high deductible plan; or 
(2)  A deductible that is higher than the lowest deductible permitted for a federally qualified high deductible health plan, but includes an employer contribution to a health savings account in a dollar amount at least equal to the dollar amount difference between the lowest deductible permitted for a federally qualified high deductible plan and the deductible for an employer offered federal qualified high deductible plan; 
ii.  Has an out of pocket maximum that does not exceed three times the amount of the annual deductible; and 
iii.  The employer pays at least sixty (60) percent of the premium for the employee and the dependents of the employee who work or reside in the state of Utah. 
12.  "Random testing" means periodic examination of a covered employee, selected on the basis of chance, for drugs and alcohol in accordance with a drug and alcohol testing policy. 
13.  "Subcontractor" means any person or entity who may be awarded a contract with a contractor or another subcontractor to provide services or labor for a building improvement or public works project, and includes a trade contractor or specialty contractor but does not include a supplier who provides only materials, equipment, or supplies to a contractor or subcontractor. 
14.  "Veteran" means an individual who: 
a.  Has served in the Unites States Armed Forces for at least one hundred eighty (180) days: 
i.  On active duty; or 
ii.  In a reserve component, to include the National Guard; or 
b.  Has incurred an actual service-related injury or disability while in the United States Armed Forces regardless of whether the individual completed one hundred eighty (180) days; and 
c.  Was separated or retired under conditions characterized as honorable or general. 
(Ord. 2008-13 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2012-16, 10-20-2012; Ord. No. 2017-23, 7-12-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-23, adopted July 12, 2017, changed the title of § 3.12.130 from "Special procedure for public works projects, including the consruction or repair of a public building" to read as herein set out.  
3.12.140 - Notice required for formal bid. 
A.  Notices inviting bids pursuant to formal bid procedures shall be published in a newspaper of general publication or circulation within the city. 
1.  Notices inviting bids shall include a general description of the items to be purchased and all contractual terms and conditions, shall state where bid specifications may be secured, and the time and place for the opening of the bids; 
2.  The last publication of a notice inviting bids shall be published at least five days before the date of the opening of the bids. A notice inviting a bid for a municipal building or public works project shall be published twice in a newspaper of general circulation. A notice inviting a bid for Class "C" road projects shall be published once a week for three consecutive weeks. The notice for all other items shall be published once. 
B.  Notice inviting bids shall be mailed to qualified vendors on the bidder's list. 
(Ord. 2008-13 (part))  
3.12.150 - Award of bid or contract. 
A.  The purchasing agent shall have the authority to award bids and contracts within the limits of this chapter, rules, and regulations, and the city retains the right to accept or reject any or all parts of any bids presented and all bid proposals shall so state. However, all bids and contracts in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) shall be approved by the mayor. 
B.  Bids shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids, which may include criteria to determine acceptability such as inspection, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery, and suitability for a particular purpose. No criteria may be used in bid evaluation that are not set forth in the invitation for bids. 
C.  When the contract is not awarded to the lowest bidder, a full and complete statement of the reasons for awarding the contract to another bidder shall be submitted, along with the recommendation to award the bid from the requesting department, and shall be retained in the contract file. 
D.  If the low bid is a tie bid with the same amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, the contract shall be awarded to the lowest bid made by and after negotiation with the tie bidders. 
E.  If bids received pursuant to an invitation for bids are unreasonable, noncompetitive, or the low bid exceeds available funds, all bids may be rejected and new bids may be solicited. If, after twice, no satisfactory bid is received, the city may proceed at its own discretion to complete the purchase or proposed improvement as directed by the mayor. 
(Ord. 2008-13 (part))  
3.12.160 - Bidder qualification. 
In determining the qualification of the responsible bidder, the purchasing agent shall consider any or all of the following: 
A.  The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service required; 
B.  Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference; 
C.  The quality of performance of previous contracts or services; 
D.  The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract or service; 
E.  The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service; 
F.  The quality, availability and adaptability of supplies, or contractual services to the particular use required. 
(Ord. 2008-13 (part))  
3.12.170 - Cancellation or rejection of invitation for bids. 
The cancellation or rejection of invitations for bids will be accepted only if the determination is submitted in writing from the requesting department head, signed by the mayor, to the purchasing agent that such action is taken in the best interest of the city. 
(Ord. 2008-13 (part))  
3.12.180 - Exemptions to competitive bidding—Auction, closeout and bankruptcy sales. 
If the purchasing agent determines that supplies, materials, or equipment can be purchased at any public auction, closeout sale, bankruptcy sale or other similar sale, a contract or contracts may be let, or the purchase made upon approval from the mayor. 
(Ord. 2008-13 (part))  
3.12.190 - Exemptions to competitive bidding—Governmental purchases. 
A.  The city may purchase supplies, materials or equipment which have been declared surplus by any governmental agency. 
B.  Exchanges of supplies, materials, or equipment between the city and any other public agency which are not by sale or auction shall be by mutual agreement of the respective public agencies. 
C.  The city may purchase supplies, materials, or equipment from state, federal or local units of government who have active procurement contracts with prior approval from the purchasing agent. 
(Ord. 2008-13 (part))  
3.12.200 - Cooperative purchasing—Authorization. 
The city may either participate in, sponsor, conduct or administer a cooperative purchasing agreement for the acquisition of any supplies, materials, or equipment with one or more public agencies in accordance with an agreement entered into between the participants. Such cooperative purchasing may include, but is not limited to, joint or multi-party contracts and open-ended state contracts. 
(Ord. 2008-13 (part))  
3.12.210 - Contractual services—Professional. 
Contracts for professional services are not subject to the bid procedures described in this chapter. Departments seeking professional services shall obtain the approval of the mayor for professional services contracts. 
(Ord. 2008-13 (part))  
3.12.220 - Multi-year contracts—Determination of use. 
Prior to utilization of a multi-year contract, it shall be determined that: 
A.  Estimated requirements cover the period of the contract and are reasonably firm and continuing; 
B.  Such a contract will serve the best interest of the city. 
(Ord. 2008-13 (part))  
3.12.230 - Multi-year contracts—Termination. 
When funds are not appropriated or otherwise made available to support continuation of performance in a subsequent year of a multi-year contract, the contract for such subsequent years shall be terminated. 
(Ord. 2008-13 (part))  
3.12.240 - Contract changes. 
A.  Purchase order changes must be made on the form titled "Request for Purchase Order Correction." 
B.  Type of changes: 
1.  An error in extension or addition; 
2.  An over/under shipment which the city is willing to accept; 
3.  An increase in the total of the purchase order of more than ten percent. 
(Ord. 2008-13 (part))  
3.12.250 - Prohibition against subdivision. 
A contract or purchase may not be subdivided to avoid the bid procedures described in Sections 3.12.110 through 3.12.180 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2008-13 (part))  
3.12.260 - Inspection and testing. 
A.  Inspection. The purchasing agent shall inspect or supervise the inspection of all deliveries of supplies or contractual services to determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the order of the contract. The purchasing agent shall have the authority to authorize using agencies having the staff and facilities for adequate inspection to inspect all deliveries made to such using agencies under the rules and regulations which the purchasing agent shall prescribe. 
B.  Testing. The purchasing agent shall have the authority to require chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with the specifications. In the performance of such tests, the purchasing agent shall have the authority to make use of laboratory facilities of any agency of the city government or of any outside laboratory. 
(Ord. 2008-13 (part))  
3.12.270 - Preference to local vendors. 
A.  Only for the purpose of calculating the low bid in either a formal or informal bid situation, and not to establish the actual contract price, prior to comparing bids, the city purchasing agent shall reduce by five percent the bid of each vendor that provides an affidavit attesting that for the two years preceding the bid deadline the vendor: 
1.  Operated a physical business location within the corporate limits of the city on property that it either leased or owned; 
2.  Held a valid city business license for the business location within the corporate limits of the city; 
3.  Timely paid all sums due and owing to the city; 
4.  Had no judgment entered against it for violation of any federal or state law or city ordinance relating to its business activity within the city; 
5.  Remitted sales tax receipts from its business location within the city to the State Tax Commission; and 
6.  Paid franchise tax to the city as part of its utility bill. 
B.  In order to offer the preference for local vendors established in subsection A of this section, the city shall first give notice of the availability of the local preference in the invitation to bid. 
C.  If for any reason the local preference should be found to be invalid, all bids shall be rejected automatically. 
(Ord. 2008-13 (part))  
3.12.290 - Ethics. 
A.  Generally. All persons participating in a procurement process shall act in accordance with federal, state and city ethics and conflict of interest requirements. All personnel dealing with procurement shall prevent abuses of the procurement system as described below. 
B.  Prohibited Acts. With respect to procurement matters, city employees, officers and appointees, or any other person participating in a procurement process shall comply with all applicable ethics and conflict of interest laws, which shall include the following: 
1.  Special Benefits. They shall not use the procurement system to secure special privileges or exemptions for themselves or others because of their positions. See also Utah Code Annotated Section 10-3-1304. 
2.  Gifts or Loans. They shall not knowingly receive gifts or loans that tend to influence the discharge of their official duties. However, they may accept occasional nonpecuniary gifts of less than fifty dollars ($50.00), publicly presented awards, or bona fide loans or political campaign contributions. See also, Utah Code Annotated Section 10-3-1304. 
3.  Payment for Assisting in Transactions. They shall not receive or agree to receive compensation for assisting another in a transaction with city unless they file a disclosure of information with the mayor as required by state law, and with their supervisors and others who rely on their representations during the transaction. See also Utah Code Annotated Section 10-3-1305. 
4.  Interest in Business Within Regulatory Authority. When they are officers, directors, agents, employees or owners of a substantial interest in an entity under their regulatory authority, they must file a disclosure of information as required by the state law. See also Utah Code Annotated Section 10-3-1306. 
5.  Interest in Business Seeking City Business. When they are officers, directors, agents, employees or owners of a substantial interest in an entity anticipating doing business with the city, they must file a disclosure of information as required by state law. See also Utah Code Annotated Section 10-3-1307. 
6.  Interests Conflicting with Public Duties. When their personal interests and investments conflict with their public duties, the conflict must be disclosed as required by state law. See also Utah Code Annotated Section 10-3-1308. 
7.  Individual Material Benefits. When their actions may result in a specific financial, professional or personal material benefit to them, they must disclose those interests in the manner provided by city code. 8. Use of Confidential Information. They shall not disclose or use confidential information acquired in their jobs for their or another's private gain or benefit. 
9.  Contracts Benefitting Self or Family. They shall not enter contracts in which they or members of their immediate family have any private pecuniary interest, whether direct or indirect, when they have participated in making, recommending or preparing the contract, or when they have performed or will perform some function in connection with the contract requiring the exercise of discretion on their part, unless the contract is awarded through a public competitive process and the interest is disclosed as provided by city code. 
C.  Manner of Disclosure. Disclosure under this chapter must comply with all applicable law, and shall include the following: 
1.  Relating to Transaction. When disclosure relates to a specific transaction, the disclosing employee, officer or appointee must do the following: 
a.  Disclosure to Mayor. The employee, officer or appointee must file a sworn statement with the mayor giving his or her name and address, the name and address of the third party involved in the transaction, and a brief description of the transaction, and the nature of the employee's, officer's or appointee's involvement. 
b.  Disclosure to Others. The employee, officer or appointee must disclose the same information described above to his or her immediate supervisor, to the responsible purchasing agent, and to any other city employees, officer or appointee who may rely on his or her representation. If a member of a public body, that body must also receive notice. 
c.  Time of Disclosure. The above disclosures must occur at least ten days before the date of any agreement relating to the transaction, or ten days before the date when any compensation may be received, whichever is earlier. See also Utah Code Annotated Section 10-3-1305. 
d.  Relating to Conflict of Interest. When disclosure relates to a conflict of interest, the disclosing employee, officer or appointee must do the following: 
i.  Required Disclosure. Upon becoming employed or taking office, the employee, officer or appointee must disclose any positions held, or the nature and value of any substantial interests held, in any business or entity conflicting with city duties, or any business or entity which is subject to regulation by the city and over which that person may have influence. This disclosure must be updated whenever the employee's, officer's or appointee's position in the business changes, or the value of his or her interests significantly increases. 
ii.  Manner of Disclosure. Disclosure must be made in a sworn statement filed with the mayor, with a copy to the responsible purchasing agent. See also Utah Code Annotated Section 10-3-1306. 
D.  Duty of Procurement Personnel. All personnel dealing with procurement shall comply with requirements imposed on city employees as described above. If they become aware of circumstances that may indicate a violation of any provision of this chapter on the part of the city employee, officer, appointee or other person to explain in writing the nature of these circumstances, they shall forward the written explanation to the city recorder. The city recorder shall consult with the city attorney's office as needed. 
(Ord. 2008-13 (part))  
3.12.300 - Request for proposals. 
A.  Conditions for Use. When the purchasing agent or his designated representative determines in writing that the use of competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not advantageous to the city, a contract may be made by use of the competitive sealed proposals method. 
B.  Request for Proposals. Competitive sealed proposals shall be solicited through a request for proposals ("RFP"). 
C.  Public Notice. Adequate public notice of the RFP shall be given in the same manner as provided in Section 3.12.140 of this chapter. 
D.  Receipt of Proposals. No proposal's contents, except for the names of the offerors, shall be disclosed to competing offerors during the process of negotiation. A register of proposals shall be prepared containing the name of each offeror, the number of modifications received, if any, and a description sufficient to identify the item offered. The register of proposals shall be open for public inspection only after award. 
E.  Evaluation Factors. The RFP shall state the relative importance of price and other evaluation factors, including the quantitative basis for evaluation. No criteria may be used in an RFP response evaluation that is not set forth in the RFP. 
F.  Discussion with Responsible Offerors and Revisions to Proposals. As provided in the RFP, discussions may be conducted with responsible offerors who submit proposals determined to have a reasonable chance of being selected in order to clarify and assure full understanding of, and conformance to, the solicitation requirements. Offerors shall be accorded fair and equal treatment to discuss and revise proposals in writing and such written revisions may be permitted by the selection committee after submissions and prior to award to obtain best and final offers. In conducting discussions, there shall be no disclosure of any information derived from proposals submitted by competing offerors, except for the names of the offerors. 
G.  Award. Award shall be made to the responsible offeror whose proposal is determined in writing to be the most advantageous to the city, taking into consideration the price and the evaluation factors set forth in the RFP. No other factors or criteria shall be used in the evaluation. The file shall contain the basis on which the award is made. 
H.  Cancellation of an RFP. An RFP, or other solicitation may be canceled, or any or all bids or proposals may be rejected in whole or in part as may be specified in the solicitation, when it is for good cause and in the best interests of the city. Each solicitation issued by the city shall state that the solicitation may be canceled and that any bid or proposal may be rejected in whole or in part for good cause when in the best interests of the city. Notice of cancellation shall be sent to all businesses responding. The notice shall identify the solicitation, explain the reason for cancellation and, where appropriate, explain that an opportunity will be given to compete on any resolicitation or any future procurement of similar items. Reasons for rejection shall be provided upon request by unsuccessful bidders or offerors. 
(Ord. 2008-13 (part))  
3.12.310 - Appeals and remedies. 
A.  Any actual or prospective bidder or offeror who is aggrieved in connection with the solicitation or award of a contract for procurement may protest the procurement by filing a written protest with the purchasing agent. The protest shall contain the following information: 
1.  The protesting party's name, mailing address and daytime telephone number, the signature of the protesting party or the attorney for the protesting party, and the date the protest is signed; 
2.  The relief sought, a statement of facts and a recitation of the reasons and legal authority in support of the protest sufficient to permit review; 
3.  Protests shall be submitted prior to the closing date for receiving bids or proposals unless the protestor did not know and could not reasonably have known of the facts giving rise to the protest prior to such time, but in any event, all protests shall be submitted within five business days after the closing date for receiving bids or proposals; 
4.  The purchasing agent may designate another individual to assist in reviewing the matter, which assistance may include finding facts, analyzing the protest, and making recommendations to the purchasing agent; 
5.  The purchasing agent or the purchasing agent's designated representative may request additional information from the protesting party or from other persons to make a determination. The protesting party shall provide all information requested by the purchasing agent reasonably needed to decide the protest except information which is protected from disclosure by law, or which could reasonably be expected to result in unfair competitive injury to the protestor in spite of the protections for the protestor provided by law; 
6.  The purchasing agent shall review and decide protests, and shall issue a written determination to the protesting party within fifteen (15) business days of receipt of the protest; 
7.  The protesting party may appeal the written decision of the purchasing agent by filing a written appeal with the administrative law judge within five business days of the purchasing agent's written determination. The notice of appeal shall contain the following information: 
a.  The appellant's name, mailing address and daytime telephone number, the signature of the appellant or of the attorney for the appellant, and date, and 
b.  The relief sought, a statement of facts and a recitation of the reasons and legal authority in support of the protest sufficient to permit review; 
8.  The administrative law judge shall review and hear the appeal. No later than five business days after receiving a notice of appeal, the administrative law judge shall schedule a hearing on the appeal. Unless otherwise agreed to by the city and the appellant, the hearing shall be held no sooner than five business days and not later than thirty (30) business days from the date of the filing of the appeal; 
9.  At the hearing before the administrative law judge, the appellant and the city's representative shall be allowed to testify, present evidence, and comment on the issues. The administrative law judge may allow other interested persons to testify, comment or provide evidence on the issues; 
10.  No later than fifteen (15) business days after the hearing, the administrative law judge shall issue a signed order either granting the appeal in whole or in part, or upholding the determination of the purchasing agent in whole or in part. The order of the administrative law judge shall include: 
a.  The decision, and any reasons for the decision the administrative law judge may wish to provide, and 
b.  A statement that any party to the appeal may appeal the decision to the State District Court; 
11.  If the administrative law judge fails to issue a decision within fifteen (15) business days after the hearing, said failure shall be considered the equivalent of an order denying the appeal; 
12.  The administrative law judge may appoint a person other than the purchasing agent to fulfill his or her respective responsibilities described in this section. 
(Ord. 2008-13 (part))  
3.12.320 - Remedies for solicitations or awards in violation of law. 
A.  Prior to Bid Opening or Closing Date for Receipt of Proposals. If prior to the bid opening or the closing date for receipt of proposals, the purchasing agent, after consultation with the city attorney, determines that a solicitation is in violation of federal, state, or local law, then the solicitation or proposed award shall be canceled or revised to comply with applicable law. 
B.  Prior to Award. If after a bid opening or the closing date for receipt of proposals, the purchasing agent, after consultation with the city attorney, determines that a solicitation or a proposed award of an agreement is in violation of federal, state, or local law, then the solicitation or proposed award shall be canceled. 
C.  After Award. If after an award the purchasing agent, after consultation with the city attorney, determines that a solicitation or award of an agreement was in violation of applicable law, then: 
1.  If the person awarded the agreement has not acted fraudulently or in bad faith: 
a.  The agreement may be ratified and affirmed, provided it is determined that doing so is in the best interests of the city; or 
b.  The agreement may be terminated and the person awarded the agreement shall be compensated for the actual costs reasonably incurred under the agreement, plus a reasonable profit, prior to the termination. 
2.  If the person awarded the agreement has acted fraudulently or in bad faith, the agreement may be declared null and void or voidable, if such action is in the best interests of the city. 
D.  Acting in Violation of this Chapter. Any violation of this chapter shall be grounds for disciplinary action, and civil and criminal prosecution at the discretion of the city. 
(Ord. 2008-13 (part))  
Chapter 3.14 - PURCHASE, SALE AND LEASE OF REAL PROPERTY 
Sections: 
 
3.14.010 - Definitions. 
"Purchase" of an interest in real property shall include dedication, acquisition for value, donation or trade. "Reasonable notice" for purposes of the sale of a significant parcel of real property shall mean publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the city of the city's intent to declare a parcel of property to be surplus and to sell the parcel. The notice shall identify the parcel by its approximate street address and its approximate size and shall set forth the date, time and place that the public will have the opportunity to comment on the proposed sale. The notice shall be published at least fourteen (14) days in advance of the opportunity provided by the city for public comment. 
"Significant parcel" shall mean any parcel of real property the fair market value of which, as determined any reasonable evaluation method, is greater than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), the total acreage of which exceeds five thousand (5,000) square feet or the annual rent for which, under a lease agreement, exceeds ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). The following parcels, whether or not they meet or exceed the value and size criteria, are excluded from this definition: 
A.  Parcels disposed of by the city as part of a boundary line agreement or adjustment; 
B.  Parcels created by a right-of-way vacation or an easement vacation; 
C.  Parcels that are not developable unless combined with an adjacent parcel. A parcel will be considered not to be developable if it cannot be independently developed due to city ordinance requirements or due to the unique physical characteristics of the parcel; and 
D.  Parcels acquired by eminent domain or other means if the city is statutorily or contractually obligated to first offer the parcel to a specific party, provided that the parcel is offered, sold or conveyed to the party holding the right to acquire the parcel. 
(Ord. 2003-09 (part))  
3.14.020 - Purchase or lease of real property. 
Interests in real property shall be purchased, leased or otherwise acquired under the direction of the mayor and no other officer or employee shall be authorized to purchase or lease interests in real property on behalf of the city. 
A.  The mayor shall obtain the approval of the city council for the purchase, lease or acquisition of any significant parcel of real property unless the city council has already appropriated and specifically identified funds for the purchase or lease of the real property in a budget line item. The city council shall give its approval by resolution. The resolution shall identify the budgetary source from which the purchase will be paid. 
B.  Any contract for the purchase or lease of a significant parcel of real property signed by the mayor shall be made contingent upon approval by the city council. 
C.  Prior to giving its approval for the purchase, lease or acquisition of any significant parcel of real property, the mayor shall: 
1.  Certify to the city council that the city has sufficient funds to pay for the purchase, lease or acquisition of any significant parcel of real property according to the proposed contract terms; 
2.  Explain how the city may finance the purchase or lease of the interest in real property, if sufficient funds are not available; 
3.  Identify the specific line item(s) in the budget where the funding has been authorized; 
4.  Identify the specific line item(s) in the budget from where funding can be transferred by budget amendment, if no specific line item has been authorized; or 
5.  Identify that fund balance or reserves will be used to fund the acquisition. 
D.  Discussions with the city council regarding the purchase, lease or acquisition of real property should occur in closed session when a public discussion of the transaction would disclose the appraisal or estimated value of the property or lease, or prevent the city from completing the transaction on the best possible terms. After discussing the confidential aspects of a real property purchase or lease in closed session, the city council may reconvene in public session to give its approval, by resolution, of a purchase or lease of real property. In the public session, the city council may retain confidential any aspect of the purchase or lease that would prevent the city from completing the transaction on the best possible terms until after the transaction has been consummated. 
E.  Prior to the purchase or acquisition of any significant parcel of real property the city shall obtain an appraisal of the parcel. 
F.  Prior to the purchase of any parcel of real property in fee simple by the city, and in addition to the disclosures generally required from the seller as part of a real estate transaction, the city shall require the seller of the property to disclose the following: 
1.  The history of uses of the property for the past fifty (50) years; 
2.  Whether or not the property is at natural grade level or has been filled; and 
3.  The types of businesses or activities that have been conducted on the property. 
G.  Prior to the purchase of any parcel of real property in fee simple, the city shall commission an environmental assessment of the site by a qualified professional engineer. 
1.  The scope of the environmental assessment and the firm or professional to be utilized in the performance of the environmental assessment shall be approved by the mayor prior to the commencement of the assessment. 
2.  When a report has been completed indicating the presence of any materials in violation of the state department of health, Salt Lake County board of health regulations and/or the regulations of the Environmental Protection Agency pertaining to hazardous waste and/or petroleum products, the report shall include an estimated cost of removal of the hazardous materials. 
(Ord. 2003-09 (part))  
3.14.030 - Sale of real property. 
A.  From time to time, the mayor or his or her designee shall compile a list of surplus city real property. If a parcel of surplus property is not a "significant parcel", the mayor may sell it for fair market value using any means that is reasonable, fair and advances the best interest of the city. 
B.  If the parcel of surplus property is a "significant parcel", the following procedures shall apply: 
1.  Reasonable notice, as defined in Section 13.14.010, shall be given of the city' s intent to declare the parcel surplus and to place it for sale and the matter shall be scheduled, consistent with the notice requirements of Section 13.14.010, on the city council agenda. 
2.  At the city council meeting during which the sale of the real property is considered, the public shall be given the opportunity to comment on the proposed sale. 
3.  After receiving public comment, the city council may adopt a resolution declaring the parcel of real property surplus and authorizing the mayor to sell it for fair market value using any means that is reasonable, fair and advances the best interest of the city. 
(Ord. 2003-09 (part))  
3.14.040 - Leasing city-owned real property. 
A.  The mayor may lease an interest in real property owned by the city for a term of five years or less, for fair market value, by means that are reasonable, fair and advance the best interest of the city. 
B.  Prior to entering into any lease of an interest in real property owned by the city for a term of greater than five years, the mayor shall first obtain the approval of the city council as follows: 
1.  Notice of the intent to lease city property for a term of greater than five years shall be given by placing it as an item on the city council agenda. 
2.  The city council may grant its approval by adopting a resolution authorizing the mayor to lease the property for a term of greater than five years for fair market value, by means that are reasonable, fair and advance the best interest of the city. 
(Ord. 2003-09 (part))  
3.14.050 - Penalty. 
Violation of this chapter is a class C misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 2003-09 (part))  
Chapter 3.16 - DISPOSAL OF SURPLUS PROPERTY 
Sections: 
 
3.16.010 - Inventory of surplus property. 
From time to time as necessary, but not less that annually on a date designated by the mayor, each department head shall submit to the mayor or his or her designee a list of all city property which the department head has determined is no longer useful or of benefit to that department or the city. 
A.  The mayor, or his or her designee, shall review the list of property submitted by the department head, and then inspect, or cause to be inspected, the listed property to determine whether the property should be sold, transferred to another department, or otherwise disposed of pursuant to this policy. The mayor will then formulate and approve a final list of all surplus property to be disposed or transferred. 
1.  The final approved list will then be forwarded to all departments for review by the department head to determine whether any items on the final list could be put to further use by that department. Any requests by the department head for listed property will be made as described in this chapter. 
(Ord. 96-29 § 1)  
3.16.020 - Disposal of equipment and supplies—All property except real property and motor vehicles. 
Before equipment and supplies are sold by the city, the department head shall review the mayor's final list of surplus property for equipment and supplies which could as efficiently and effectively be put to further use as new equipment and supplies. 
A.  When the department head determines that surplus property could be put to further use by that department, he or she shall notify the mayor in writing within ten days of receipt of the mayor's final approved list of surplus property of which surplus equipment and supplies the department requires, and include an explanation of the reasons for the department's need for such equipment and supplies. 
1.  Upon receipt from the department heads of a request for equipment and supplies which could be put to further use by that department, the mayor will determine the priority in which specific requests from department heads should be granted, grant such requests as necessary, then have the equipment and supplies requested forwarded to the requesting department. 
B.  Any equipment and supplies which cannot be put to further use by a department shall then be sold in the following manner: 
1.  All surplus property sold by the city of South Salt Lake shall be sold "as is," with no express or implied warranties, and all sales of surplus property by the city will be final. 
a.  Notice that all property sold by the city will be "as is" and that all sales are final shall be posted in a conspicuous place or in a conspicuous manner. 
2.  A list of all remaining equipment and supplies will be sent to the city treasurer, who will then determine which equipment and supplies should be sold directly by the city, or through a company providing auction services. 
a.  All equipment and supplies to be sold by an auction services company shall then, as directed by the treasurer, be forwarded to the company for immediate sale. The city treasurer shall ensure that the process employed by the auctions services company is open and fair. 
b.  All equipment and supplies to be sold directly by the city will then be sold in an open, fair manner, with adequate notice, and an open hearing and sale as determined and directed by the city treasurer. Preference may be given to other government agencies when such need for preference is provided in advance of any sale by the interested government agency. 
(Ord. 96-29 § 2)  
3.16.030 - Disposal of motor vehicles. 
All motor vehicles determined to be surplus will be disposed of pursuant to the manner described above with the following exceptions: 
A.  Police Vehicles. All police vehicles will, prior to the time when they are sold either by the city or an auction services company, be stripped of all emergency and other police equipment. 
B.  At the time of the sale of motor vehicles a minimum price will be established for each vehicle to be sold below which no bids will be accepted. Bids submitted for motor vehicles in excess of the established minimum price may be accepted. 
(Ord. 96-29 § 2)  
3.16.050 - Disposal of surplus property which is of a specialized or limited use (specialty property). 
Property which has a specialized function, or limited to use by a particular industry or business may be disposed of by the mayor or the mayor's designee as follows: 
A.  Together with the department head, industry professionals, or others with the knowledge and ability to designate the value of specialty property, the mayor shall establish a reasonable and fair value for specialty property. 
1.  Property valued at less than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) may be negotiated and sold directly by the mayor to other governmental entities or businesses. 
2.  Property valued at more than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) shall be following notice and hearing as described above. 
(Ord. 96-29 § 4)  
3.16.060 - Miscellaneous policies and procedures. 
Trade-In of Surplus Property. The mayor may trade in surplus property when the mayor and the department head determine that new property can be acquired by the city through trading of surplus property at a greater value than selling the same property. 
(Ord. 96-29 § 5)  
Chapter 3.20 - TRANSIENT ROOM TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.20.020 - Purpose. 
A.  The 1997 Utah State Legislature enacted legislation authorizing municipalities to impose a transient room tax as the rents charged to transients occupying public accommodations. 
B.  It is the purpose of this chapter to create within the city of South Salt Lake a transient room tax to be charged for public accommodations as defined below. 
(Ord. 98-4 § 1 (part))  
3.20.030 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply: 
"Public accommodation" means a place providing temporary sleeping accommodations to the public and includes a(n): 
1.  Motel; 
2.  Hotel; 
3.  Motor court; 
4.  Inn; 
5.  Bed and breakfast establishment; 
6.  Condominium; and 
7.  Resort home. 
"Rents" include: 
1.  Rents; and 
2.  Timeshare fees or dues. 
"Transient" means a person who occupies a public accommodation for thirty (30) consecutive days or less. 
(Ord. 98-4 § 1 (part))  
3.20.040 - Transient room tax. 
Effective June 30, 1998, and thereafter, there is levied and there shall be collected and paid on the rents charged a transient room tax to all transients occupying public accommodations in an amount of one percent of the rents charged. 
(Ord. 98-4 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 3.24 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.24.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this ordinance: 
"Commission" means the State Tax Commission. 
"Customer" means: 
A.  Subject to subsections (B) and (C), the person who is obligated under a contract with a telecommunications provider to pay for telecommunications service received under the contract; 
B.  1.  The person who is obligated under a contract with a telecommunications provider to pay for telecommunications service received under the contract; or 
2.  If the end user is not the person described in subsection (B)(1), the end user of telecommunications service. 
C.  "Customer" does not include a reseller of: 
1.  Telecommunications service; or 
2.  A serving carrier for mobile telecommunications service under an agreement to serve the customer outside the telecommunications provider's licensed service area. 
"End user" means 
A.  The person who uses a telecommunications service. 
B.  For purposes of telecommunications service provided to a person who is not an individual, "end user" means the individual who uses the telecommunications service on behalf of the person who is provided the telecommunications service. 
"Gross receipts attributed to the municipality" means those gross receipts from a transaction for telecommunications services that is located within the municipality for the purposes of sales and use taxes under Utah Code Title 59, Chapter 12, Sales and Use Tax Act and determined in accordance with Utah Code Section 59-12-207. 
"Gross receipts from telecommunications service" means the revenue that a telecommunications provider receives for telecommunications service rendered except for amounts collected or paid as: 
A.  A tax, fee, or charge: 
1.  Imposed by a governmental entity; 
2.  Separately identified as a tax, fee or charge in the transaction with the customer for the telecommunications service; and 
3.  Imposed only on a telecommunications provider; 
B.  Sales and use taxes collected by the telecommunications provider from a customer under Utah Code Title 59, Chapter 12, Sales and Use Tax Act; or 
C.  Interest, a fee or a charge that is charged by a telecommunications provider on a customer for failure to pay for telecommunications service when payment is due. 
"Mobile telecommunications service" is as defined in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act 4 U.S.C. Sec. 124. 
"Municipality" means the city of South Salt Lake, Utah. 
"Place of primary use" means: 
A.  For telecommunications service other than mobile telecommunications service, the street address representative of where the customer's use of the telecommunications service primarily occurs, which shall be: 
1.  The residential street address of the customer; or 
2.  The primary business street address of the customer; or 
B.  For mobile telecommunications service, as defined in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act, 4 U.S.C. Sec. 124. 
"Service address," notwithstanding where a call is billed or paid, means: 
A.  If the location described in this subsection is known, the location of the telecommunications equipment: 
1.  To which a call is charged; and 
2.  From which the call originates or terminates; 
B.  If the location described in subsection (A) is not known but the location described in this subsection is known, the location of the origination point of the signal of the telecommunications service first identified by: 
1.  The telecommunications system of the telecommunications provider; or 
2.  If the system used to transport the signal is not a system of the telecommunications provider, information received by the telecommunications provider from its service provider; or 
C.  If the locations described in subsections (A) and (B) are not known, the location of a customer's place of primary use. 
"Telecommunications provider" means: 
A.  Subject to subsections (B) and (C), a person that: 
1.  Owns, controls, operates or manages a telecommunications service; or 
2.  Engages in an activity described in subsection (A)(1) for the shared use with or resale to any person of the telecommunications service. 
B.  A person described in subsection (A) is a telecommunications provider whether or not the Public Service Commission of Utah regulates: 
1.  That person; or 
2.  The telecommunications service that the person owns, controls, operates, or manages. 
C.  "Telecommunications provider" does not include an aggregator as defined in Utah Code Section 54-8b-2. 
"Telecommunications service" means: 
A.  Telephone service, as defined in Utah Code Section 59-12-102, other than mobile telecommunications service, that originates and terminates within the boundaries of this state; and 
B.  Mobile telecommunications service, as defined in Utah Code Section 59-12-102: 
1.  That originates and terminates within the boundaries of one state; and 
2.  Only to the extent permitted by the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act, 4 U.S.C. Sec. 116 et seq. 
(Ord. 2004-11 § 2 (part))  
3.24.020 - Levy of tax. 
There is hereby levied a municipal telecommunications license tax on the gross receipts from telecommunications service attributed to this municipality. 
(Ord. 2004-11 § 2 (part))  
3.24.030 - Rate. 
The rate of the tax levy shall be four percent of the telecommunication provider's gross receipts from telecommunications service that are attributed to the municipality, subject to the following: 
If the location of a transaction is determined to be other than this municipality, then the rate imposed on the gross receipts for telecommunications services shall be the lower of either: 
A.  The rate imposed by the taxing jurisdiction in which the transaction is located; or 
B.  For non-mobile telecommunication services, the rate imposed by the municipality in which the customer's service address is located; for mobile telecommunications service, the rate imposed by the municipality of the customer's primary place of use. 
(Ord. 2004-11 § 2 (part))  
3.24.040 - Rate limitation and exemption. 
This rate of this levy shall not exceed four percent of the telecommunication provider's gross receipts from telecommunication service attributed to the municipality unless a higher rate is approved by a majority vote of the voters in this municipality that vote in: 
A.  A municipal general election; 
B.  A regular general election; or 
C.  A local special election. 
(Ord. 2004-11 § 2 (part))  
3.24.050 - Effective date of tax levy. 
This tax shall be levied beginning the earlier of July 1, 2004 or the first day of any calendar quarter after a seventy-five-day period beginning on the date the commission received notice pursuant to Utah Code Section 10-1-403 that this municipality has enacted this ordinance. 
(Ord. 2004-11 § 2 (part))  
3.24.060 - Changes in rate or repeal of the tax. 
This ordinance is subject to the requirements of Utah Code Section 10-1-403. If the tax rate is changed or the tax is repealed, then the appropriate notice shall be given as provided in Utah Code Section 10-1-403. 
(Ord. 2004-11 § 2 (part))  
3.24.070 - Interlocal agreement for collection of the tax. 
On or before the effective date of the ordinance, the municipality shall enter into the uniform interlocal agreement with the commission as described in Utah Code Section 10-1-405 for the collection, enforcement, and administration of this municipal telecommunications license tax. 
(Ord. 2004-11 § 2 (part))  
3.24.080 - Repeal of inconsistent taxes and fees. 
Any tax or fee previously enacted by this municipality under authority of Utah Code Section 10-1- 203 or Utah Code Title 11, Chapter 26, Local Taxation of Utilities Limitation is hereby repealed. 
Nothing in this ordinance shall be interpreted to repeal any municipal ordinance or fee which provides that the municipality may recover from a telecommunications provider the management costs of the municipality caused by the activities of the telecommunications provider in the rights-of-way of the municipality, if the fee is imposed in accordance with Utah Code Section 72-7-102 and is not related to the municipality's loss of use of a highway as a result of the activities of the telecommunications provider in a right of way, or increased deterioration of a highway as a result of the activities of the telecommunications provider in a right-of-way nor does this ordinance limit the municipalities right to charge fees or taxes on persons that are not subject to the municipal telecommunications license tax under this ordinance and locate telecommunications facilities, as defined in Utah Code Section 72-7-108, in this municipality. 
(Ord. 2004-11 § 2 (part))  
Chapter 3.28 - EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SERVICE 
Sections: 
 
3.28.010 - Purpose. 
By interlocal agreement, the city is a member of the Salt Lake Valley Emergency Communications Center (VECC) through which the city provides emergency telephone services within its corporate limits. Pursuant to Utah Code Ann. § 69-2-5, the city is authorized to levy a monthly emergency telephone services charge in the amount of up to sixty-five cents ($0.65) per month upon each local exchange service switched access line within the boundaries of the city and upon each revenue producing radio communications access line with a billing address within the boundaries of the city. The intent of the charge is to defray the city's portion of providing emergency telephone services through VECC. 
(Ord. 2004-13 (part))  
3.28.020 - Levy. 
An emergency telephone services charge of sixty-five cents ($0.65) per month is hereby levied upon each local exchange service switched access line within the boundaries of the city and upon each revenue producing radio communications access line with a billing address within the boundaries of the city. 
(Ord. 2004-13 (part))  
3.28.030 - Disposition of funds. 
The charge levied shall be collected by the Utah State Tax Commission. Four cents of charge levied, less the permitted collection costs of the Utah State Tax Commission and provider, shall be deposited in a statewide unified E-911 Emergency Services Fund. The balance of the charge levied shall be deposited by the Utah State Tax Commission directly to the VECC emergency telephone service fund that has been established to pay the costs of establishing, installing, maintaining and operating a 911 emergency telephone service system and integrating the 911 system into an established public safety dispatch center and such other purposes as permitted by law. 
(Ord. 2004-13 (part))  
Title 4 - HOUSING  
Chapter 4.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
4.04.010 - Purpose. 
The city council of South Salt Lake finds that a large number of dwelling units within the city of South Salt Lake are occupied on a rental tenancy basis. The city council of South Salt Lake also finds that pursuant to constitutional and legislative authorization, the city is permitted to license, regulate and enact ordinances governing rental dwellings, mobile home parks and trailer courts. The city council finds that regulation is necessary due to a history of nuisance activities by tenants, unsanitary conditions and unfit premises. As such, a rigorous housing program is necessary in order to improve the quality of life for residents of the city abiding in rental dwellings and mobile home parks. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.04.020 - Definitions. 
As used within any chapter in this title: 
"Apartment complex" means a parcel of real property, or a series of contiguous parcels sharing a common owner, containing ten or more rental dwelling units. 
"Background check" means a printed history of the tenant's criminal activity, either prepared by the Utah Bureau of Criminal Identification, or a service which provides the same data. 
"Business license official" means an employee, official or agent of the city authorized to review, issue, suspend and revoke business licenses and applications for licenses. 
"City official" means any employee, official or agent of the city authorized to administer or enforce the provisions of the City Code. 
"Criminal conduct" refers to both "serious criminal conduct" and "minor offenses" as those terms are defined in this section. 
"Design professional" means an engineer or architect, duly and currently licensed under the laws of the state of Utah. 
"Duplex" means a building arranged or designed to be occupied by two families, the structure only having two dwelling units. Each dwelling unit contains its own exclusive entry point, kitchen, bathing and toilet facilities, and separate sleeping quarters. The units are divided by a permanent wall or a doorway which may be locked on one side to the exclusion of the other. 
"Exempt residential rental business" means the rental of a residential unit within a single structure that contains: (1) no more than four residential units, and (2) one unit which is continuously occupied by the owner. 
"Incident" is used in relation to "serious criminal conduct" and "minor offense" and means an arrest or citation of a tenant or guest of an apartment complex for criminal conduct. 
"Landlord" means the owner of a rental dwelling, or a manager of a rental dwelling, if the owner has designated a manager. 
"Manager" means an individual or entity that has entered into a formal or informal arrangement with the owner of a rental dwelling to provide management services for the unit. A manager shall be deemed an agent of the owner for purposes of delivery of notices required under this title. 
"Minor offense" means any criminal offense defined by state law or municipal ordinance, that can be reasonably linked to a tenant or guest of an apartment complex, that has the apartment complex as its locus and that is not included within the definition of "serious criminal conduct." "Minor offense" includes parking violations, as defined in Title 41, Chapter 6, Section 103, criminal trespass as defined in Title 76, Chapter 6, Section 206 and littering as defined in Title 41, Chapter 6, Section 114 of the Utah Code. 
"Mobile home" means a factory assembled structure or structures equipped with the necessary service connections and made so as to be readily movable as a unit or units on its (their) own running gear and designed to be used as a dwelling unit(s) without a permanent foundation. A modular home transported on wheels to its foundation shall not be considered a mobile home. 
"Mobile home park" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land which has been so designed, improved or utilized that it contains three or more mobile home lots available to the general public for the placement thereon of mobile homes for occupancy. 
"Owner" means the record owner of the real property as listed on the records of the Salt Lake County recorder or assessor's office, a lessor or a sub-lessor of a residential unit. A managing agent, leasing agent, or resident manager is considered an owner only for purposes of notice and other communications required or allowed under this title unless the agent or manager specifies otherwise in writing in the rental agreement. 
"Owner-occupied duplex" means a duplex in which one of the rental dwellings is occupied by the record owner of the property as the owner's principal place of residence. 
"Preponderance of the evidence" means evidence that is more convincing than the evidence supporting a contrary conclusion, as developed and explained by Utah's appellate courts. 
"Rental agreement" means any agreement, written or oral, which establishes or modifies the terms, conditions, rules or any other provision regarding the use and occupancy of a residential rental unit. 
"Rental dwelling" means a building or portion of building that is: 
1.  Used or designated for use as a residence by one or more persons, and includes the appurtenances, grounds, and facilities held out for the use of the residential renter generally, as well as any other area or facility provided to the renter in the rental agreement; and 
2.  a.  Available to be rented, loaned, leased or hired out for a period of one month or longer; or 
b.  Arranged, designed, or built to be rented, loaned, leased, or hired out for a period of one month or longer. 
Rental dwellings include single family rentals, duplexes, owner-occupied duplexes and apartments. 
"Rental dwelling unit" means a residential unit held out for lease to the public, which is part of or inside of a rental dwelling containing at least one other unit for lease. 
"Rental property" means the premises on which are located residential rental dwellings and for which there is a single owner, including all rental dwellings, common and parking areas, driveways, walkways, yards, plazas and stairwells. 
"Renter" means any person entitled under a rental agreement to occupy a rental dwelling to the exclusion of others. 
"Service building" means a building which houses toilets, lavatories, bathing facilities, a service sink, and may also include laundry and other accommodations as may be required. Comfort of the occupant is provided for by adequate heating, lighting and ventilation. 
"Serious criminal conduct" means any of the following that has the apartment complex as its locus and can be reasonably linked to a tenant or guest of the apartment complex (all references are to the Utah Code): the unlawful sale, manufacture, service, storage, distribution, dispensing or acquisition of any controlled substance, precursor, paraphernalia or analog specified in Title 58, Chapter 37, Controlled Substances, Chapter 37a, Paraphernalia; Chapter 37b, Imitation Controlled Substances, Chapter 37c, Precursors or Chapter 37d, Clandestine Labs; criminal activity committed in concert with two or more persons as provided in Section 76-3-203.1; an offense involving any form of abuse of a child or violence or the threat of violence against a person as defined in Title 76, Chapter 5, Offenses Against the Person; sexual exploitation of a child as defined in Title 76, Chapter 5a, Sexual Exploitation of Children; an offense involving intentional damage to property as defined in Title 76, Chapter 6, Part 1; an offense relating to burglary of a building or vehicle or possession of burglary tools as defined in Title 76, Chapter 6, Part 2; an offense involving any form of robbery as defined in Title 76, Chapter 6, Part 3; an offense involving any form of theft as defined in Title 76, Chapter 9, Part 4; riot, disorderly conduct or failure to disperse as defined in Title 76, Chapter 9, Part 1; an offense involving any form of animal fighting as defined in Title 76, Chapter 9, Part 3; an offense involving intoxication or any form of lewdness or voyeurism as defined in Title 76, Chapter 9, Part 7; an offense involving a dangerous weapon as defined in Title 76, Chapter 10, Part 5; an offense involving a nuisance as defined in Title 76, Chapter 10, Part 8; gambling permitted to be played, conducted or dealt as prohibited in Title 76, Chapter 10, Part 11, Gambling; or prostitution or promotion of prostitution carried on by one or more persons as provided in Title 76, Chapter 10, Part 13, Prostitution. 
"Serious safety violation" means any hazard constituting an imminent threat to the life safety of an occupant or neighbor, and for which condemnation, closure to occupancy or termination of utilities is provided in electrical, building, plumbing or similar codes. 
"Single family rental" means a building arranged or designed to be occupied by one family and held for lease to the general public, the structure only having one unit. 
"Structure" means anything constructed or erected which requires location on or below the ground or attached to something having location on or below the ground. 
"Tenant" means every person who resides in a rental dwelling, whether named in the lease or not. 
"Wastewater" means discharges from all plumbing facilities, such as rest rooms, kitchen and laundry fixtures either separately or in combination. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.04.030 - Existing law continued. 
The provisions of this title shall not invalidate any other title, chapter or ordinance of this code, but shall be read in conjunction with those titles, chapters and ordinances and shall be used as an additional remedy for enforcement of violations thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.04.040 - Criminal or civil prosecution right. 
The city shall have sole discretion in deciding whether to file a civil nuisance action under state law, a criminal case or to pursue an administrative enforcement action for the violation of any of its ordinances or applicable code requirements. The enactment of this title shall not be construed to limit the city's right to prosecute any violation as a civil nuisance violation or a criminal offense under state or municipal law. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.04.050 - Severability. 
If any chapter, section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, portion or provision of this title is, for any reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council hereby declares that it would have adopted this title and each chapter, section, subsection, clause, phrase, portion or provision thereof, irrespective of the fact that any more or more sections, subsections, clauses, phrases, portions or provisions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. This section shall apply to all amendments made to this title. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.04.060 - Civil liability. 
By establishing performance standards or by establishing obligations to act, it is the intent of the city council that South Salt Lake City employees and officers are exercising discretionary authority in pursuit of an essential governmental function and that any such standards or obligations shall not be construed as creating a ministerial duty for purposes of tort liability. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
Chapter 4.08 - RENTAL DWELLINGS 
 
4.08.010 - License—Required. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association, as owner, lessee, or agent thereof to keep, conduct, operate or maintain any rental dwelling within the limits of the city of South Salt Lake, or cause or permit the same to be done, unless such person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership holds a current, unrevoked operating regulatory business license under this chapter. 
B.  An owner of multiple-rental dwellings or multiple buildings containing rental dwellings is not required to obtain more than one regulatory business license for the operation and maintenance of those rental dwellings. 
C.  Such licenses are not transferable between parties or structures, and parties holding such licenses shall give written notice within forty-eight (48) hours to the business license official after having transferred or otherwise disposed of the legal or equitable control of any premises licensed under these provisions. Such notice of transferred interest shall be deemed a request to cancel the existing business license, and shall include the name, address, and control of the premises as required under Section 4.08.030 of this chapter. The new owners must obtain a business license as required in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.08.020 - License—Application. 
An application for a rental dwelling business license shall be made to the business license official and shall contain such information as indicated on forms provided by the city including the following: 
A.  The location and address of such rental dwelling; 
B.  The number of units located in such rental dwelling; 
C.  The name, address, and telephone number of each of the following: 
1.  The applicant; 
2.  The owner of the fee title interest; 
3.  The owners of any equitable interest; 
4.  The local operating agent; 
5.  The resident manager; and 
6.  The designation of a legal representative and agent for such service of each corporate and out-of-state resident owner, who must reside in the state of Utah; 
D.  The signatures of any and all owners of the premises, and the operator, if different, agreeing to comply with applicable ordinances and to authorize inspections as provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.08.030 - License—Fee. 
The license fee for a rental dwelling business license is to be set by resolution of the city council and included in the city fee schedule. The fee shall take into account the number of rental units operated or maintained by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.08.040 - License—Issuance restrictions. 
A.  No rental dwelling business license shall be issued or renewed for an out-of-state applicant unless such applicant designates in writing a power of attorney in the name of an agent located in the state of Utah for receipt of service for notice of violation of the provisions of this chapter or any other applicable ordinance, and for service of process pursuant to this chapter, acknowledged by such agent. 
B.  No business license shall be issued or renewed for a rental dwelling unless the applicant, owner and operator agree as a condition precedent, by signing the license application, to such inspections that the city may require in order to determine whether the rental dwelling unit is in compliance with the applicable requirements. The failure of the applicant and/or operator to consent to such inspection shall be grounds for the denial, suspension and/or revocation of a business license, in addition to other civil or criminal penalties. 
C.  No business license is to be issued until the city has inspected the premises and confirmed that compliance with applicable requirements has been obtained. 
D.  No business license is to be issued or renewed until the finance department has determined that the applicant, owner or operator is not delinquent in paying any sum owed to the city for any other fee or fine. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.08.050 - City inspection. 
A.  The original application for a rental dwelling business license shall be referred to the city for inspection as to whether the interior and exterior premises are in compliance with currently adopted city ordinances and codes and state law. The assigned official shall report to the business license official within fourteen (14) days as to the compliance with such ordinances and codes. 
B.  Premises found to be out of compliance may be re-inspected upon the applicant's request made within thirty (30) days of receipt of the inspection report. If a third inspection will be required, the request must be accompanied by the payment of an inspection fee. The applicant shall not be required to pay a second business license application fee if the applicant makes a timely request for re-inspection. 
C.  The failure or refusal to allow a city inspector onto the premises for an inspection shall result in a denial of the business license application. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.08.060 - Issuance of license. 
The business license official, after receiving recommendations from the community development department, shall act upon the application in respect to granting or denying the same, as shall be deemed appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.08.070 - Appeal. 
The applicant or license holder may appeal the business license official's decision as provided in Section 2.22.040 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
Chapter 4.12 - GOOD LANDLORD PROGRAM 
 
4.12.010 - Purpose. 
The cost to provide municipal services to rental dwellings is greater than the cost to provide services to owner-occupied dwellings. Due to this added cost, disproportionate rental fees are assessed to pay the incremental cost of the disproportionate services. Pursuant to state law, however, landlords who actively participate in the good landlord program are permitted to pay a reduced fee, so long as they continue to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.12.020 - Good landlord program. 
A.  Every landlord who is "certified" by the city pursuant to its "good landlord program" shall be entitled to a reduction in its per unit license fee in the amount set forth in the consolidated fee schedule. 
B.  An exempt residential rental business is not required to pay a disproportionate impact fee. License fees for exempt residential rental businesses in the good landlord program are limited to the base licensing fee. Exempt businesses may still participate in the good landlord program and receive a discount in their base licensing fee. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.12.030 - Good landlord certification. 
To receive a "good landlord" certification from the city, a landlord shall do the following: 
A.  Provide proof that the person or persons responsible for the management of the rental housing has/have: (1) made arrangements with an entity authorized to complete background checks; (2) procured a lease form that allows prompt eviction for criminal acts or maintaining a nuisance; (3) completed good landlord training provided or approved by the city prior to certification and once every three years thereafter. A property is exempt from the training requirement if the manager or landlord maintains a designation as a certified property manager with the Utah Division of Real Estate or is otherwise exempt pursuant to state law. 
B.  Within thirty (30) days of a change in the person or persons responsible for the management of rental housing, provide proof to the city that the new manager(s) has/have completed good landlord training provided or approved by the city. 
C.  Enter into a good landlord agreement on a form prepared by the city to institute the following practices: 
1.  Require a written lease for every rental unit. 
2.  Require that all adult occupants of the unit be listed on the lease. 
3.  Perform background checks on every adult who will be listed on the lease so that the landlord is aware of past criminal convictions of the prospective tenant. 
4.  Utilize a lease form that allows eviction for criminal acts or maintaining a nuisance by a tenant, occupant or guest. 
5.  Serve notice of eviction upon a tenant within five days of receiving notice from the city of evidence which demonstrates by a preponderance of the evidence that a tenant or tenant's guest has been involved in a criminal act or maintained a nuisance on the premises. 
6.  Provide the city with a telephone number, email and postal address for the landlord or landlord's representative to which information regarding inappropriate behavior by tenants, occupants or their guests and other notices which may be sent to the landlord or landlord's representative. Each landlord shall be responsible to update and keep current this contact information, and shall execute a statement agreeing that notice sent to the contact information kept on file is sufficient to meet the requirements of notice under this chapter. 
7.  Implement "crime prevention through environmental design" practices on the premises. 
D.  Maintain the rental dwelling in a fit and habitable condition, as required by the state fit premises act, and relevant building, fire and land use codes. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.12.040 - Required conditions on property. 
A.  Rental properties are required to conform with all applicable building, fire and land use codes, Title 57, Chapter 22 of the Utah Code (Utah Fit Premises Act), and Chapter 4.16 of this title (Fit Premises Ordinance). 
B.  Upon receiving notice from the city or any other government agency of a violation of fire, building or fit premises codes, a landlord must remedy the conditions listed in subsection (A) within one month, unless another amount of time is identified by state or local law for the particular violation. A participant who fails to timely bring the rental property into compliance shall have the participant's certification suspended, except as provided in Section 4.12.080. 
C.  The city may extend these deadlines if a landlord demonstrates that extensive renovation is needed to comply with these provisions, that the costs of renovation are extremely burdensome, and that progress is being made toward timely compliance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.12.050 - Audits. 
A.  The department may request an audit of the landlord's written leases and background checks under the following circumstances: 
1.  During a regularly scheduled audit, which may occur once every three years; 
2.  When alleged criminal activity occurs at a specific rental property; or 
3.  When the city receives evidence that such documents are not being maintained in accordance with city ordinances. 
B.  For landlords with more than twenty (20) rental units, regular audits are initially limited to a selection of twenty-five (25) percent of the units, as selected by the city prior to inspection. Further audits may be requested by the city if substantial deficiencies are located within those which were provided. 
C.  Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, any landlord in the program must, within five business days of a request by the city, produce evidence of written leases and background checks. The landlord may provide copies of the evidence via facsimile or electronic mail, deliver a physical copy of the evidence for the city's records, or permit a city official to inspect the evidence at any business premises located within the city. 
D.  Failure or refusal to respond to the city official's request within five business days shall result in a suspension of the landlord's good landlord certificate. For purposes of this section, three additional business days are permitted if notification of the audit is sent by mail. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.12.060 - Renewal of certification. 
A.  The good landlord certificate expires every three years, at which time a landlord who wishes to remain on the program must seek a renewal of the certificate if the landlord wishes to seek the benefits of the good landlord program. 
B.  Prior to renewal, the landlord or manager must attend: 
1.  A renewal good landlord course which shall be approved by the city, or live training provided by another city in Utah which participates in the good landlord program; and 
2.  At least one local training session provided free of charge by the city. 
C.  Landlords of exempt residential rental businesses who wish to participate in the program are exempt from the instruction provisions of subsection (B) of this section, unless the department demonstrates that the landlord has violated the provisions of this chapter during the previous three-year period, or unless the landlord also owns or maintains other residential rental properties within the city. 
D.  The good landlord certificate will not be renewed unless the property is kept in compliance with Section 4.12.040. 
E.  A landlord whose certification is currently suspended or revoked is not eligible for renewal. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.12.070 - Suspension of certification. 
A.  If a landlord fails to present evidence of compliance pursuant to Section 4.12.040, or if the landlord fails to timely correct a minor violation of the good landlord agreement, the certification for that landlord shall be suspended. Minor violations include a failure to run a background check on tenants, failure to update contact information, failure to maintain written lease agreements, fit premises or health and safety violations which do not result in injury, violations of local ordinances, or failure to timely train new management. Suspension will also be entered if the landlord or manager fails to attend the renewal courses required by Section 4.12.060. 
B.  If a landlord's certification is suspended, the certificate shall not be reinstated until (1) the landlord has corrected the violation for which suspension was entered, and (2) the landlord has paid an administrative fee in an amount set forth in the consolidated fee schedule. 
C.  A second violation for which suspension is ordinarily imposed, if committed within one year from the initial suspension, shall result in revocation of the landlord's certificate. 
D.  The city may not penalize a landlord for failing to take action against a renter because that renter makes reasonable requests for assistance from a public safety agency. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.12.080 - Revocation of certification. 
A.  When the business license official receives evidence that the landlord has committed a major violation of the good landlord program, or has violated state or federal law in connection with the rental property the official shall revoke the landlord's certification. Major violations include failure to begin eviction proceedings against tenants who commit criminal acts or maintain a nuisance, or evidence that a tenant or guest suffered bodily injury due to inadequate conditions included in Section 4.16.060. The official shall send notification, stating the reason for the revocation by certified mail to the landlord together with instructions on how to appeal the official's decision. 
B.  The landlord whose certificate has been revoked is not entitled to certify again until after a one-year probation period. 
C.  A landlord seeking reinstatement must re-apply for the certificate, and provide evidence of attendance of an approved good landlord course. 
D.  Further violations of state, local or federal law during the one-year probation period shall restart the one-year probation period, which extension may be appealed. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.12.090 - Appeal. 
A landlord may appeal an adverse decision related to the good landlord program to the city's administrative law judge pursuant to procedures set forth in Title 2, Chapter 22 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.12.100 - Applicability of amendments to current participants. 
Unless otherwise stated, amendments to this chapter are effective immediately, but their application to landlords who are currently participating in the program is deferred until the expiration or renewal of that landlord's certification. Landlords may be required to execute a new contract with terms which conform to the amendments, if they wish to continue participating in the program. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
Chapter 4.16 - FIT PREMISES 
 
4.16.010 - Title. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be referred to as city of South Salt Lake fit premises ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.16.020 - Purpose. 
A.  The city council of South Salt Lake finds that a large number of dwelling units within the city of South Salt Lake are occupied on a rental tenancy basis, and that while a large majority of both owners and tenants maintain premises in a habitable condition, a significant number of both owners and tenants fail to abide these standards, that some make unreasonable requests to enter the premises, some tenants breach an obligation to maintain premises in reasonable condition and cause damages in excess of reasonable wear and tear, that rental agreements are in many cases breached by both owners and tenants, and that some tenants breach a duty to maintain peaceful enjoyment of the premises by other tenants. The council further finds that pursuant to decisions of the Utah Supreme Court that the city has the necessary police and other regulatory powers to permit enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
B.  The city council intends the requirements of this chapter to clarify, not to supersede or conflict with, the requirements of the Utah Fit Premises Act, § 57-22-1 et seq. U.C.A., and finds that such clarification is necessary in order to ensure compliance with the standards for habitability in this community. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.16.030 - Exclusions from application of chapter. 
The following housing is not governed by this chapter: 
A.  Residence at a detention, medical, geriatric, educational, counseling, or religious institution; 
B.  Occupancy under a contract of sale of a dwelling unit if the occupant is the purchaser; 
C.  Occupancy by a member of a fraternal or social organization in a building operated for the benefit of the organization; 
D.  Transient occupancy in a hotel, or motel (or lodgings subject to Utah Code § 59-12-301); except that single room occupancy units (SRO) shall be governed by this chapter. SRO means an existing housing unit with one combined sleeping and living room of at least seventy (70) square feet, but of not more than two hundred twenty (220) square feet, where the usual tenancy or occupancy of the same unit by the same person or persons is for a period of longer than one week. Such units may include a kitchen and a private bath; and 
E.  Occupancy by an owner of a condominium unit. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.16.040 - Identification of owner and agents. 
A.  A property owner, or any person authorized to enter into an oral or written rental agreement on the property owner's behalf, shall disclose to the tenant in writing on or before the commencement of the tenancy the name, address and telephone number of: 
1.  The property owner or person authorized to manage the premises; and 
2.  A local person authorized to act for and on behalf of the property owner for the purpose of receiving demands, and performing the property owner's obligations under this chapter and the rental agreement. 
B.  A person, other than the tenant, who enters into a rental agreement and fails to comply with the requirements of this section becomes an agent of the property owner for the purposes of: 
1.  Receipt of notices under this chapter; and 
2.  Performing the obligations of the property owner under this chapter and under the rental agreement. 
C.  A tenant must be notified in writing of changes in the information required to be furnished by this section within thirty (30) days of the effective date of the change. 
D.  Every rental property with more than one unit rented without a written agreement shall have a notice posted in a conspicuous place with the name, address and telephone number of the property owner or manager and local agent as required by subsection (A) of this section. 
E.  This section is necessary in order to ensure the tenant's ability to serve notice of deficiencies to a property owner, as specified in § 57-22-6(2)(b) of the Utah Code. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.16.050 - Notice of utility termination or deficiencies. 
Before entering into a lease or rental agreement, the property owner shall disclose in writing to the tenant the following: 
A.  Any notice by a utility provider to terminate water, gas, electrical or other utility services to the dwelling unit or to common areas of the building, and the proposed date of termination; 
B.  Any current uncorrected building or health code violation included in a deficiency list or notice from the city, Salt Lake Valley health department, or any other government entity. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.16.060 - Property owner—Affirmative duties. 
A property owner has an affirmative duty to do the following unless the duty has been lawfully allocated to the tenant pursuant to existing state law: 
A.  Comply with the requirements of applicable building, housing, fire and health codes and city ordinances; 
B.  Maintain the structural integrity of the building; 
C.  Maintain floors in compliance with safe load-bearing requirements; 
D.  Provide exits, emergency egress, and light and ventilation in compliance with applicable codes, including egress windows, as defined in the current state building or fire code, for each bedroom in each rental dwelling, unless it is an excepted, currently existing window qualifying for exemption under Section 4.16.150; 
E.  Maintain stairways, porches, walkways and fire escapes in sound condition, including hand and guard rails required by applicable codes; 
F.  Provide operating smoke detectors (either battery operated or directly wired) and fire extinguisher as required by applicable code; 
G.  Provide operable sinks, toilets, tubs and/or showers; 
H.  Provide heating facilities as required by code; 
I.  Provide kitchen facilities as required; 
J.  Provide running, potable water; 
K.  Provide adequate hall and stairway lighting; 
L.  Maintain floors, walls and ceilings in a structurally sound condition; 
M.  Supply window screens where required by code; 
N.  Maintain foundation, masonry, chimneys, water heater and furnace in good working condition; 
O.  Prevent the accumulation of stagnant water in the interior of any premises; 
P.  Maintain in good and safe working order and condition all electrical, plumbing, sanitary, heating, ventilating, air conditioning, and other facilities and appliances supplied by the property owner as required by applicable codes; 
Q.  Provide and maintain appropriate garbage receptacles and arrange for timely garbage removal as required by code or ordinance; 
R.  Dispose of oil, electric batteries, and all other household hazardous waste or materials as required by federal, state, and local laws; 
S.  Provide electricity and hot water at all times, and heat during at least the months of October through April and as weather conditions might otherwise reasonably warrant, except where the dwelling unit is so constructed that electricity, heat or hot water is within the exclusive control of the tenant and supplied by a direct public utility connection; 
T.  Initiate pest control measures if reasonable proof of pest infestation has been established, provided that a property owner may not apply pesticide contrary to label directions; 
U.  Provide and maintain exterior doors including weather proofing; 
V.  Provide adequate locks to exterior doors and furnish keys to tenants, and occupancy separation doors, as required by current building and fire codes; 
W.  Maintain the dwelling unit in a reasonably insulated and weather tight condition as required by the Uniform Building, Housing and Utah State Energy Conservation Codes; 
X.  Ensure that repairs, decorations, alterations, or improvements, or showing the dwelling unit for rental or sale shall not unreasonably interfere with the tenants' right to quiet enjoyment of the premises; 
Y.  Provide a mailbox; and 
Z.  Provide separate meters for each tenant for gas and electricity or include charges for utility services in the rent; 
AA.  Provide ground fault circuit interrupter protected outlets in locations specified in applicable electric codes; and 
BB.  Provide a separate street address for each unit, as required by current fire codes. 
CC.  This section clarifies the property owner's duties identified in § 57-22-3 of the Utah Code, based on this community's standards for habitability. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.16.070 - Property owner—Prohibited activities. 
A property owner may not: 
A.  Rent the premises unless the premises are safe, sanitary, and fit for human occupancy; 
B.  Interrupt or disconnect utility services; or 
C.  Enter a rental unit without first complying with § 57-22-4(2) of the Utah Code and Section 4.16.090 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.16.080 - Tenant to maintain dwelling unit. 
A tenant has the affirmative duty to: 
A.  Comply with all appropriate requirements of the rental agreement and applicable provisions of building, housing and health codes; 
B.  Maintain the premises occupied in a clean and safe condition and not unreasonably burden any common area; 
C.  Dispose of all garbage and other waste in a clean and safe manner and shall not leave garbage or litter in hallways, porches, patios and other common areas; 
D.  Maintain all plumbing fixtures in as sanitary a condition as the fixtures permit and shall not obstruct sinks, toilets, tubs, showers and other plumbing drains; 
E.  Use all electrical, plumbing, sanitary, heating, and other facilities and appliances in a reasonable manner; 
F.  Not destroy, deface, damage, impair or remove any part of the premises or knowingly permit any person to do so; 
G.  Promptly inform the property owner of any defective conditions or problems at the premises; 
H.  Not interfere with the peaceful enjoyment of the residential rental unit of another renter; 
I.  Upon vacating the premises, restore the premises to their initial condition except for reasonable wear and tear or conditions caused by the property owner; 
J.  Be current on all payments required by the rental agreement; 
K.  Not increase the number of occupants above that specified in the rental agreement without written permission of the owners; 
L.  Not modify or paint the premises without the express permission of the property owner/agent; 
M.  Dispose of oil, car batteries, and other hazardous waste materials away from the rental premises, and in a manner prescribed by federal, state and local laws; and 
N.  Not require the owner to correct or remedy any condition caused by the renter, the renter's family or the renter's guests or invitees by inappropriate use of the property during the rental term or any extension of it. 
O.  This section clarifies the duties described in § 57-22-5 of the Utah Code, based on standards for habitability and tenant obligations in this community. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.16.090 - Access. 
A.  A tenant shall not unreasonably withhold consent to the property owner to enter into the dwelling unit in order to make necessary or agreed repairs, decorations, alterations, or improvements; or to exhibit the dwelling unit to prospective purchasers, tenants or work people. 
B.  A property owner may enter the dwelling unit without consent of the tenant in case of emergency. 
C.  Except in case of emergency the property owner shall give the tenant at least twenty-four (24) hours notice of plans to enter and may enter only between eight a.m. and ten p.m., unless the tenant expressly agrees to entry during other hours. 
D.  A property owner has no other right of access except: 
1.  Pursuant to court order; 
2.  To make repairs required by the tenant pursuant to Sections 8.40.150 and 8.40.160; or 
3.  Unless the tenant has abandoned the premises as defined in Section 78B-6-816, Utah Code Annotated, or any successor provision. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.16.100 - Property owner and tenant remedies for abuse of access. 
A.  If the tenant refuses to allow lawful access, the property owner may obtain an administrative court order by initiating a proceeding with the administrative law judge pursuant to Chapter 2.22 of this code. 
B.  If the property owner makes an unlawful entry or makes repeated demands for entry which harass the tenant, the tenant may obtain an administrative court order by initiating a proceeding with the administrative law judge pursuant to Chapter 2.22 of this code. 
C.  The party seeking the order bears the burden to establish the violation by a preponderance of the evidence. The administrative hearing fee shall be paid in advance by the party seeking relief, but may be ordered by the administrative law judge to be paid by a party which has had an order levied against it. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.16.110 - Failure to deliver possession. 
If the property owner fails to deliver possession of the dwelling unit to the tenant as promised in the rental agreement, rent abates until possession is delivered. Alternatively, the tenant may terminate the rental agreement by written notice to the property owner and recover all prepaid rent and security deposits. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.16.120 - Tenant remedies. 
A tenant's remedies under this chapter are limited to those described in § 57-22-6 of the Utah Code. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.16.130 - Retaliatory conduct prohibited. 
A.  A property owner may not terminate a rental agreement or bring or threaten to bring an eviction action because the tenant has in good faith: 
1.  Complained of code violations at the premises to a governmental agency, elected representative or public official charged with responsibility for enforcement of a building, housing, health or similar code; 
2.  Complained of a building, housing, health or similar code violation or an illegal property owner practice to a community organization or the news media; 
3.  Sought the assistance of a community organization or the news media to remedy a code violation or illegal property owner practice; 
4.  Requested the property owner to make repairs to the premises as required by this chapter, a building or health code, other regulation, or the residential rental agreement; or 
5.  Testified in any court or administrative proceeding concerning the condition of the premises. 
B.  A violation of this section is punishable by a fine in an amount to be established in the consolidated fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.16.140 - City business license suspension or revocation. 
The city business license of any property owner in violation of the provisions of this chapter may be suspended or revoked pursuant to Chapter 5.02 of the municipal code, with due regard to the severity of the offense, the property owner's acceptance of responsibility for violations, and the length of time the violation existed. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.16.150 - Installation of egress windows in bedrooms. 
A.  Egress windows must be provided for any bedroom of a rental dwelling. If all of the windows in an existing bedroom are smaller than those required by the current state building or fire code, one or more windows must be replaced with an approved egress window unless completing the alteration would unreasonably or impractically compromise the structural integrity of the building or violate building, fire, or land use codes in existence at the time of certification. 
B.  For purposes of subsection (A), a letter from a design professional certifying that adding or altering a bedroom window to comply with minimum egress standards will compromise the structural integrity of the building, or certifying that such a window cannot be installed in accordance with existing building, fire, or land use codes, shall be prima facie evidence that compliance with that subsection would be unreasonable or impractical. 
C.  If the housing inspector disagrees with the conclusions of the design professional and determines that adding or altering a bedroom window would not unreasonably or impractically compromise the structural integrity of the building or violate building, fire or land use codes, the inspector must support this determination with a second opinion of an alternate design professional, provide a copy of the second opinion to the landlord, and notify the landlord of their right to appeal. If no appeal is made, or the administrative law judge determines that the egress window should be installed, then the landlord shall install the egress windows. 
D.  A landlord is required to file a complete permit application to replace or install an egress window within thirty (30) days of the end of the appeal period, or of the date the administrative court makes its determination. The window must be installed within eight months from the date the completed permit application is turned into the community development department. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.16.160 - Enforcement remedies not exclusive. 
A.  In addition to other remedies provided by law, the city may institute injunctions, mandamus, abatement or any other appropriate legal actions. 
B.  The city's use of any particular remedy provided by law does not prevent the city from pursuing any other remedy, civil or criminal, as to the same or a similar offense against the same person who violates this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
Chapter 4.20 - APARTMENT NUISANCES 
 
4.20.010 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to impose a legal duty upon apartment complex owners to properly manage their properties to prevent them from deteriorating into havens for crime to the degree that a nuisance is created, ruining the safe, peaceful and quiet enjoyment of property of innocent tenants and of neighboring properties. The chapter creates a system to notify owners of the problems reasonably attributable to their properties and imposes civil fines upon owners who neglect to take reasonable actions to address problems. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.20.020 - Acts include causing, attempting, aiding and abetting. 
Whenever any act or omission is referred to or made unlawful in this chapter, it shall include causing, attempting, permitting, aiding or abetting such act or omission. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.20.030 - Duty to properly manage. 
Every owner of an apartment complex has a duty to provide adequate management to prevent the creation of a nuisance to innocent tenants and to neighboring properties, resulting from multiple incidents of criminal conduct by tenants and guests within a six-month period of time. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.20.040 - Nuisance declared. 
A.  Pursuant to Title 10, Chapter 8, Section 60, of the Utah Code, the city of South Salt Lake city council declares that the quiet enjoyment of property is intolerably impaired and a public nuisance exists when, despite giving notice to the owner and/or manager of an apartment complex: 
1.  Seven or more incidents of serious criminal conduct occur at an apartment complex within a six-month period of time. In any six-month period, each incident of serious criminal conduct in excess of seven shall constitute a separate nuisance and violation of this chapter; 
2.  Fifteen (15) or more incidents of minor offense occur at an apartment complex within a six-month period of time. In any six-month period, each minor offense incident in excess of fifteen (15) shall constitute a separate nuisance and violation of this chapter; or 
3.  Five or more incidents of serious criminal conduct in combination with ten or more incidents or minor offenses occur at an apartment complex within a six-month period of time. In any six-month period, each subsequent incident of serious criminal conduct in excess of five and each subsequent incident of a minor offense in excess of ten shall constitute a separate nuisance and violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.20.050 - Notice. 
A.  Timely notice of an incident of serious criminal conduct or minor offense shall be given by providing the owner and/or manager of an apartment complex a copy of relevant portions of the police report or citation pertaining to the incident no later than ten days after the city's report of the incident is prepared. 
B.  Sensitive information that the city reasonably believes may create the risk of retribution against a complainant or police informant, reveal police methods or tactics, result in the invasion of privacy of an individual or interfere with an ongoing police investigation may be redacted from the information provided. 
C.  The notice shall contain the information upon which the city bases its conclusion that the incident is linked to a tenant or guest of the apartment complex. An incident occurring inside an apartment inside of an apartment complex is prima facie evidence that it is linked to a tenant or guest of the apartment complex. 
D.  The notice will contain information, if available, to assist the owner and/or manger to identify the rental unit or units to which the incident is related. 
E.  The notice shall contain a statement that: 
1.  Seven incidents of serious criminal conduct or fifteen (15) minor offenses at an apartment complex within a six-month period constitute a nuisance and will result in the imposition of civil penalties; 
2.  Each incident of serious criminal conduct in excess of seven and each minor offense incident in excess of fifteen (15) in a six-month period of time will be considered to be a separate nuisance and result in a separate civil penalty; and 
3.  After an apartment complex has been the locale for a combination of five serious criminal incidents and ten minor offenses within a six-month period of time, each subsequent incident of either serious criminal conduct or minor offense in a six-month period shall be considered to be a separate nuisance and result in a separate civil penalty. 
F.  Service of notice shall be complete upon being delivered personally or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested and regular mail to the owner and/or manager at the address furnished to the city on the business license application for the apartment complex or the owner's address as reflected in the records of the Salt Lake County recorder or assessor's office. Service of notice is complete even if the certified or regular mail is returned as undeliverable, refused or unclaimed. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.20.060 - Reduction of penalty for obtaining good landlord certification. 
An owner that has received a civil penalty for maintaining a nuisance [in] an apartment complex and that, within sixty (60) days of receiving the penalty, obtains a good landlord certification, is entitled to a remittance of one-half the civil penalty and removal of the most recent incident from its record. The opportunity for an owner to receive a remittance of one-half of a civil penalty and removal of the most recent incident is only available once per landlord. This section does not permit a landlord to enroll in the good landlord program if the landlord's status under that program is currently suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.20.070 - Appeal. 
Any owner that receives a notice under this part shall be entitled to request an administrative hearing as set forth in Section 2.22.040 of this code. The failure to appeal a notice of any incident shall be deemed a waiver of the right to object to that incident being counted against the owner. The administrative law judge shall consider only the incident or nuisance for which an appeal was timely filed, and shall consider any non-appealed incidents as counting against the owner. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.20.080 - Defenses. 
A.  An incident shall not be counted against the owner of an apartment complex who can demonstrate the following: 
1.  The tenant or guest was the victim of a crime, and that crime was not committed by another tenant or guest to the rental property. 
2.  Where, due to federal law or regulation, an owner or manager lacks sufficient basis to evict a tenant, it shall be a defense that the owner or manager has taken reasonable measures to prevent reoccurrence of nuisance behavior by a tenant. 
B.  After eviction proceedings have been initiated against a tenant, a subsequent incident caused by the tenant or tenant's guest, while the eviction proceeding is pending, shall not be counted against the owner. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013) 
A civil penalty in the amount established in the consolidated fee schedule shall be assessed for each violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
Chapter 4.24 - MOBILE HOME PARKS AND TRAILER COURTS 
 
4.24.010 - Adopt county ordinance. 
The current Salt Lake City/County health regulations regarding mobile home parks shall apply to mobile home parks/trailer courts within the city of South Salt Lake. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.24.020 - Interpretation. 
The city-county ordinance is a supplement to this chapter and is intended to enlarge the scope thereof. Wherever conflicts exist between the two, the interpretation as set forth in this chapter shall prevail and take precedence except in such instances as the state statutes shall require more stringent rules for compliance therewith, in which case the requirements in the state code must be complied with. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.24.030 - License. 
It is unlawful for any person to maintain or operate a mobile home park within the limits of the city, unless such person shall first obtain a license therefor, except that the maintenance or operation of a mobile home park in existence on the effective date of this chapter may be continued under present license, provided it conforms with minimum regulations as set forth within this chapter, together with all existing ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.24.040 - License fees. 
The fee for such a license shall be determined in accordance with the consolidated fee schedule, or any subsequent superseding ordinance or resolution by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.24.050 - Permit fee. 
For the initial construction of a mobile home park there shall be a fee to be set by resolution of the city council and in addition the builder of such park shall be required to pay the usual building permit fee as required in the Uniform Building Code in effect at the time of construction. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.24.060 - Application for license. 
A.  Application for Initial License. Application for an initial mobile home park license shall be filed with and issued by the business license official upon approval by the board of health. The application shall be in writing, signed by the applicant and shall include the following: 
1.  The name and address of the applicant; 
2.  The location and legal description of the mobile home park; 
3.  A complete plan of the park in conformity with the requirements of this chapter; 
4.  Plans and specifications of all buildings, improvements and facilities constructed or to be constructed within the mobile home park; 
5.  The number, size, location and type of all mobile home spaces; 
6.  Such further information as may be requested by the board of health to enable it to determine if the proposed park will comply with legal requirements. 
The application and all accompanying plans and specifications shall be filed in triplicate. The board of health shall investigate the applicant and inspect the application and the proposed plans and specifications. If the applicant is of good moral character, and the proposed mobile home park will, when constructed or altered in accordance with such plans and specifications, be in compliance with all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable ordinances and statutes, the board of health shall approve the applications, and upon completion of the park according to the plans the business license official shall issue the license. 
B.  Application for Renewal License. Upon application in writing by a licensee for renewal of a license, and upon payment of the annual license fee, the business license official shall issue a certificate approving the renewing of such license for another year. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.24.070 - Location. 
Mobile home parks may be located in business/commercial/industrial zones only and shall have a minimum area of three acres. Each boundary of the park must be at least two hundred (200) feet from any permanent residential building located outside the park, unless separated therefrom by a natural or artificial barrier, consisting of a six-foot high fence, visual barrier, wall, or hedge properly related to surrounding topography and the character of the surrounding development shall be provided along such boundary, or unless a majority of the property owners, according to area within the two hundred (200) feet, consent in writing to the establishment of the park without such wall. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.24.080 - Mobile home park plan. 
The mobile home park shall conform to the following requirements: 
A.  The park shall be located on a well-drained site, properly graded to ensure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water. 
B.  Mobile home spaces shall be provided consisting of a minimum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet for each space which shall be at least thirty (30) feet wide and clearly defined; provided, however, that mobile home parks in existence on the effective date of this chapter which provide mobile home spaces having a width or area less than that hereinabove prescribed may continue to operate with spaces of the existing width and area, but in no event shall any mobile space be less than twenty-five (25) feet wide and have an area of less than one thousand (1,000) square feet. 
C.  Mobile homes shall be so harbored on each space that there shall be at least a fifteen-foot clearance between mobile homes, provided, however, that with respect to mobile homes parked end-to-end, the clearance may be less than fifteen (15) feet but shall not be less than ten feet. No mobile home shall be located closer than ten feet from any building within the park or from any property line bounding the park. 
D.  All mobile home spaces shall abut upon a driveway of not less than twenty (20) feet in width, which shall have unobstructed access to a public street, alley or highway. 
E.  Walkways not less than two feet wide shall be provided from the mobile home spaces to the service buildings. 
F.  All driveways and walkways within the park shall be hard surfaced and lighted at night with electric lamps of not less than twenty-five (25) watts each, spaced at intervals of not more than one hundred (100) feet. 
G.  Each park shall provide service buildings to house such toilet, bathing and other sanitation facilities and such laundry facilities as are hereinafter more particularly prescribed. 
H.  An electrical outlet supplying at least one hundred ten (110) volts shall be provided for each mobile home space. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.24.090 - Water supply. 
An adequate supply of pure water for drinking and domestic purposes shall be supplied by pipes to all buildings and mobile home spaces within the park to meet the requirements of the park. Each mobile home space shall be provided with a cold water tap at least four inches above the ground. An adequate supply of hot water shall be provided at all times in the service buildings for all bathing, washing, cleansing and laundry facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.24.100 - Sanitation facilities. 
Each park accommodating dependent mobile homes shall be provided with toilets, baths or showers, slop sinks and other sanitation facilities which shall conform to the following requirements: 
A.  Toilet facilities for males shall consist of not less than one flush toilet and one urinal for the first fifteen (15) dependent mobile homes or any less number thereof, and for dependent mobile homes in excess of fifteen (15), not less than one additional flush toilet and one additional urinal for every fifteen (15) additional dependent mobile homes or fractional number thereof. 
B.  Toilet facilities for females shall consist of not less than one flush toilet for the first ten dependent mobile homes or any less number thereof, and for dependent mobile homes in excess of ten, not less than one additional flush toilet for every ten additional dependent mobile homes or fractional number thereof. 
C.  Each sex shall be provided with not less than one lavatory and one shower or bathtub with individual dressing accommodations for the first ten dependent mobile homes or any less number thereof, and for dependent mobile homes in excess of ten, not less than one additional lavatory and one additional shower or bathtub with individual dressing accommodations for every ten additional dependent mobile homes or fractional number thereof. 
D.  Each toilet and each shower or bathtub with individual dressing accommodations, for which provision is made in subsections (A), (B) and (C) of this section, shall be in a private compartment or stall. 
E.  The toilet and other sanitation facilities for males and females shall be either in separate buildings or shall be separated, if in the same building, by a soundproof wall. 
F.  There shall be provided in a separate compartment or stall not less than one flush toilet bowl receptacle for emptying bed pans or other containers or human excreta and an adequate supply of hot running water, for cleansing such bed pans or containers. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.24.110 - Laundry facilities. 
A.  Laundry facilities shall be provided in either of the following ratios: 
1.  Not less than one double laundry tray and one conventional wringer type washing machine for the first twenty-five (25) mobile home spaces or any less number thereof, and for mobile home spaces in excess of twenty-five (25), not less than one additional conventional wringer type washing machine for every twenty-five (25) additional home spaces or fractional number thereof; or 
2.  Not less than one single laundry tray and one automatic or semi-automatic type washing machine for the first twenty-five (25) mobile home spaces or any less number thereof, and for mobile home spaces in excess of twenty-five (25), not less than one additional single laundry tray and one additional automatic or semi-automatic type washing machine for every twenty-five (25) additional mobile home spaces or fractional number thereof. 
B.  An ample number of electrical outlets shall be provided supplying current sufficient to operate each washing machine. Drying spaces shall be provided sufficient to accommodate the laundry of the mobile home occupants if automatic drying equipment is not supplied. 
C.  The laundry facilities shall be either in a separate building or, if [in] the same building where sanitation facilities are housed, shall be separated from the rooms housing the sanitation facilities by a soundproof wall. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.24.120 - Service buildings. 
A.  Service buildings housing sanitation and laundry facilities, or any of such facilities, shall be permanent structures complying with all applicable ordinances and statutes regulating buildings, electrical installations and plumbing and sanitation systems. 
B.  The service buildings shall be well lighted at all times of the day and night, shall be well ventilated with screened openings, shall be constructed of such moisture-proof material, including painted woodwork, as shall permit repeated cleaning and washing, and shall be maintained at a temperature of at least sixty-eight (68) degrees Fahrenheit during the period from October 1st to May 1st. The floors of the service buildings shall be of water impervious material. 
C.  Service buildings housing sanitation facilities shall be located not closer than ten feet nor farther than two hundred (200) feet from any mobile home space upon which a dependent mobile home is harbored. 
D.  All service buildings and the grounds of the park shall be maintained in a clean, sightly condition and kept free of any condition that will menace the health of any occupant or the public or constitute a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.24.130 - Sewage and refuse disposal. 
A.  Waste from showers, bathtubs, flush toilets, urinals, lavatories, slop sinks and laundries in service and other buildings within the park shall be discharged into a public sewer system in compliance with applicable ordinances or into a private sewer and disposal plant or septic tank system of such construction and in such manner as will present no health hazard. 
B.  Each mobile home space shall be provided with a trapped sewer at least four inches in diameter, which shall be connected to receive the waste from the shower, bathtub, flush toilet, lavatory and kitchen sink of the mobile home harbored in such space and having any or all such facilities. The trapped sewer in each space shall be connected to discharge the mobile home waste into a public sewer system in compliance with applicable ordinances or into a private sewer disposal plant or septic tank system of such construction and in such manner as will present no health hazard. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.24.140 - Garbage receptacles. 
Metal garbage cans with tight-fitting covers shall be provided in quantities adequate to permit disposal of all garbage and rubbish. Garbage cans shall be located not farther than three hundred (300) feet from any mobile home space. The cans shall be kept in sanitary condition at all times. Garbage and rubbish shall be collected and disposed of as frequently as may be necessary to ensure that the garbage cans shall not overflow. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.24.150 - Fire protection. 
Every park shall be equipped at all times with fire extinguishing equipment in good working order, of such type, size and number and so located within the park as to satisfy applicable reasonable regulations of the fire department. No open fires shall be permitted any place which may endanger life or property. No fires shall be left unattended at any time. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.24.160 - Animals and pets. 
No owner or person in charge of any dog, cat or other pet animal shall permit it to run at large or commit any nuisance within the limits of any mobile home park. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.24.170 - Register of occupants. 
It is the duty of each licensee and permittee to keep a register containing a record of all mobile home owners and occupants located within the park. The register shall contain the following information: 
A.  The name and address of each mobile home occupant; 
B.  The name and address of the owner of each mobile home and motor vehicle by which it is towed; 
C.  The make, model, year and license number of each mobile home and motor vehicle; 
D.  The state, territory or country issuing such licenses; 
E.  The date of arrival and of departure of each mobile home; 
F.  Whether or not each mobile home is a dependent or independent mobile home. 
The park shall keep the register available for inspection at all times by law enforcement officers, public health officials and other officials whose duties necessitate acquisition of the information contained in the register. The register record for each occupant registered shall not be destroyed for a period of three years following the date of departure of the registrant from the park. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.24.180 - Supervision. 
The licensee or permittee, or a duly authorized attendant or caretaker, shall be in charge at all times to keep the mobile home park, its facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition. The attendant or caretaker shall be answerable, with the licensee, for the violation of any provision of this chapter to which the licensee or permittee is subject. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.24.190 - Revocation of license. 
The business license official, upon recommendation of the board of health, may revoke any license to maintain and operate a park when the licensee has been found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter. After such conviction, the license may be reissued if the circumstances leading to conviction have been remedied and the park is being maintained and operated in full compliance with law. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.24.200 - Posting of license. 
The license certificate shall be conspicuously posted in the office of or on the premises of the mobile home park at all times. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.24.210 - Separability of provisions. 
Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.24.220 - City-county health department enforcement. 
The city-county health department by agreement previously executed may enforce on behalf of the city of South Salt Lake any violation of a health or sanitation ordinance as covered by the ordinance adopted by reference in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
Chapter 4.28 - HOUSING INSPECTOR 
 
4.28.010 - Duties. 
A.  The city may employ a housing inspector in order to achieve compliance with Title 4 of this code. The housing inspector may: 
1.  Conduct inspections of rental dwellings to the extent permitted by state law; 
2.  Identify and abate violations of this code relating to rental dwellings; 
3.  Investigate complaints of unsanitary living conditions in all rental dwellings located within the city, or unsafe conditions in any dwelling located within the city; 
4.  Close dwellings to occupancy in cases of serious safety violations as provided in Section 4.28.030. 
B.  Any city employee or independent contractor who holds a building inspector certification issued by the state of Utah's Division of Occupational and Professional Licensing may be assigned the housing inspector's duties. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.28.020 - Right to inspect rental dwellings. 
A.  The housing inspector may demand entry into any rental dwelling within the city, to the extent permitted by state law, in order to accomplish a regulatory search for health, safety and sanitation violations. 
1.  If entry to the dwelling is denied by a tenant, the inspector shall not enter without obtaining a warrant to enter the premises, unless other exigencies make the entry reasonable. 
2.  Inspections of occupied dwellings shall be made during daytime hours and shall be limited to identifying violations of health, safety and fit premises codes. 
3.  Inspection reports shall be created for each inspection. 
4.  Within ten business days after completing the inspection, the inspector shall send or deliver a copy of the inspection report to the owner and manager of the dwelling. The inspector shall establish reasonable deadlines for the owner to remedy any identified violations, after which deadlines the owner shall be subject to fines as established in the consolidated fee schedule. 
5.  If a rental property is being kept in violation of the state or city's fit premises laws, the time allowed for repair shall be as provided in Section 57-22-6 of the Utah Code. In cases where permits must be drawn to perform the work, deadlines relate to the acquisition of permits. 
6.  A landlord who causes all tenants to vacate the defective dwelling unit during a corrective period is not in violation so long as the rental dwelling remains unoccupied. 
B.  Premises found to be in violation shall be subject to re-inspection to ensure compliance, and shall be subject to inspection until compliance is obtained. 
C.  Premises shall be subject to inspection upon reasonable cause to believe that violations of applicable codes exist, as described in Section 4.28.030. 
D.  An owner or manager who refuses to provide access to the housing inspector, or who ignores requests to obtain access, shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor and is subject to additional civil penalties, including business license suspension and decertification from the good landlord program. A tenant's refusal to allow access to a specific unit shall not be grounds to suspend, revoke or deny the landlord's license. It is not a defense under this subsection that the owner or manager would have allowed a different city inspector onto the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.28.030 - Cause for inspections. 
A.  The inspector may inspect rental housing in any of the following circumstances: 
1.  Upon receipt of a complaint by tenants or owners regarding conditions or violations at the property; 
2.  Upon the discovery of facts or conditions in one unit which are reasonably likely to be present in multiple units within the rental property; 
3.  Upon the discovery of facts through external inspection of units which give rise to cause to believe that violations exist within the units; 
4.  Upon the complaint of a third party, whether a resident of the property or not, of public nuisances originating at a unit or series of units, such as odor or noise; 
5.  Pursuant to a conditional use inspection program, if one exists for the property at issue; 
6.  Upon referral by another governmental agency of a potentially dangerous condition at the property; 
7.  Upon receipt of any other credible facts or reports giving rise to a belief that conditions on the property are inadequate or in violation of state or local law; or 
8.  Upon receipt of consent for a voluntary inspection by a tenant. 
B.  Premises found to be in violation shall be subject to re-inspection as the inspector deems appropriate to ensure compliance, and shall be subject to continuing inspections until compliance is obtained. Failure to bring the units into compliance within a reasonable time as determined by the community development department shall be grounds for denial, suspension or revocation of a business license and/or application or other applicable penalties and actions allowed under law. 
C.  If a rental property is in violation of the state or city's fit premises laws, the time allowed for repair shall be as provided in Section 57-22-6 of the Utah Code. A landlord who chooses to relocate a tenant during a corrective period is not in violation so long as the rental dwelling remains unoccupied while the repairs are underway. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.28.040 - Authority to evacuate, condemn or close to occupancy. 
A.  The housing inspector may close to occupancy any rental dwelling unit within the city which constitutes a serious safety violation and which has not been corrected within the deadlines established by the inspector. Closure to occupancy shall be reserved for violations of safety codes and which warrant prompt action under those codes. 
B.  The housing inspector may, immediately and without prior notification of violation, evacuate and close to occupancy any dwelling which presents an imminent threat to the lives of any human occupant. A threat to life safety is imminent if the continued presence of the occupant is likely to result in the death or permanent physical injury of the occupant. Life safety dangers include such hazards as detectable concentrations of carbon monoxide or structural inadequacies likely to result in collapse. 
C.  Occupancy shall not be resumed until the conditions are corrected and the housing inspector has determined that the property is in compliance with relevant codes. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
4.28.050 - Appeals—Temporary stays. 
A.  Appeal may be taken by any person aggrieved by the housing inspector's decision, and may be filed in accordance with Chapter 22 of Title 2 of this code. 
B.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, an appeal of a closure to occupancy does not automatically stay the imposition of that closure. 
C.  In appeals from closures to occupancy, the case shall be heard on the next available administrative law calendar, unless the parties agree to a continuance or the administrative law judge finds that a party will be unable to attend or present the party's evidence due to unforeseen circumstances. Failure to obtain counsel or prepare a case is not good cause to obtain a continuance. An appealing party who requests a continuance waives any objection to the closure to occupancy remaining in place. 
D.  After filing an appeal, the appealing party may request a stay of the closure while the appeal is pending. 
1.  The administrative law judge, within two business days of the city's receipt of the stay request, shall review the city's evidence, which may include photographs, excerpts of code, and reports, and consider whether there is a reasonable likelihood that the order will be upheld. No briefing or oral argument may be considered by the administrative law judge when considering a stay, but the appealing party may present, with the stay request, a statement explaining why closure should not proceed. 
2.  If the administrative law judge finds that the evidence presented by the official does not support a reasonable likelihood that the closure to occupancy is justified, then it shall stay the closure pending the hearing. 
3.  Within twenty-four (24) hours of receipt of the administrative law judge's decision to stay the closure, a city official shall remove the closure and inform the appealing party of the judge's decision. 
4.  The stay, if granted, shall be in effect until the next available administrative law hearing, at which time the court may extend the stay for good cause. 
5.  Any decision regarding temporary stays may not be appealed to the district court, being provisional in nature. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 10-11-2013)  
Chapter 4.32 - HOUSING DISCRIMINATION 
 
4.32.010 - Purpose. 
A.  Every individual in the city has the right to seek housing. Discriminatory housing practices are detrimental because they impede the social and economic progress of the city by preventing all of the city's citizens from contributing to or fully participating in the cultural, spiritual, social and commercial life of the community, which is essential to the growth and vitality of the city's neighborhoods and businesses. 
B.  The Utah Fair Housing Act, Utah Code Section 57-21-1 et seq., addresses housing related discrimination based on race; color; religion; sex; national origin; familial status; source of income; and disability, but does not address discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity. 
C.  South Salt Lake City has found that discrimination in housing on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity must be addressed. The denial or deprivation of access to housing because of an individual's sexual orientation or gender identity is detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of the city's citizens and damages the city's economic well being. The purpose of this chapter is to provide a clear and comprehensive mandate for the prevention and elimination of discrimination in housing in the city against individuals based upon sexual orientation or gender identity and this chapter shall be liberally construed to achieve that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2013-05, 2-14-2013)  
4.32.020 - Administration. 
The mayor is responsible for administering and implementing this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-05, 2-14-2013)  
4.32.030 - No private right of action; no special rights. 
This chapter does not create a private cause of action, nor does it create any right or remedy that is the same or substantially equivalent to the remedies provided under federal or state law. This chapter does not create any special rights or privileges which would not be available to all of the city's citizens because every person has a sexual orientation and a gender identity. 
(Ord. No. 2013-05, 2-14-2013)  
4.32.040 - Severability. 
If any section, sentence, paragraph, term, definition or provision of this chapter is for any reason determined to be illegal, invalid, superseded by other authority or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction or by any state or federal regulatory authority having jurisdiction thereof, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such determination shall have no effect on the validity of any other section, sentence, paragraph, term, definition or provision of this chapter, all of which will remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2013-05, 2-14-2013)  
4.32.050 - Definitions. 
The following terms are defined solely for the purposes of this chapter: 
"City" shall mean the City of South Salt Lake, Utah. 
"City attorney" shall mean the duly appointed city attorney. 
"Community development director" shall mean the duly appointed community development director. 
"Complainant" shall mean a person, including the community development director, who files a complaint under this chapter. 
"Conciliation" shall mean the attempted resolution of issues raised in a complaint filed under this chapter, or raised in the investigation of the complaint, through informal negotiations involving the complainant, the respondent, and the housing administrator. 
"Conciliation agreement" shall mean a written agreement setting forth the resolution of issues by conciliation under this chapter. 
"Discrimination" shall mean any direct or indirect exclusion, distinction, segregation, limitation, refusal, denial, or other differentiation in the treatment of a person or persons because of a person's actual or perceived sexual orientation or gender identity or because of a person's association with any such person. Discrimination shall not be interpreted to require or to grant or accord preferential treatment to any person because of that person's sexual orientation or gender identity. 
"Dwelling" shall mean any building or portion thereof which is designed for use as residential purposes, except hotels, mobile homes, motels and apartment complexes, that has been approved for residential use by the city's building official. 
"Gender identity" shall mean a person's actual or perceived gender identity, appearance, mannerisms, or other characteristics of a person with or without regard to the person's sex at birth. 
"Housing administrator" shall mean the person designated by the mayor to receive, investigate, and conciliate complaints under this chapter, or another designated representative of the city. 
"Mayor" shall mean the duly elected or appointed and qualified mayor of Salt Lake City. 
"Person" includes one or more individuals, corporations, limited liability companies, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in cases under the United States bankruptcy code, receivers, and fiduciaries. 
"Real estate broker or salesperson" shall mean a principal real estate broker, an associate real estate broker, or a real estate sales agent as those terms are defined in Utah Code Section 61-2-2 or any successor provision. 
"Religious organization" shall mean a religious corporation, association, educational institution, society, trust, or any entity or association which is a wholly owned or controlled subsidiary or agency of any religious corporation, association, society, trust or corporation sole. 
"Rent" shall mean to lease, sublease, let, or otherwise grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
"Residential real estate related transaction" shall mean the making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial assistance for purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling; or secured by residential real estate; or selling, brokering, or appraising residential real property inside the city. 
"Respondent" shall mean a person identified in a complaint as having committed an unlawful housing practice under this chapter. 
"Sexual orientation" shall mean a person's actual or perceived orientation as heterosexual, homosexual, or bisexual. 
"Unlawful practice" shall mean a discriminatory act or practice relating to housing that is prohibited under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-05, 2-14-2013)  
4.32.060 - Exemptions. 
A.  This chapter does not apply to a temporary or permanent residence facility operated by a nonprofit organization; a charitable organization; or a person in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society, including any dormitory operated by a public or private educational institution, if the discrimination is based on sexual orientation or gender identity for reasons of personal modesty or privacy or in the furtherance of a religious organization's sincerely held religious beliefs. 
B.  This chapter does not prohibit or restrict a religious organization or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings it owns or operates for primarily noncommercial purposes to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons. 
C.  This chapter does not prohibit distinctions based on a person's inability or failure to fulfill the terms and conditions, including financial obligations, of a lease, rental agreement, contract of purchase or sale, mortgage, trust deed, or other financing agreement. 
D.  This chapter does not apply to: a) the United States government, any of its departments or agencies, or any corporation wholly owned by it; or b) the government of the state of Utah or any of its departments, agencies, or political subdivisions, except for the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-05, 2-14-2013)  
4.32.070 - Unlawful housing practices. 
A.  Discriminatory Housing Practices. It is a discriminatory housing practice to do any of the following: 
1.  Refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental, or otherwise deny or make unavailable any dwelling from any person because of the person's sexual orientation or gender identity; 
2.  Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of the sale or rental of any dwelling or in providing facilities or services in connection with the dwelling because of the person's sexual orientation or gender identity; 
3.  Represent to any person that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when in fact the dwelling is available; 
4.  Make a representation orally or in writing or make, print, circulate, publish, post, or cause to be made, printed, circulated, published, or posted any notice, statement, or advertisement, or to use any application form for the sale or rental of a dwelling, that directly or indirectly expresses any preference, limitation, or discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity, or expresses any intent to make any such preference, limitation, or discrimination; 
5.  Induce or attempt to induce, for profit, any person to buy, sell, or rent any dwelling by making representations about the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of persons of a particular sexual orientation or gender identity; 
6.  Engage in any discriminatory housing practices because of sexual orientation or gender identity based upon a person's association with another person. 
B.  Discriminatory Housing Practice by Broker or Salesperson. It is a discriminatory housing practice for a real estate broker or salesperson to do any of the following because of a person's sexual orientation or gender identity: 
1.  Discriminate against any person in making available a residential real estate transaction, or in the terms or conditions of the transaction, inside the city, because of a person's sexual orientation or gender identity; 
2.  Deny any person access to, or membership or participation in, any multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization, or other service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings inside the city or to discriminate against any person in the terms or conditions of access, membership, or participation in the organization, service, or facility inside the city because of a person's sexual orientation or gender identity; or 
3.  Engage in any discriminatory housing practices inside the city because of sexual orientation or gender identity based upon a person's association with another person. 
C.  Exceptions. This chapter does not apply to the following: 
1.  The sale or rental of any single-family dwelling, if the owner: 
a.  Does not own an interest in or title to four or more single-family dwellings held for lease or sale at one time located inside the city; 
b.  Has not sold two or more single-family dwellings inside the city in which the owner did not reside in the dwelling within the twenty-four-month period preceding the sale or rental of the dwelling; and 
c.  Does not use the services or facilities of any real estate broker, agent, or salesperson, or of any other person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, in connection with the sale or rental of the dwelling inside the city. 
2.  The rental of a dwelling that is occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other, when the owner actually maintains and occupies part of the dwelling as a residence. 
3.  Nothing in this section prohibits conduct against a person because of the person's conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance under state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2013-05, 2-14-2013)  
4.32.080 - Unlawful intimidation, retaliation, and coercion. 
It is unlawful for any person to discriminate against, harass, threaten, harm, damage, or otherwise penalize another person for opposing an unlawful practice, for filing a complaint, or for testifying, assisting, or participating in any manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-05, 2-14-2013)  
4.32.090 - Procedures for filing complaints. 
A.  Any person who claims to have been injured by an unlawful housing practice may file a complaint with the city recorder. A complaint may also be filed by the community development director if the city has reasonable cause to believe that a person has committed an unlawful housing practice. A complaint must be filed within one hundred eighty (180) calendar days after an alleged unlawful housing practice has occurred. 
B.  A complaint must be in writing on a form provided by the city recorder, made under oath or affirmation, and contain the following information: 
1.  The complainant's name, address, and signature; 
2.  The date the alleged unlawful housing practice occurred; 
3.  A statement of the facts upon which the allegation of an unlawful practice is based; and 
4.  The respondent's name and address. 
C.  Promptly after the filing of a complaint, the housing administrator shall: 
1.  Provide the respondent named in the complaint written notice that a complaint alleging the commission of an unlawful housing practice has been filed against the respondent; 
2.  Furnish a copy of the complaint to the respondent; and 
3.  Advise the respondent of the respondent's procedural rights and obligations, including the right to file a written, signed, and verified informal answer to the complaint within fifteen (15) days after service of notice of the complaint. 
D.  Not later than the fifteenth day after service of the notice and copy of the complaint, a respondent may file an answer to the complaint with the housing administrator. The answer must be in writing, made under oath or affirmation, and contain the following information: 
1.  The respondent's name, address, telephone number, and signature of the respondent or the respondent's attorney, if any; and 
2.  A concise statement of facts in response to the allegations in the complaint, including facts of any defense or exception. 
(Ord. No. 2013-05, 2-14-2013)  
4.32.100 - Investigation. 
A.  Upon the filing of a complaint, the housing administrator shall commence an investigation to determine the facts behind the complaint and whether there is reasonable cause to believe the respondent committed an unlawful housing practice, except that no investigation may commence if, after reviewing the allegations of the complaint, the housing administrator determines that the complaint does not come within the scope of this chapter. Upon determining that a particular complaint does not come within the scope of this chapter, the housing administrator shall dismiss the complaint, notify the complainant and the respondent and take no further action. 
B.  In connection with any investigation of a complaint filed under this chapter, the housing administrator shall seek the voluntary cooperation of any person to: 
1.  Obtain access to premises, records, documents, individuals, and any other possible source of information; 
2.  Examine, record, and copy necessary materials; and 
3.  Take and record testimony or statements of any person reasonably necessary for the furtherance of the investigation. 
C.  The community development director may request the city attorney to issue an executive branch subpoena or subpoena duces tecum to compel the attendance of a witness or the production of relevant materials or documents. 
D.  The community development director may dismiss a complaint during the investigation if the housing administrator determines that: 
1.  The complaint was not filed within the required time period; 
2.  The location of the alleged unlawful housing practice is not within the city's jurisdiction; 
3.  The alleged unlawful housing practice is not a violation of this chapter; 
4.  The complainant refuses to cooperate with the housing administrator in the investigation of the complaint or enforcement of an executed conciliation agreement; 
5.  The complainant cannot be located after the housing administrator has performed a reasonable search; or 
6.  A conciliation agreement has been executed by the complainant and respondent. 
(Ord. No. 2013-05, 2-14-2013)  
4.32.110 - Conciliation. 
A.  During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the mailing of the notice of the complaint to the respondent, the housing administrator shall, at the request of the community development director, attempt to conciliate the complaint if it appears that the respondent has committed an unlawful housing practice. In conciliating a complaint, the administrator shall try to achieve a just resolution and obtain assurances that the respondent will satisfactorily remedy any violation of the complainant's rights and take action to ensure the elimination of both present and future unlawful housing practices. A conciliation agreement may include: sensitivity training for the respondent and/or the respondent's employees; the respondent's agreement to adopt and pursue a policy of nondiscrimination in its practices; and the respondent's agreement to not engage in discriminatory practices in the future. 
B.  A conciliation agreement executed under this section must be in writing in a form approved by the city attorney and must be signed and verified by the respondent and the complainant, subject to approval of the community development director who shall indicate approval by signing the agreement. 
C.  If a respondent voluntarily enters into a conciliation agreement, the community development director shall immediately dismiss the complaint. 
(Ord. No. 2013-05, 2-14-2013)  
4.32.120 - Disposition of a complaint. 
A.  If, upon completion of an investigation of a complaint, the community development director determines that an unlawful housing practice has occurred and is unable to secure an acceptable conciliation agreement from the respondent, then the community development director shall refer the case to the city attorney. The community development director shall refer the entire file to the city attorney, who shall determine how best to pursue further action, if any, on the complaint. 
B.  If the city attorney determines that cause exists that an unlawful housing practice occurred and the facts are sufficient to warrant the initiation of an administrative action, then the city attorney shall provide written notification to the respondent and the complainant that an action to enforce this chapter may be submitted to the administrative law judge. If the city attorney determines that there is no cause that an unlawful housing practice occurred or that the facts are insufficient to warrant the initiation of an action by the administrative law judge, the city attorney shall provide written notification to the respondent and the complainant and notify the community development director, who shall then dismiss the complaint. 
(Ord. No. 2013-05, 2-14-2013)  
4.32.130 - Offenses and penalties. 
A person violates this chapter if the person intentionally or knowingly violates a provision of this chapter or if the person intentionally or knowingly obstructs or prevents compliance with this chapter. An offense committed under this chapter by a respondent owning or operating twenty (20) or fewer dwellings is punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). An offense committed under this chapter by a respondent owning or operating twenty-one (21) or more dwellings or by a real estate broker or salesperson is punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 2013-05, 2-14-2013)  
4.32.140 - Record designation. 
Complaints, notices, conciliation agreements and any other records created or received under this chapter are designated as private documents under Utah law. These records will contain data on individuals' sexual orientation, gender identity and other matters of a personal nature, rendering the public release of any such documents a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy. A document filed with the administrative law judge is presumed to be public, so long as private information is redacted prior to its release. 
(Ord. No. 2013-05, 2-14-2013)  
TITLE 5 - BUSINESS LICENSING[1] 
Chapters: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2020-02, § II, adopted Jan. 8, 2020, repealed Title 5, Chapters 5.02—5.64. Section II, Exhibit A of said ordinances reenacted Title 5, Chapters 5.01—5.64, as set out herein. Formerly, Title 5 pertained to business taxes, licenses and regulations, and derived from Ord. 97-23 § 1 (Att. A (part)); Ord. 99-1 § 1 (part); Ord. 99-9 § 1 (part); Ord. 99-18 §§ 1—4; Ord. 2000-7 § 1; Ord. 2001-03 § 1 (part); Ord. 2003-11 (part); Ord. 2005-10 (part); Ord. 2005-12 (part); Ord. 2006-06 (part); Ord. 97-23 § 1 (Att. A (part)); Ord. 2006-07 (part); Ord. 2008-03 (part); Ord. 2005-17 (part); Ord. 2005-12 (part); Ord. 2008-20 (part); Ord. 2006-06 (part); Ord. 2008-21 (part); Ord. 2003-11 (part); Ord. 2008-21 (part); Ord. No. 2009-04, adopted June 4, 2009; Ord. No. 2012-19, adopted Nov. 15, 2012; Ord. No. 2013-14, adopted Oct. 11, 2013; Ord. No. 2014-05, adopted March 26, 2014; Ord. No. 2015-17, adopted June 17, 2015; Ord. No. 2016-20, adopted Aug. 10, 2016; Ord. No. 2016-25, adopted Nov. 16, 2016; and Ord. No. 2017-27, § 2, adopted Dec. 6, 2017. 
 
Chapter 5.01 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
5.01.010. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this Title the following terms shall have their prescribed meanings: 
"Adult Bookstore, Adult Video store, or Adult Device Store" means a commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business activities, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, digital video discs, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of Specified Sexual Activities, Specified Anatomical Areas, or Sexual Devices as defined in this Title. A "principal business activity" exists where the commercial establishment meets any one or more of the following criteria: 
A.  At least thirty (30) percent of the establishment's displayed merchandise consists of said items; 
B.  At least thirty (30) percent of the retail value (defined as the price charged to customers) of the establishment's displayed merchandise consists of said items; 
C.  At least thirty (30) percent of the establishment's revenues derive from the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of said items; 
D.  The establishment maintains at least thirty (30) percent of its floor space for the display, sale, and/or rental of said items (aisles and walkways used to access said items shall be included in "floor space" maintained for the display, sale, or rental of said items); 
E.  The establishment maintains at least five hundred (500) square feet of its floor space for the display, sale, and/or rental of said items (aisles and walkways used to access said items shall be included in "floor space" maintained for the display, sale, or rental of said items); 
F.  The establishment regularly offers for sale or rental at least two thousand (2,000) of said items; 
G.  The establishment regularly features said items and regularly advertises itself or holds itself out, in any medium, by using "adult," "adults-only,' "XXX," "sex," "erotic," or substantially similar language, as an establishment that caters to adult sexual interests; or 
H.  The establishment maintains an "adult arcade," which means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are characterized by their emphasis upon matter exhibiting Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas. 
"Act of Violence" means the use of physical force or power, threatened or actual, that either results in or has a high likelihood of resulting in injury, death, psychological harm, or property damage. 
"Adult Cabaret" means a business that regularly features live conduct characterized by Semi-Nudity. No establishment shall avoid classification as an Adult Cabaret by offering or featuring Nudity. 
"Adult Motion Picture Theater" means a commercial establishment where films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions characterized by their emphasis upon the display of Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas are regularly shown to more than five persons for any form of consideration. 
"Amusement Device" means any machine, device, or contrivance, not prohibited or declared unlawful by the City or the state of Utah, designed or intended to be operated or used for amusement or the playing of a game upon or in exchange for paying a fee or inserting a coin or token. 
"Auction" means a competitive sale of property by outcry or signal to the highest bidder. 
"Auctioneer" means any Person who conducts an auction. 
"Auction House" means a permanent Place of Business where auctions are conducted, and personal property is sold at auction. 
"Business Activity" means any pursuit within City limits carried on for the purpose of economic gain or profit, excluding the acts of an employee rendering service to their employer within the scope of their employment contract, unless otherwise proscribed. 
"Business Owner" means the Person or Persons Engaged in Business within South Salt Lake City. 
"Change in Ownership" means (1) for a sole proprietorship: when the proprietor sells or transfers the business to any other individual, group, or entity; (2) for a partnership: when there is a change in the controlling percentage of the partnership, as compared to the partnership that existed at the time of the initial application; (3) for a corporation: when there is a change in any officer or director, or a change in any individual or entity holding twenty (20) percent or more of the shares of stock from the time of the initial application; and (4) for a limited liability company: when there is a change in the limited liability company's management or a change in any individual or entity owning twenty (20) percent or more of the company from the time of the initial application. 
"Charitable Group" means any group, organization, association, or other entity that holds itself out to be a benevolent, educational, voluntary, philanthropic, humane, patriotic, religious or eleemosynary, social welfare or advocacy, public health, environmental or conservation, civic, or public safety, law enforcement, or firefighter organization which is located or has members residing in the City of South Salt Lake. 
"City Event" means any City-planned festival, celebration, function, or gathering within the City limits, including but not limited to the Fourth of July Celebration, Huck Finn Day, Halloween, or the "City Night Out." 
"Coin Dealer" means any Person Engaged in the Business of buying or selling coins having numismatic value. 
"Criminal Conduct" means any of the following offenses that has the Place of Business as its locus, and can be reasonably linked to a patron, invitee, Manager, owner or employee of the business, or a resident or occupant of the Place of Business (all references are to the Utah Code): any offense designated as a felony under Utah law; the unlawful sale, manufacture, service, storage, distribution, dispensing or acquisition of any controlled substance, precursor, paraphernalia or analog specified in Title 58, Chapter 37, Controlled Substances, Chapter 37a, Paraphernalia; Chapter 37b, Imitation Controlled Substances, Chapter 37c, Precursors or Chapter 37d, Clandestine Labs; an offense involving any form of abuse of a child or violence or the threat of violence against any person as defined in Title 76, Chapter 5, Offenses Against the Person; an offense involving intentional damage to property as defined in Title 76, Chapter 6, Part 1, an offense relating to burglary of a vehicle or possession of burglary tools as defined in Title 76, Chapter 6, Part 2; an offense involving any form of theft as defined in Title 76, Chapter 9, Part 4; riot or failure to disperse as defined in Title 76, Chapter 9, Part 1; an offense involving any form of animal fighting as defined in Title 76, Chapter 9, Part 3; an offense involving lewdness or voyeurism as defined in Title 76, Chapter 9, Part 7; an offense involving a dangerous weapon as defined in Title 76, Chapter 10, Part 5; an offense involving a nuisance as defined in Title 76, Chapter 10, Part 8; any offense prohibited by Title 9; gambling permitted to be played, conducted or dealt as prohibited in Title 76, Chapter 10, Part 11, Gambling; or prostitution or promotion of prostitution carried on by one or more persons as provided in Title 76, Chapter 10, Part 13, Prostitution. 
"Dealer" means a Person Engaged in the Business of buying or selling goods. 
"Disqualifying History" means a Person convicted of—including pleas of guilty, no contest, nolo contendere, or any other plea whereby punishment may be imposed upon the defendant, and including a plea which is held in abeyance, regardless of whether it was ultimately dismissed—(1) a felony under federal law or state law; (2) a violation of a federal law, state law, or local ordinance concerning the sale, offer for sale, warehousing, manufacture, distribution, transportation, or adulteration of an alcoholic product within the preceding ten (10) years; (3) a crime involving Moral Turpitude within the preceding ten (10) years; or (4) on two or more occasions within the preceding five (5) years, any offense listed under Subsection 41-6a-501(2)(a) of the Utah Code, as amended. 
"Employ, Employee, or Employment" means any Person who performs any service on the premises of a business, on a full time, part time, or contract basis, regardless of whether the Person is denominated as an employee, independent contractor, agent, lessee, or otherwise. Employee does not include a Person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for delivery of goods to the premises. 
"Employee, Full-Time" means an Employee who is employed for at least thirty (30) hours per week and shall include temporary or seasonal Employees where such Employees are employed for two (2) months or more per year and all corporate officers, owners, or partners. 
"Employee, Part-Time" means a Person who works for an employer less than thirty (30) hours per week and shall include temporary or seasonal employees, even if working more than thirty (30) hours per week, if such Person is employed for less than two months (2) per year. 
"Engage in Business/Engaged in the Business" means to conduct, manage, or carry on any activity as owner, officer, agent, Manager, employer, servant, or lessee. 
"Establish a Sexually Oriented Business (SOB)" means any of the following: 
A.  The opening or commencement of any Sexually Oriented Business, as defined in the Chapter as a new business; 
B.  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a Sexually Oriented Business, to any Sexually Oriented Business; or 
C.  The addition of any Sexually Oriented Business to any other existing Sexually Oriented Business. 
"Event" means, for purposes of Chapter 5.04 of this Code, a convention, civic, or community gathering whether held for profit, nonprofit, or charitable purposes, occurring for a limited or fixed duration that impacts the City by requiring City licensing or services beyond the scope of normal business and/or alcoholic beverage regulations, as set forth in this Code, or involving the use of City property, impacting public vehicle or pedestrian flow, generating public safety demands beyond their normal scope, or involving outdoor or temporary activities that do not normally occur as a component of the venue's Permitted Use or Conditional Use, as defined in Title 17 of the Code. 
"Event Support Fee" means any fee charged by the City for the cost of providing police protection, park maintenance, or other required City services. 
"Exchange Access Services" means telephone exchange lines or channels, and services provided in connection with them, that are necessary to provide access from the premises of a subscriber to the local switched public telecommunications network of the public utility to effect communication or the transfer of information. Exchange Access Services do not include: (1) private line services; (2) long distance toll services; (3) carrier access services; (4) telephonic services that are not regulated by the Utah Public Service Commission; and (5) services that emulate functions available in customer premises equipment. 
"Floor Space" means the floor area inside an establishment that is visible or accessible to patrons for any reason, excluding restrooms. 
"Gross Sales" means the sum total of all the monies received from the sale of goods, wares, merchandise, or services rendered within a given calendar year, excluding the net Utah state sales tax and any direct federal tax levied on goods or services sold. Gross Sales as used in this Title shall be synonymous with gross receipts. 
"Gross Revenue" means the total revenue derived from the sale and use of public utility services within South Salt Lake City, provided that Gross Revenue as applied to the telephone utility shall be construed to mean Basic Local Exchange Services revenue. 
"Hearing Officer" means the South Salt Lake City Administrative Law Judge. 
"Hotel or Motel" means any facility that provides, for a fee, sleeping accommodations and customary lodging services, including maid service, the furnishing and upkeep of furniture and bed linens, telephone and desk service, and is in current possession of a long-term or short-term lodging business license from the City. 
"Influential Interest" means any of the following: (1) the actual power to operate a Sexually Oriented Business, control the operation, management, or policies of any Sexually Oriented Business, or the legal entity that operates any Sexually Oriented Business, (2) ownership of a financial interest of at least twenty (20) percent of a Sexually Oriented Business or of any class of voting securities of a business, or (3) holding an office (e.g., president, vice president, secretary, treasurer, managing member, managing director, etc.) in a legal entity that operates a Sexually Oriented Business. 
"Junk Collector" means any Person, that not does not have a fixed Place of Business in Salt Lake County, who goes from place to place gathering, collecting, buying, selling, or otherwise dealing in old rags, papers, metals, or other articles commonly known as junk. "Junk Dealer" means any Person who engages in buying or selling old metals (other than precious metals), glass, rags, rubber, paper, or other junk from a fixed Place of Business. "Manager" means any individual employed or operating in a supervisory, managerial, decision-making, agent, or similar capacity for the entity. 
"Metal Processor" means any Person who engages in refining or otherwise altering the form of precious metals not found in a natural state (i.e. raw ore). 
"Moral Turpitude" means an act or behavior done contrary to community standards of honesty, good morals, or justice or which has an element of fraud, theft, or intent to harm another individual or property. 
"Neighboring Resident or Business Owner" means a Person or corporation, respectively, residing in a home, owning property, or maintaining a business premises within three hundred (300) feet of the property line of the parcel on which the business that is the subject of the complaint is located. 
"Nudity" means the showing of human genitals, pubic area, vulva, or anus with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple and areola. 
"Nuisance Conduct" includes both Criminal Conduct and Objectionable Conditions, as those terms are defined in this Title. 
"Objectionable Conditions" means any condition that is disruptive to the quiet enjoyment of neighboring residential or business uses, or the harassment of patrons of other businesses or other passers-by, including, but not limited to: disturbance of the peace, intoxication, drinking in public, harassment of passers-by, gambling, prostitution, public urination, lewd conduct, gang activity, drug trafficking, extensive littering, unlawful discharges of hazardous materials, rodent harborage, parking violations, unlawful accumulation of solid waste, fouling of the air with offensive odors or contaminants, excessive dust, or excessive loud noise. 
"Organizer" means the Person responsible for event arrangements and payment of support fees. 
"Owner" means, for purposes of Chapter 5.04 of this Code, a sole proprietor or in the case of a partnership, corporation, or limited liability company: a partner, managing agent, Manager, officer, or director thereof; a stockholder who holds at least 20% of the total issued and outstanding stock of the corporation; or a member who owns at least 20% of the limited liability company. 
"Pattern of Criminal Conduct" means the commission of five (5) or more crimes within a six (6) month period: 
A.  Which crimes involve drug manufacturing or distribution, prostitution, or gambling under state or federal law; 
B.  Which share a similar basis in facts; or 
C.  Which are all committed by members of a street gang or other association of individuals who gather for a criminal purpose. 
"Pawnbroker" means any Person who loans money on deposit of personal property or deals in the purchase, exchange, or possession of personal property on condition of selling the same back again to the pledgor or depositor, or who loans or advances money on personal property by taking chattel mortgage security thereon and takes or receives such personal property into his possession, and who sells the unredeemed pledges, together with such new merchandise as will facilitate the sale of same. 
"Person" means any individual, receiver, assignee, trustee in bankruptcy, trust, estate, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, club, company, joint stock company, business trust, limited liability company, corporation, association, legal entity, society or other group of individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit or otherwise. 
"Place of Business" means a location maintained or operated by a Person within the City of South Salt Lake from which a Person Engages in Business. Place of Business includes a parking lot owned or leased by the business, parking areas traditionally used by patrons or Employees of the business, and the public rights-of-way adjacent to the business premises as it is used by Persons attracted to the business. 
"Premises" means the real property upon which a Sexually Oriented Business is located, and all appurtenances thereto and buildings thereon, including, but not limited to, the business, the grounds, private walkways, and parking lots and/or parking garages adjacent thereto, under the ownership, control, or supervision of the licensee. 
"Private Security Staff" means either: (1) a permanent Employee of the business whose chief responsibility is to provide security for the Premises; (2) an individual provided by a contract security company that is currently licensed by the state of Utah; or (3) an off-duty peace officer holding a current state certificate, lawfully employed at the location. 
"Property Owner" means the record owner of the real property as listed on the records of the Salt Lake County recorder or assessor's office. A Property Owner who has entered into a contract for management services shall, nonetheless, remain directly responsible for the management of the property. 
"Public Portion of Premises" means the area around the exterior of the premises where the activities of patrons collide with the activities of the greater public, including all outdoor portions of the property upon which the premises is located, including parking areas, public sidewalks, streets immediately adjacent to the premises, and extending to parking areas off the premises, whether on public property or private property of another, used by patrons of the establishment based either upon agreement or custom. 
"Receives" means acquiring possession, control, or title or lending on the security of the property. 
"School Group" means any club, group, organization, or association of any school located in or having students that reside in this City which seeks to raise money for a school-sanctioned activity or project. 
"Secondhand Dealer" means any Person who keeps a store, office, or Place of Business for the purchase, barter or exchange or sale of any secondhand merchandise of value, or who Engages in the Business of dealing in secondhand goods. A secondhand dealer does not include any Person who deals in the purchase, barter, exchange, or sale of used motor vehicles and trailers, or buys or sells fewer than five (5) firearms per year. 
"Secondhand Precious Metal Dealer/Processor and/or Precious Gem Dealer" means any Person who engages in buying, selling, or processing gold, silver, platinum, other precious metal, secondhand articles containing any of such metals, secondhand precious gems or any articles containing any precious gems. 
"Semi-Nude or Semi-Nudity" means the showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola and extending across the width of the breast at that point, or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breasts exhibited by a bikini, dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, or similar wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. 
"Semi-Nude Model Studio" means a place where Persons regularly appear in a state of Semi-Nudity for money or any form of consideration in order to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculpted, photographed, or similarly depicted by other Persons. This definition does not apply to any place where Persons appearing in a state of Semi-Nudity did so in a class operated: 
A.  By a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
B.  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
C.  In a structure: 
1.  That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a Semi-Nude Person is available for viewing; and 
2.  Where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class. 
"Sexual Device" means any three-dimensional object designed for stimulation of the male or female human genitals, anus, buttocks, female breast, or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others and shall include devices commonly known as dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, cock rings, anal beads, butt plugs, nipple clamps, and physical representations of the human genital organs. Sexual Device does not include devices primarily intended for protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy. 
"Sexually Oriented Business or SOB" means an "Adult Bookstore, Adult Video Store, or Adult Device Store," an "Adult Cabaret," an "Adult Motion Picture Theater," or a "Semi-Nude Model Studio." 
"Specified Anatomical Areas" means and includes: 
A.  Less than completely and opaquely covered: human genitals; pubic region; buttock; and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
B.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
"Single Episode" means all conduct that is closely related in time and is incident to an attempt or an accomplishment of a single objective, or which results in a single citation. 
"Sexually Oriented Business Licensee" means a Person in whose name a license to operate a Sexually Oriented Business has been issued, as well as any individual or individuals listed on the application for a Sexually Oriented Business license. In the case of an "Employee," it shall mean the Person in whose name the Sexually Oriented Business employee license has been issued. 
"Sexually Oriented Business Operator" means any Person on the Premises of a Sexually Oriented Business who manages, supervises, or controls the business or a portion thereof. A Person may be found to be an operator regardless of whether such Person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business. 
"Special Event" means an event occurring out of the ordinary course of neighborhood functions; such as races, runs, walks, parades, block parties (in excess of thirty (30) homes), entertainment programs, filming of movies, and similar events, which are primarily for the purpose of entertainment or fund raising and attract participants and/or observers and are conducted in or affect public facilities and/or public streets. 
"Specified Criminal Activity" means any of the following specified crimes for which less than five (5) years has elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date: 
A.  Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; 
B.  Dissemination of obscenity or illegal pornographic materials; sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; 
C.  Sexual abuse; sexual abuse of a child; sexual exploitation of children; sexual performance by a child; 
D.  Possession or distribution of child pornography; 
E.  Sexual assault; sexual battery; rape; 
F.  Indecent exposure; indecency with a child; molestation of a child; 
G.  Distribution of a controlled substance; 
H.  The crimes of criminal pandering, tax violations, embezzlement, or racketeering, if such crimes are directly related to the operation of a Sexually Oriented Business; 
I.  Any attempt, solicitation, or conspiracy to commit one of the foregoing offenses; or 
J.  Any offense in another jurisdiction that, had the predicate act(s) been committed in Utah, would have constituted any of the foregoing offenses. 
"Specified Sexual Activity" means any of the following: 
A.  Intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or 
B.  Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of the activities described in (A) above. 
"Telephone Service" means exchange access services, extended area service, customer access line charges and any service for which a tax or other charge was being paid pursuant to this Chapter. 
"Transfer (Assignment) of Ownership or Control" of a business means any of the following: 
A.  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
B.  The transfer of securities which constitute an Influential Interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; 
C.  A Change in Ownership; or 
D.  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the Person possessing the ownership or control. 
"Transient Auction House" means any place, whether indoors or outdoors, located within South Salt Lake where any goods, wares, merchandise, or articles of value are offered for sale at auction and which is neither the permanent Place of Business for auction sales nor a permanent business which has an auction sale to dispose of its inventory, furnishings, and business equipment as it goes out of business. 
"Use" has the definition assigned in Chapter 17.01 of this Code. 
"Vendor" means any Person, group, organization, firm, or company which sells or offers to sell to the public any type of product, service, food, or drink at a City Event. 
"Viewing room" means the room, booth, or area where a patron of a Sexually Oriented Business would ordinarily be positioned while watching a film, videocassette, digital video disc, or other video reproduction. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
Chapter 5.02 - BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY 
Sections: 
 
5.02.010 - Doing Business Without a License Unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any Person to Engage in Business within the City of South Salt Lake without a current business license issued by the City. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.02.020 - Failure to Pay License—Penalty. 
If any Person shall neglect, fail, or refuse to pay the amount assessed when it becomes due on any license provided for in this Title, for a period of thirty (30) days after the due date, a penalty of fifty (50) percent shall be added to the original amount due. Any license fee that is delinquent after sixty (60) days, shall be assessed a penalty of one hundred (100) percent (double fee). The license fee and any applicable penalty shall be collected by the City treasurer and the payment thereon enforced in the manner provided in Section 5.02.030 of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.02.030 - Civil Actions. 
In all cases where a license is required and the amount is fixed by the City, and the amount is not paid in the manner prescribed, a civil or administrative action may be brought in the name of the City of South Salt Lake against the Person failing to pay such license, before the administrative law judge for the City of South Salt Lake or in any court of this state having jurisdiction over such action, to recover the amount of the same together with the penalty provided for in Section 5.02.020 of this Chapter. The City may make use of all relevant administrative or civil actions to obtain compliance with the provisions of this Title. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.02.040 - Application for License to Conduct Business. 
A.  Any Person Engaged in Business within the City of South Salt Lake must first obtain a license from the City of South Salt Lake prior to conducting such business, except a Person, under the age of 18, engaging in business only occasionally. 
B.  A license to conduct business may be obtained by making application to the business license official at the business licensing office within the City of South Salt Lake. 
C.  All applications and renewals for business licenses shall be submitted on the form provided by the City. Payment of the requisite license fee as set forth by ordinance and/or by the consolidated fee schedule and any amendments or revisions thereto shall be submitted with all applications. Failure to remit the required fees shall be grounds for denial of the applicant's license. 
D.  Applications to Engage in a new or expanded Business (not a renewal) are subject to a nonrefundable application fee. 
1.  If a business license is denied for cause, and any appeal of such denial is upheld, or if the business fails to bring the premises, building, or operation into compliance with the laws and ordinances of the City of South Salt Lake, the state of Utah, and the United States within thirty (30) days of notice of violation from the City, the fees shall be forfeited and a new application, together with required fees, shall be required. 
2.  If the license is approved, the application fee shall be applied to the required license fee. 
E.  Upon review by the business license official for completeness of application, and a finding by the business license official that: (1) the application is complete; (2) the application complies with ordinances of the City of South Salt Lake; (3) there are no known violations of the laws and ordinances of the City of South Salt Lake, including all conditions of land use approval, the state of Utah, and the United States; and (4) that the business is not delinquent in the payment of any other sum, fee, or fine owed to the City for any reason, the business license official shall issue a business license to the applicant. 
F.  All licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter expire annually. An applicant must apply to renew any license annually, on or before the due date established by the City for that business location. The City establishes a twice-yearly renewal season based on the physical location of the business. Those businesses located east of 200 West (the light rail tracks) shall be licensed from January to January with a due date of January 1st. Those located west of 200 West (the light rail tracks) shall be licensed from July to July with a due date of July 1st. All license renewal applications are subject to review by the business license official to determine whether the business is in compliance with all laws and ordinances of the City of South Salt Lake, the state of Utah, and the United States. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.02.050 - License Must Be Paid in Advance. 
A license shall not be issued to anyone until the amount required for such license fees and penalties have been paid to the City treasury, and the application for a business license has been approved by the business license official. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.02.060 - Contents of License Certificate. 
Every certificate of license shall (1) specify by name the Person to whom it is issued; (2) designate the particular business licensed; and (3) designate the location at which the business shall be operated. No license granted or issued under the provision of this Chapter shall authorize any Person to whom a license is issued to Engage in Business (1) at any place other than the location indicated on such license; or (2) other than the business that is properly licensed by the City of South Salt Lake. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.02.070 - License to be Posted in a Conspicuous Place. 
Every license issued shall be posted by the licensee in a conspicuous public place upon the wall of the building, room, or office of the location in which such licensed business is engaged, so that the same may be easily seen by the public. When a business license has expired, it shall be removed by the licensee from any place visible by the public. No license which is not current or valid shall remain posted. It shall be the duty of each and every Person to whom a license has been issued to show a current City of South Salt Lake business license when required to do so by any official or officer of the City of South Salt Lake.  
5.02.080 - Transfer or Assignment of Ownership or Control. 
All licenses granted or issued under the provisions of this Title shall become void upon Transfer or Assignment of Ownership or Control. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.02.090 - License Not to Authorize Unlawful Activities. 
A business license issued in conflict with the law or ordinances of the City of South Salt Lake is void. A valid business license does not authorize a lawful business to be conducted in an unlawful manner. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.02.100 - Denial, Suspension, and Revocation of Business Licenses. 
An application for a new business license, or for renewal of an existing business license, may be denied, or an existing business license may be revoked, for the following reasons: 
A.  The applicant or licensee, or his or her business, does not meet zoning or other requirements set forth in this Code; 
B.  False or incomplete information was provided on a business license application; 
C.  The licensee or applicant has violated, or is violating, any provision of this Title or provision of the City Code, state or federal statutes, or other regulations relating to or governing the applicant's or licensee's business; 
D.  The licensee has obtained, the applicant has attempted to obtain, or the licensee or applicant has aided another Person to obtain, a license by fraud or deceit; 
E.  The applicant for a renewal, or licensee, has failed to pay Salt Lake County ad valorem property taxes and/or personal property taxes, or City of South Salt Lake utility service charges, sales tax, or any other fee or fine owed to the City; 
F.  The applicant or licensee has refused to allow authorized representatives of the City to make a lawful inspection of the business or has interfered with such representatives while in the lawful performance of their duty in making such an inspection; 
G.  The applicant or licensee is not complying with a requirement or condition established by the Planning Commission or Community Development Department, if applicable, under a conditional use permit, by the land use authority, if applicable, the conditions of a variance or special exception, or by other agreement with the City; 
H.  Violation of this Title by the agents or employees of a licensee or applicant, and violations of other laws by the agents or employees of the applicant or licensee while acting as an agent or employee of the licensee or applicant; or any other reason expressly provided for in this Title. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.02.110 - Enforcement. 
A.  The business license official shall have the authority, without a hearing, to deny an application for a new business license for any reason provided for in this Chapter. 
B.  The business license official shall have the authority to deny an application for renewal of an existing business license or to suspend or revoke a business license, without a hearing, for any reason provided for in this Chapter. A denial, suspension, or revocation by the business license official shall become effective upon service of notice as set forth in Section 5.02.130 of this Chapter. 
C.  The business license official shall have the authority, on his or her own initiative or in response to complaints from the public or any City department, to investigate and gather evidence of violations of this Code or other circumstances which may give rise to a denial, suspension, or revocation of a license. Upon a finding that the business license application or business license may be denied, suspended, or revoked for the reasons set forth above, the business license official may deny, suspend, or revoke such application or license. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.02.120 - Penalty—Each day a separate violation. 
A.  Unless otherwise specified, a Person convicted of violating any provision of this Title shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine, imprisonment, or both as allowed by state law. 
B.  Each day that a violation of this Title occurs is deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.02.130 - Notice of Denial, Suspension, or Revocation. 
Upon a denial, suspension, or revocation of a business license application or business license the business license official shall provide written notice of his or her decision to deny, suspend, or revoke an application or license to the applicant, by personal service or regular mail, at the address listed on the business license application or license. Such notice shall include the reasons for the denial, suspension, or revocation and any accompanying documentation relating to the business license official's decision to deny, revoke, or suspend an application or business license. Such notice shall also include a description, if applicable, of the applicant's or licensee's right to appeal the decision of the business license official. Notice shall be deemed served as follows: 
A.  Personal service is deemed served on the day of service; and 
B.  Service by mail is deemed served three (3) calendar days after the notice is deposited in the United States mail. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.02.140 - Administrative Hearing. 
Any Person adversely affected by a decision of the business license official or any other City official made pursuant to this Title, shall have the right to request an administrative hearing as provided under Chapter 2.22 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.02.150 - Business License Hearing. 
A.  The City shall impose graduated sanctions upon businesses that fail to comply with the conditions of their licenses. Revocation shall be reserved for serious violations or repeated conduct. 
B.  The administrative law judge shall have the authority to modify any sanction imposed by a business license official if it appears from the evidence presented that the sanction is excessive. 
C.  The laws and ordinances of the City of South Salt Lake, the state of Utah, and the United States shall be controlling in all appeals. The administrative law judge shall not make any findings that would result in the violation of, or continuing violation of, any of the above laws and ordinances. The administrative law judge shall not have the authority to waive compliance with any of the applicable provisions of the business license ordinance, nor shall the administrative law judge extend deadlines set forth in such ordinances or change the substance or form of such ordinances. 
D.  If the administrative law judge enters an order upholding a decision to deny, suspend, or revoke a license, the order shall contain a directive to the subject business to cease all unlawful Business Activity on the premises. When the sanction of suspension or revocation is imposed, an order from the administrative law judge shall also contain a directive to cease all Business Activity on the premises during the time of suspension or revocation. The administrative law judge may authorize the City to use any reasonable means to enforce cessation of Business Activity. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.02.160 - Unlawful to Engage in Business After Revocation. 
If any license is revoked or application for license is denied as provided in this Title, it shall thereafter be unlawful for any Person to open, operate, maintain, manage, or conduct any business, trade, profession, or calling for which a license is required at the premises where the license was revoked or denied until a new license is granted by the City. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.02.170 - Issuance of New License After Denial or Revocation—Waiting Period. 
No Person who has been denied a license or whose license has been revoked, and no Person associated or connected with such a Person in the conduct of his business, shall be granted a new license for a period of at least six (6) months after such denial or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.02.180 - Subject to General Licensing Provisions. 
Licenses required in the consolidated fee schedule are also subject to all of the general licensing provisions set forth in this Title. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.02.190 - License fees. 
Before Engaging in Business in the City of South Salt Lake, all Persons shall be required to obtain a license from the City and pay all applicable license fees. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.02.200 - Reciprocal licenses. 
Whenever a Person Engaged in Business in the City of South Salt Lake, but having no office, building, or plant location in the City of South Salt Lake, has obtained a license in another City or from Salt Lake County, such license shall be recognized as valid in the City of South Salt Lake, providing that Salt Lake County or such other City also recognizes as valid like licenses issued by the City of South Salt Lake. If a Person Engages in Business in South Salt Lake but is not located within a jurisdiction that has a reciprocal agreement with the City of South Salt Lake then the City Council may charge a license to such business on the same basis and at the same rate as charged to such businesses located within the City of South Salt Lake. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.02.210 - License for Each Place of Business. 
Each separate Place of Business or plant within the City shall obtain a separate license for each location in the City of South Salt Lake in accordance with the schedules set forth in this Title, except as exempted by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.02.220 - Disproportionate Costs. 
In addition to the license fee required by this Title, a business that creates a disproportionate demand on the public safety services of the City, pursuant to Title 2, shall annually reimburse the City for excessive public safety costs. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
Chapter 5.03 - NUISANCE MANAGEMENT 
Sections: 
 
5.03.010 - Purpose and Intent. 
Business Owners and Property Owners shall properly manage their businesses and properties to prevent them from becoming a nuisance to Neighboring Residents and businesses, deteriorating into havens for crime to the degree that a nuisance is created, ruining the safe, peaceful, and quiet enjoyment of property of neighbors, citizens, and patrons of other businesses. This Chapter creates a system to permit concerned neighbors to initiate administrative nuisance actions, to encourage mediation and creative problem-solving to abate nuisances, and to impose civil fines or other penalties if a Business Owner fails to take reasonable actions to address the identified problems. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.03.020 - Existing Law Continued. 
The provisions of this Chapter shall not invalidate any other title, chapter, or ordinance of this Code, but shall be read in conjunction with those titles, chapters, and ordinances and shall be used as an additional remedy for enforcement of violations thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.03.030 - Criminal or Civil Prosecution. 
A.  The City shall have sole discretion in deciding whether to pursue nuisance remedies under this Chapter, file a civil nuisance action under state law, to bring criminal charges, order suspension or revocation of business licenses, or pursue administrative enforcement actions for the violation of any of its ordinances or applicable Code requirements. City officials are permitted to exercise executive discretion in determining which course of enforcement to pursue, taking into consideration the severity of an incident, the culpability of involved parties, and the history of the business location. 
B.  The enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter does not prevent the City from pursuing other remedies for specific violations, including fines, abatement, suspension, revocation, injunctions, or other penalties. Specific violations may be considered Nuisance Conduct under this Chapter, even if the Business Owner or Property Owner has already suffered civil or criminal penalties for that offense. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.03.040 - Effect of Headings. 
Title, chapter, and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.03.050 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, portion, or provision of this Chapter is, for any reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Chapter. The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted this Chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, portion, or provision thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, clauses, phrases, portions, or provisions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. This Section shall apply to all amendments made to this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.03.060 - Civil Liability. 
By establishing performance standards or by establishing obligations to act, it is the intent of the City Council that South Salt Lake City employees and officers are exercising discretionary authority in pursuit of an essential governmental function and that any such standards or obligations shall not be construed as creating a ministerial duty for purposes of tort liability. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.03.070 - Acts Include Causing, Attempting, Aiding, and Abetting. 
Whenever an act or omission is referred to or made unlawful in this Chapter, it shall include causing, attempting, permitting, aiding, or abetting such act or omission. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.03.080 - City Alcoholic Beverage Licensees' Duties Under Code Remain in Effect. 
The provisions of this Chapter do not overrule or excuse a City alcoholic beverage licensee from the duties imposed by the provisions of Chapter 5.04, Alcoholic Beverages. The provisions of this Chapter supplement penalties imposed through other enforcement mechanisms in the Code and are required due to the unique public nuisance created as a consequence of the repeated underlying conditions or offenses. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.03.090 - Duty to Properly Manage. 
Every owner shall have a duty to provide adequate management to prevent the creation of a nuisance to neighboring businesses, residents, and passers-by, that results from Nuisance Conduct by patrons, guests, employees, occupants, or those who frequent the business premises. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.03.100 - Nuisance Declared. 
Pursuant to Title 10, Chapter 8, Section 60 of the Utah Code, the City of South Salt Lake's City Council declares that the quiet enjoyment of property is intolerably impaired, and a public nuisance exists when Nuisance Conduct occurs at a Place of Business. The provisions of this Chapter are intended to supplement other penalties imposed through other enforcement mechanisms and are required due to the unique public nuisance created as a consequence of the repeated nature of the underlying conditions or offenses. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.03.110 - Per Se Nuisance Due to Criminal Activity. 
A.  A business is or has created a nuisance if, within one-hundred-eighty (180) consecutive days, not less than three (3) separate incidents of Criminal Conduct occur at or within the Place of Business, between the period of time between one hour before opening and one hour after closing. 
B.  The provisions of this Section do not apply to apartment complexes, as defined in Section 4.04.020, which are governed by Chapter 4.207, Apartment Nuisances. These provisions apply to all other rental housing which does not fit the definition of an apartment complex. 
C.  The provisions of this Section do not apply to Hotels or Motels, unless the following is established by the City: 
1.  A guest or patron has committed a crime at the Place of Business previously, the City provided notice of that crime to the management, and the same guest or patron was rented a room on a subsequent occasion; 
2.  The crimes took place in the public areas of the Hotel or Motel; and 
3.  The City establishes a pattern of Criminal Conduct occurring at the premises, and the management will not take reasonable precautions identified by the City to prevent further crime on the premises. 
D.  The provisions of this Section apply to mobile home parks if the Criminal Conduct occurs in public areas of the park. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.03.120 - Objectionable Conditions. 
A.  A business is or has created a nuisance if it is determined that the business has contributed to or permitted Objectionable Conditions on its premises on more than one occasion within a one-hundred-eighty-day (180) period. 
B.  Objectionable Conditions are only nuisances to the extent that the conditions are nuisances pursuant to Utah state law. Any activity that is deemed not to be a nuisance pursuant to applicable case law or state statute does not constitute an Objectionable Condition. 
C.  A condition is not an Objectionable Condition if the Business Owner promptly and permanently corrects the condition upon receipt of notification by a Neighboring Resident or Business Owner or a government entity. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.03.130 - Initiation of Nuisance Determination. 
The City may initiate a nuisance determination action for nuisances under Section 5.03.110 or Section 5.03.120. A Neighboring Resident or Business Owner may request a nuisance determination for Objectionable Conditions under Section 5.03.120 by submitting a written request to the Community Development Department for a nuisance determination. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.03.140 - Request for Nuisance Determination. 
A.  A Neighboring Resident or Business Owner may initiate a nuisance determination by submitting a request for nuisance determination, on a form provided by the City, at no charge, to the Community Development Department. 
B.  All relevant and available information and evidence of the Objectionable Conditions must accompany the request for nuisance determination. 
C.  Once a request for nuisance determination is submitted to the Community Development Department the complaint will be assessed for sufficiency to proceed to mediation. A complaint shall be sufficient if credible, objective evidence of the Objectionable Conditions is presented. If the department does not proceed to mediation, it shall provide a written response to the complainant explaining its decision. 
D.  A determination of whether to proceed shall be rendered within ten (10) calendar days of receipt of the request. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.03.150 - Mediation. 
A.  Prior to referring the request for nuisance determination to the administrative law judge, the department shall contact or attempt to contact the Business Owner, during the business's regular business hours, and offer to mediate the dispute between the parties. 
B.  A Business Owner that does not respond to the City's contact in Section (A) above, within five (5) business days waives the opportunity for mediation under this Section, and the request of the City shall be submitted to the administrative law judge for a hearing. 
C.  If accepted by the Business Owner, mediation shall be conducted within fifteen (15) calendar days of the complaint's receipt by the department. An extension of five (5) days may be granted for good cause, with advance notice to the complainant of the request. 
D.  Mediation shall be conducted at a neutral location, and provided by City staff; alternatively, an independent third party may mediate the dispute if both the complainant and the Business Owner can agree on the Mediator and make payment arrangements between themselves. The City shall not pay for mediation services between the parties. 
E.  Mediation may take place in multiple sessions in order for the parties to gather additional information and to consider remedies to the Objectionable Conditions. 
F.  If the parties are able to reach a resolution that includes remediation of the conditions that are the subject of the complaint, then an agreement shall be entered between the Business Owner and the City in which the Business Owner agrees to promptly mitigate the Objectionable Conditions. The corrective plan shall impose timelines and provide for penalties in the event the Business Owner does not complete the corrective actions. 
G.  Failure to comply with a corrective plan entered into with the City shall result in the case being submitted to the administrative law judge for enforcement of its provisions. 
H.  If the parties are not able to reach an agreement that resolves the complainant's concerns within thirty (30) days from the beginning of mediation, then the request for nuisance determination shall be forwarded to the administrative law judge. 
I.  The City may gather additional evidence prior to making a decision on whether to submit the case to the administrative law judge. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.03.160 - Notice. 
A.  Notice to Business Owners of both a complaint and request for mediation shall be complete upon: 
1.  Providing personal service to a Person in control of the business premises during regular business hours; 
2.  Depositing a letter for delivery via regular mail, addressed to the address provided on the business license records of the City; or 
3.  If mail is returned as undeliverable, by posting a copy of the notice in a prominent location at the business, such as at an entrance or gate. 
B.  Notice of a hearing before the administrative law judge shall be in conformance with Section 2.22.050 of this Code, and shall be provided to both the Business Owner, and the complainant if the request for nuisance determination was initiated by a party other than the City. 
C.  Complainants shall be given an opportunity to participate in the proceedings. 
D.  Failure to notify the complainants shall result in the hearing being rescheduled. 
E.  As a courtesy, the Property Owner of the subject property may be notified of the proceedings. Failure to notify a Property Owner does not affect the proceedings.  
5.03.170 - Hearing Before Administrative Law Judge. 
A.  Once a request for nuisance determination is received by the administrative law judge, the matter shall be placed on the next available calendar for which appropriate notice may be served, or a special hearing may be convened. 
B.  At a hearing on whether a business is a per se nuisance due to Criminal Conduct, the administrative law judge shall consider evidence of the violations. 
1.  Police reports, witness statements, and other evidence in the police department's case file shall be accepted and considered by the administrative law judge in rendering its decision. 
2.  A conviction for an offense listed as Criminal Conduct that arises out of an incident that occurred at the business premises conclusively establishes that the crime of conviction occurred. A plea in abeyance or reduction of the offense to an attempted offense is counted as an incident of Criminal Conduct. The form of a plea resulting in conviction or a plea in abeyance, such as guilty, no contest, Alford, nolo contender, etc., shall not invalidate a conviction for purposes of this Chapter. 
3.  The Business Owner shall have the opportunity to present evidence, to cross-examine witnesses who testify at the hearing, and to present argument. 
C.  At a hearing on whether a business has permitted or contributed to Objectionable Conditions, the administrative law judge shall consider evidence provided by all parties. 
1.  The City shall facilitate the presentation of the complainant's evidence and the cross-examination of any witnesses called by the Business Owner; however, the City is not required to take a position as to whether the evidence rises to the level of a nuisance. 
2.  The Business Owner shall have the opportunity to present evidence, to cross-examine witnesses who testify at the hearing, and to present argument. 
D.  At a hearing on a failure to comply with a corrective plan entered pursuant to Section 5.05.150, the court shall consider the steps taken by the Business Owner and determine whether the penalties in the plan are appropriate. 
1.  The Business Owner may present evidence of steps taken to mitigate the nuisance, cross-examine any witnesses who testify at the hearing, and present argument. 
2.  During a hearing reviewing a failure to comply with a corrective plan, the administrative court does not consider whether the request for nuisance determination was appropriate, that issue having been waived by the Business Owner who entered the agreement. 
E.  The burden of proof for all proceedings in these matters, including affirmative defenses, shall be a preponderance of the evidence. 
F.  Notwithstanding Section 5.03.180, a nuisance determination is a final, appealable order. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.03.180 - Continuing Supervision. 
A.  When the administrative court has entered a finding of nuisance, the business is subject to the continued supervision of the administrative court for six (6) months. During that time, the administrative court may schedule review hearings to track the Business Owner's compliance with the administrative orders, impose previously suspended penalties, or convene a new hearing based upon new incidents of nuisance. 
B.  Before imposing any new penalty for subsequent Nuisance Conduct, the administrative court shall ensure that due process is afforded to the Business Owner through the opportunity for a hearing in compliance with Subsection B or C of this Section. 
C.  The finding of a subsequent incident of nuisance which occurs within the six-month (6) period shall restart the six-month (6) supervision period and is subject to new penalties. 
D.  Each new incident which results in additional penalties may be appealed. Such appeals are limited to a review of that new incident and may not address previous determinations by the administrative law judge which were not timely appealed. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.03.190 - Penalties. 
A.  A business that is found to be a nuisance is subject to penalties that include: a one-time fine, daily fine, license suspension, or license revocation. Penalties shall be graduated, taking into consideration the following: 
1.  Severity of the nuisance; 
2.  Duration of the nuisance; 
3.  Impact of the nuisance on Neighboring Residents and businesses; 
4.  History of the nuisance at the business; 
5.  Business Owner's attempts at mitigating the nuisance; and 
6.  Cost of nuisance mitigation. 
B.  A penalty may be stayed or reduced if the Business Owner: 
1.  Abates the nuisance within a time period established by the administrative law judge; or 
2.  Adopts and implements additional principles of Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED), as required and approved by the administrative law judge. 
C.  The administrative law judge may additionally enter an order of abatement that requires the Business Owner to correct nuisance conditions, and that authorizes the City to abate the nuisance if the owner does not timely perform the abatement. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.03.200 - Defenses. 
A.  For purposes of this Chapter, an act of Criminal Conduct shall not be counted against the owner if: 
1.  The criminal act was committed by a person who has been trespassed from the property, and police were summoned to remove that person as soon as his or her presence was known to the owner or an agent of the owner; 
2.  The owner's private security staff was immediately present at the time that the crime was committed, immediately summoned police, took reasonable steps to keep the peace and identify the individuals involved in the crime, and cooperated with police in the investigation; 
3.  The Business Owner or an agent was the intended victim of a criminal act, and summoned police upon discovering the conduct; or 
4.  The Criminal Conduct occurred at the business location due to its advance selection by law enforcement as the location for controlled Criminal Conduct, such as a "controlled buy" of narcotics or "sting" operation. 
B.  For purposes of this Section, "agent" includes employees, Managers, independent contractors, or any Person with actual or apparent authorization to act on behalf of the owner. 
C.  The defenses enumerated in this Section shall be affirmative defenses, and the owner shall bear the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the defenses apply. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.03.210 - Determination to Follow Business Owner and Business Location. 
A.  A determination of nuisance follows the Business Owner and/or the location of the business. A nuisance determination is not eliminated by virtue of transferring the business to another Person or entity, changing the name of the business, or moving the business to a new location. 
B.  A Person who disputes the continued application of a nuisance determination may request relief from the administrative court. In making a decision over whether a determination should continue to apply to such a business, the administrative law judge shall consider the following factors: 
1.  The ownership shares or interests in the prior business and the current business; 
2.  Whether familial or other relationships exist between prior and current owners; 
3.  The type of business being conducted at the location; 
4.  The identities of employees or independent contractors at the business; 
5.  Advertising or other materials for the new business; and 
6.  Any other evidence which connects the new business to the previous business. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.03.220 - Appeals. 
A party may appeal a determination of nuisance activity or a penalty imposed by the administrative law judge under this Chapter to the district court. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
Chapter 5.04 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
Sections: 
 
5.04.010 - Policy. 
The City of South Salt Lake permits the operation of establishments with an alcoholic beverage component, consistent with the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act and related state statutes and regulations. The City of South Salt Lake requires the Owners and Managers of establishments with an alcoholic beverage component within the City's boundaries to take primary responsibility for maintaining order and preventing breaches of the peace at such establishments. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.04.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this Chapter: 
A.  The definition of each term that is defined in Utah Code Title 32B, Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, as amended, is adopted into this Chapter by reference, except to the extent modified by this Chapter or Title. Where used in this Chapter, such terms are capitalized. 
B.  The definitions under Title 5 of this Code supplement the definitions in the state's Alcoholic Beverage Control Act and are also capitalized where used. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.04.030 - Local consent, proof of state licensure, and City business license required. 
A.  The City's issuance of a City alcoholic beverage license—whether beer, liquor, single event, or special-use—under this Chapter constitutes local consent for the purpose of the corresponding license, sublicense, Package Agency, or temporary or special-use permit sought from the state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, as applicable. 
B.  Before operating under a City beer, liquor, or special-use license, and not more than one hundred twenty (120) days after the date on which the particular City beer, liquor, or special-use license was granted, each approved applicant must obtain and provide the City with proof of the corresponding state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control license, sublicense, Package Agency, or permit. Failure to do so shall render the City beer, liquor, or special-use license and corresponding local consent void. Lapse, suspension, or revocation of the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control license, sublicense, Package Agency, permit, or any applicable federal license shall result in automatic suspension of the City beer, liquor, or special-use license and corresponding local consent. 
C.  Before operating under a City beer, liquor, or special-use license, each approved applicant must also obtain, if not already obtained, and provide proof to the City of a valid City business license for premises to be operated under the City beer, liquor, or special-use license. Failure to do so shall render the City beer, liquor, or special-use license and corresponding local consent void. Lapse, suspension, or revocation of the City business license for premises to be operated under a City beer, liquor, or special-use license shall result in automatic suspension of all City beer, liquor, or special-use licenses and corresponding local consents associated with the premises. 
D.  Any applicant for a City alcoholic beverage license and corresponding local consent shall comply with applicable conditions and requirements of state law and this Code prior to making application with the City for any City alcoholic beverage license. Each applicant, licensee, and consentee must maintain compliance with federal law, state law, and City Code regardless of changes to those laws and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.04.040 - City beer license required. 
A.  No entity shall operate a business with a beer component (i.e. storage, sale, offer for sale, service, consumption, manufacture, transportation, importation, or exportation of beer) within the City without first procuring the necessary City beer license, required by the City as the local alcoholic beverage licensing counterpart for a Use requiring corresponding state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control licensure. Such entity, in addition to obtaining the necessary City beer license, shall also procure the required state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control license, sublicense, or permit and any applicable federal license. 
B.  Each City beer license shall indicate the type of state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control approval for which the City beer license will be issued. 
C.  A separate City beer license shall be required for each state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control license, sublicense, or permit required. 
D.  No City beer license may be transferred, assigned, or subleased in any manner. City beer licenses are invalidated by transfer or attempted transfer. Change in Ownership of a City beer licensee constitutes an invalidating transfer. 
E.  Lapse, suspension, or revocation of a state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control license or sublicense, or permit or applicable federal permit or license shall result in automatic suspension of the corresponding City beer license. 
F.  No City beer license shall issue to an applicant if the Use for which the applicant seeks the license is prohibited (see Title 17 land-use matrix) in the zoning district where the applicant proposes to use the City beer license sought. 
G.  Consistent with the scope of state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control authorization, a City liquor license shall be required in lieu of a City beer license for a business with a liquor, wine, heavy beer, or flavored malt beverage component. 
H.  All City beer licensees shall comply with the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, as amended, and of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.04.050 - City liquor license required. 
A.  No entity shall operate a business with a liquor component (i.e. storage, sale, offer for sale, service, consumption, manufacture, transportation, importation, or exportation of liquor, wine, heavy beer, or flavored malt beverages or representation—as a Utah individual resident, partnership, corporation, or limited liability company employed by an alcohol manufacturer, supplier, or importer to represent a liquor product with the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control or a state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control licensee, sublicensee, Package Agency, or permitee—of an alcoholic product of a manufacturer, supplier, or importer) within the City without first procuring the necessary City liquor license, required by the City as the local alcoholic beverage licensing counterpart for a Use requiring corresponding state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control licensure and/or contractual approval. Such entity, in addition to obtaining the necessary City liquor license, shall also procure the required state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control license, sublicense, or Package Agency and any applicable federal permit or license. 
B.  Each City liquor license shall indicate the type of state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control license, sublicense, or Package Agency for which the City liquor license will be issued. 
C.  A separate City liquor license shall be required for each state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control license, sublicense, or Package Agency required. 
D.  No City liquor license may be transferred, assigned, or subleased in any manner. City liquor licenses are invalidated by transfer or attempted transfer. Change in Ownership of a City liquor licensee constitutes an invalidating transfer. 
E.  Lapse, suspension, or revocation of a state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control license, sublicense, or Package Agency or applicable federal permit or license shall result in automatic suspension of the corresponding City liquor license. 
F.  No City liquor license shall issue to an applicant if the Use for which the applicant seeks the license is prohibited (see Title 17 land-use matrix) in the zoning district where the applicant proposes to use the City liquor license sought. For purposes of state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control local industry representative licenses, where the applicant proposes to use the City liquor license shall be measured only by the location of the applicant's primary Place of Business, not where the applicant may travel for work. 
G.  All City liquor licensees shall comply with the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, as amended, and this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.04.060 - City single event alcoholic beverage license required. 
A.  No entity shall sell beer, heavy beer, wine, flavored malt beverages, or liquor at an Event within the City without first procuring the necessary City single event alcoholic beverage license as required by this Chapter. Such entity, in addition to obtaining the necessary City single event alcoholic beverage license, shall also procure any required state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control temporary permit. A City single event alcoholic beverage license is required for every Event at which beer, heavy beer, wine, flavored malt beverages, or liquor will be sold, or consumed during Business Activity, even if no state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control temporary permit is required. 
B.  Each City single event alcoholic beverage license shall indicate—to the extent applicable—the type of state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control temporary permit for which the City single event alcoholic beverage license will be issued. 
C.  A separate City single event alcoholic beverage license shall be required for each corresponding state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control temporary permit required, or for each Event, if no state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control temporary permit is required. 
D.  No City single event alcoholic beverage license may be transferred, assigned, or subleased in any manner. City single event alcoholic beverage licenses are invalidated by transfer or attempted transfer. Change in Ownership of City single event alcoholic beverage licensee constitutes an invalidating transfer. 
E.  Lapse, suspension, or revocation of a state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control temporary permit shall result in automatic suspension of the corresponding City single event alcoholic beverage license. 
F.  A City single event alcoholic beverage license grants a bona fide association (i.e. limited liability company, corporation, partnership, or other incorporated association), religious organization, political organization, or a recognized subordinate lodge, chapter, or other local unit thereof, that is conducting an Event, and has been in existence for at least one (1) year (except in the case of political organizations for elected positions of the City, which are not required to have been in existence for at least one (1) year) on the date on which the entity applies for a City single event alcoholic beverage license, the privilege to store, sell, offer for sale, serve, and consume alcoholic beverages: 
1.  In accordance with an applicant's corresponding state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control temporary permit; or 
2.  In accordance with terms of the City single event alcoholic beverage license—if issued—if a state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control temporary permit is not required. 
G.  The privileges granted by a City single event alcoholic beverage license shall be limited further by the type of temporary permit the applicant obtains from the state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control as follows: 
1.  If an applicant obtains a state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control Temporary Beer Event Permit, a corresponding City single event alcoholic beverage license shall carry the privileges and responsibilities granted to state Temporary Beer Event Permit holders and shall authorize the storage, sale, offer for sale, service, and consumption of beer for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. A state Temporary Beer Event Permit may authorize multiple sales outlets on different properties under one state Temporary Beer Event Permit. No entity shall in any one (1) calendar year operate under one (1) or more City single event alcoholic beverage licenses for more than a total of ninety (90) days. 
2.  If an applicant obtains a state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control Single Event Permit, a corresponding City single event alcoholic beverage license shall carry the privileges and responsibilities granted to state Single Event Permit holders and shall authorize for a period not to exceed one-hundred and twenty (120) consecutive hours or five (5) consecutive days the storage, sale, offer for sale, service, and consumption of beer, heavy beer, wine, flavored malt beverages, or liquor. In any one (1) calendar year an applicant may obtain up to twelve (12) City single event alcoholic beverage licenses provided that all such City single event alcoholic beverage licenses in the calendar year are each for seventy-two (72) hours or fewer. No City single event alcoholic beverage license applicant may receive within one (1) calendar year more than four (4) City single event alcoholic beverage licenses for that one (1) calendar year if any one (1) or more City single event alcoholic beverage license that applicant receives during that calendar year is for more than seventy-two (72) hours. 
H.  Unless otherwise provided for in this Chapter, a City single event alcoholic beverage license is only valid if a licensee has received a state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control temporary permit for the same Event. All City single event alcoholic beverage licensees must notify the Community Development Director or his/her designee immediately if their state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control temporary permit application is denied, revoked, or suspended for any reason. If an applicant is not required to obtain a state Temporary Beer Event Permit or state Single Event Permit, the privileges granted by a City single event alcoholic beverage license shall be contingent upon the type of alcohol beverages to be served at the Event, as established by the terms of the City single event alcoholic beverage license application. Subject to the limitations of this Section, a City single event alcoholic beverage license authorizes the storage, sale, offer for sale, service, and consumption of alcoholic beverages only in conjunction with an Event. 
I.  If an Event is proposed to be located within two hundred (200) feet of a residence, then the applicant must provide proof that it has given notice to all residences within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed Event location at least six (6) business days and no more than thirty (30) calendar days prior to the issuance of the license. 
1.  The notice shall include: 
a.  The location, date, and time of the Event; 
b.  The name of the Organizer; 
c.  A statement that a resident may lodge an objection with the City within five days of delivery of the notice; and 
d.  The address and telephone number of the Community Development Department. 
2.  If a Person who resides within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed location objects to the Event, the Community Development Director shall, within five business days from the date the objection was received, make a determination of whether to grant the consent, after providing the applicant the opportunity to address the grounds of the objection. 
3.  In determining whether to grant a City single event alcoholic beverage license in light of an objection from entitled complainant, the Community Development Director shall consider: 
a.  The duration of the Event; 
b.  The grounds for the complaint; 
c.  Measures which will be taken by the applicant that may mitigate the complainants' concerns; and 
d.  Other relevant evidence provided by the complainant or applicant. 
J.  All City single event alcoholic beverage licensees shall comply with the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, as amended, and this Chapter. No person under the age of twenty-one (21) shall sell or serve alcohol under a City single event alcoholic beverage license. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.04.070 - City special-use license required. 
A.  No entity shall operate under a state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control special-use permit authorizing the special-use permittee to purchase, use, store, sell, offer for sale, consume, or manufacture an alcoholic product within the City without first procuring the necessary City special-use license, required by the City as the local alcoholic beverage licensing counterpart for a Use requiring corresponding state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control licensure. Such entity, in addition to obtaining the necessary City special-use license, shall also procure the required state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control license or sublicense and any applicable federal permit or license. 
B.  Each City special-use license shall indicate the type of state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control special-use permit for which the City special-use license will be issued. 
C.  A separate City special-use license shall be required for each state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control special-use permit required. 
D.  No City special-use license may be transferred, assigned, or subleased in any manner. City special-use licenses are invalidated by transfer or attempted transfer. Change in Ownership of a City special-use licensee constitutes an invalidating transfer. 
E.  Lapse, suspension, or revocation of a state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control special-use permit or applicable federal permit or license shall result in automatic suspension of the corresponding City special-use license. 
F.  No City special-use license shall issue to an applicant if the Use for which the applicant seeks the license is prohibited (see Title 17 land-use matrix) in the zoning district where the applicant proposes to use the license sought. 
G.  A City special-use license shall grant the special-use licensee to purchase, use, store, sell, offer for sale, consume, or manufacture an alcoholic product only in the quantity, in a type, and for a purpose stated in the corresponding state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control special-use permit. 
H.  All City special-use licensees shall comply with the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, as amended, and this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.04.080 - Application for City alcoholic beverage license or license renewal. 
A.  An application for a City alcoholic beverage license or license renewal requires at least the following: 
1.  A completed and signed application form; 
2.  The appropriate application or renewal fee, as set forth in the Consolidated Fee Schedule; 
3.  A copy of the applicant's current valid City business license or a complete City business license application for the entity to be licensed; 
4.  State and federal background checks; and 
5.  Proper land-use status—the applicant's proposed location and Use must be Permitted or Conditional in Chapter 17.03 and must comply with the requirements of Title 17 of this Code. No premises shall be concurrently licensed for both a City alcoholic beverage Use and a Sexually Oriented Business Use under Title 17. 
6.  The following specific conditions must exist at the time of application for any City alcoholic beverage license other than a City liquor license - Local Industry Representative, City special-use license (Religious), or City single event alcoholic beverage license: 
a.  Pedestrian lighting must be installed in all parking areas and abutting sidewalks; 
b.  Landscaping must meet current City Code standards; 
c.  The site and structures must meet current building code requirements for accessibility; 
d.  The site and structures must meet current fire code requirements; 
e.  Street-facing facades of the premises must feature windows covering at least fifty (50) percent of their surface area; 
f.  Any structure must feature architectural elements on all facades (e.g. metal awnings above all windows and doors, decorative sconces, upgraded exterior materials, etc.); 
g.  Security cameras and a video storage system which retains recordings for at least twenty-one (21) days, must be installed and maintained to record parking lots, entrances/exits, and rooms where the public is invited to congregate. The recordings must be made available to Enforcement Officials during the system's retention period; 
h.  The structure must be renovated to present a clean, new, attractive appearance in all spaces of the establishment where the public is permitted; 
i.  The site must conform to current City engineering standards (including paving of parking areas with concrete or asphalt and installation of curb, gutter, and sidewalk, as applicable); and 
j.  A compliant waste container enclosure must be located in the rear or side of the structure. 
B.  The City shall notify each applicant when all required application materials—including payment of any applicable fees—have been received and the application is complete. Nothing in this Chapter shall establish any additional property interests or rights in a license application, City alcoholic beverage license, or corresponding local consent issued by the City. 
C.  All City beer or liquor licenses expire annually. City beer or liquor licensees desiring to renew a City beer or liquor license shall submit the completed renewal application to the City no later than five (5) p.m. on the last City business day prior to the date the City beer or liquor license expires. Failure to renew the license prior to its expiration results forfeiture of the City beer or liquor license and the corresponding local consent. 
D.  Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Section, a City special-use license renews automatically without the payment of additional fees. 
E.  Applications shall be in a form prescribed by City Staff. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.04.081 - Application review by Police Chief. 
The Community Development Director or her/his designee shall refer all complete applications for a City alcoholic beverage license filed in accordance with this Chapter to the Police Chief or his/her designee for inspection, evaluation, and report. The Police Chief or his/her designee shall conduct an investigation to evaluate factors such as: 
A.  Whether the applicant meets the licensee qualifications under this Chapter; 
B.  Any criminal violations or charges against the applicant where the criminal violation at issue would make an applicant ineligible for a license under state statute or this Chapter; 
C.  Compliance with state alcoholic beverage laws; 
D.  The nature and kind of business to be conducted by the applicant; 
E.  The nature and kind of any entertainment to be conducted on the premises (if any); 
F.  Policies and safety protections the applicant has in place to restrict minors from accessing the portion or portions of a premises where alcoholic beverages are sold; and 
G.  Policies and safety protections the applicant has in place to prevent minors from gaining access to and/or consuming alcoholic beverages. 
The Police Chief or his/her designee shall, upon completion of such investigation, make to the Community Development Director a recommendation for approval or denial of the City alcoholic beverage license application. If recommending denial, the Police Chief or her/his designee shall submit a detailed report of the investigation, record the recommendation on the application, and sign the application. If recommending approval, the Police Chief or his/her designee shall record such recommendation on the application, sign the application, and may submit a detailed report of the investigation. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.04.082 - Application review by Building Division and Planning & Zoning Division. 
The Community Development Director or his/her designee shall refer all complete applications for a City alcoholic beverage license filed in accordance with this Chapter to the Building and Planning & Zoning Divisions for review by each division's Manager or his/her designee, respectively, to ensure compliance with the applicable building codes, to determine the maximum number of occupants the premises may safely accommodate at one time, given the location and number of emergency exits, and to ensure compliance with Title 17 and the proximity requirements under Section 32B-1-202 of the Utah Code, as amended. Building and Planning & Zoning Division representatives shall submit to the Community Development Director or her/his designee a recommendation to approve or deny the application, shall record such recommendation on the application, and sign the application. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.04.083 - Application review by Health Department. 
The Building Division may refer any application filed in accordance with this Chapter to the County Health Department, which may inspect all premises to be licensed to assure compliance with all laws and regulations of the state of Utah, and the ordinances, rules, and regulations of the City governing the sanitary preparation, storage, distribution, or sale of alcoholic beverages and food. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.04.090 - Periodic inspection of premises. 
All applicants, licensees, and consentees shall permit the Police Chief or his/her designees and any Enforcement Official, as defined in Title 8 of the City Code, to have access to make periodic inspections of all premises licensed or for which a license is sought under this Chapter; the findings of such inspections shall be reported to the Community Development Director or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.04.100 - Emergency suspension of license. 
The Police Chief or her/his designee and any Enforcement Official, as defined in Title 8 of the City Code, may immediately and temporarily suspend licenses issued under this Chapter without prior hearing provided there is probable cause to believe violations of this Chapter or state law are occurring, and the conditions are such that public health, safety, or welfare are endangered. Such temporary suspension shall occur only if the licensee or the licensee's Manager fails to remedy the situation within fifteen (15) minutes of notification by the Police Chief, Police Chief's designee, or Enforcement Official that a suspension will occur if the conditions complained of are not remedied in a manner that eliminates the immediate danger to public health, safety, or welfare. No emergency suspension under this provision shall extend more than twenty-four (24) hours beyond the time when the suspension was given. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.04.110 - Duty to report Acts of Violence on the Public Portion of the Premises. 
It is the duty of every City alcoholic beverage licensee to ensure that any of its Owners, Managers, employees, and security personnel who have reason to know that an Act of Violence has been committed on the Public Portion of the Premises immediately summon the City Police Department. Failure by a licensee or an Owner, Manager, employee, or security personnel of the licensee, who has reason to know that an Act of Violence has occurred on the Public Portion of the Premises, to immediately summon the City Police Department may result in suspension of the licensee's City alcoholic beverage license for a period of up to one year. After any incident involving an Act of Violence on the public portion of a licensee's premises, the licensee shall take all lawful measures necessary to prevent further Acts of Violence on the Public Portion of the Premises, including implementation of any security plan issued by the Chief of Police or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.04.120 - Licensee offenses. 
It shall be unlawful for any City alcoholic beverage licensee or any Owner, Manager, or employee of the licensee to cause or permit to be caused on the licensee's premises any of the following acts: 
A.  Sale During Revocations. To sell any beer or liquor during any period of a license revocation or suspension. 
B.  Nuisance Conduct, as defined within Title 5 of the City Code, and which includes loitering in the licensee's parking lot, creating offsite disturbances during night-time hours while on the licensee's property, or littering. 
C.  Failure to Control Noise. To permit or provide either live or recorded amplified music without first having closed all exterior doors and windows of the licensed premises to control noise, or in any case to permit the creation of noise that violates Salt Lake County Health Department regulations. Doors may be opened for ingress and egress but shall not be propped in the open position to provide ventilation. Doors shall be equipped with automatic closing devices to keep them in the closed position except to permit ingress and egress. 
D.  Outdoor Speakers. To permit or cause to exist any loud speaker or sound amplification equipment on any vehicle, outdoor balcony, deck, patio, or garden associated with the licensed premises other than speaker systems or sound amplification equipment in conjunction with approved outdoor dining. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.04.130 - Patron offenses. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within a premises licensed under this Chapter, whether as a guest, patron, invitee, supplier, or in any other capacity other than as employee of the license holder or as the licensee to commit or perform any of the following within the premises: 
A.  To enter or remain in any licensed premises after being ordered to leave the premises by the licensee or an Owner, Manager, or employee of the licensee. 
B.  To enter or remain in any licensed premises while Intoxicated. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.04.140 - Citations and violations. 
The commission of any offense listed in this Chapter shall be a Class B misdemeanor unless otherwise indicated. Both the City alcoholic beverage licensee and/or an Owner, Manager, or employee of the licensee, and the patron of the licensed premises may be charged from the same incident, as the offenses of the licensee and the offenses of the patron are separate offenses. The licensee shall be civilly responsible for all violations permitted or caused by an Owner, Manager, or employee of the licensee and the criminal acts of an Owner, Manager, or employee of the licensee committed on the premises in the course of employment shall be deemed the acts of the licensee for purposes of suspension, revocation, or non-renewal by the City. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.04.150 - Suspension or revocation. 
A City alcoholic beverage license shall be suspended or revoked as follows: 
A.  City alcoholic beverage licenses are subject to suspension under the following conditions: 
1.  Upon the City receiving evidence of any act or failure to act by an Owner, Manager, or employee of a City alcoholic beverage licensee that would be a violation of state law or local ordinance regulating the conduct of the licensee except those specified in Subsection (B) of this Section which allow revocation; 
2.  Nuisance Conduct, as described in the City Code or state law; 
3.  Suspension of a state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control license, sublicense, Package Agency, or permit; or 
4.  Any other reason for which a business license may be suspended under this Title. 
B.  City alcoholic beverage licenses are subject to revocation under the following conditions: 
1.  After determining that a licensee's application contains materially false information; 
2.  Upon the City receiving evidence that a licensee no longer qualifies for the corresponding state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control license, sublicense, Package Agency, or permit, as set forth in state law, or applicable federal license or permit, as set forth in federal law; 
3.  Upon the City receiving evidence that an Owner, Manager, or employee of a licensee has, while on the business premises: 
a.  Solicited, aided, or exploited a prostitute; 
b.  Purchased, sold, or attempted to sell a controlled substance as defined by state law; or 
c.  Sold or provided alcohol to a minor or interdicted person; 
4.  Upon the City receiving evidence that an Owner or Manager of a licensee has, while on the business premises possessed or consumed a controlled substance in violation of state law; 
5.  For a second act or failure to act by an Owner, Manager, or employee of a licensee that would be a violation of state law or local ordinance regulating the conduct of the licensee, occurring within twenty-four (24) months of the first such act or failure to act; or 
6.  Any other reason for which a business license may be revoked under this Title. 
Suspension or revocation of a City alcoholic beverage license constitutes withdrawal of local consent for the corresponding state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control license, sublicense, Package Agency, or permit under the terms (duration, etc.) of the applicable City alcoholic beverage license suspension or revocation. Suspension or revocation of a City alcoholic beverage license shall also result in automatic suspension of the alcoholic beverage components of any City business license associated with the premises. Furthermore, no Person who has been denied a City alcoholic beverage license or whose City alcoholic beverage license has been revoked, and no Person associated or connected with such a Person in conduct related to the premises for which the City alcoholic beverage license was denied or revoked, shall be granted a City alcoholic beverage license for the subject premises for a period of six (6) months after such denial or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.04.160 - Ineligibility and disqualification. 
No City alcoholic beverage license shall issue to an applicant with an Owner or Manager with Disqualifying History. Similarly, any licensee with an Owner or Manager discovered to have Disqualifying History after receiving a City alcoholic beverage license shall have its City alcoholic beverage license revoked. All City alcoholic beverage licensees shall notify the Community Development Director or her/his designee within ten (10) days of any Owner or Manager being convicted of any offense listed below: 
A.  A felony under federal law or state law; 
B.  A violation of a federal law, state law, or local ordinance concerning the sale, offer for sale, warehousing, manufacture, distribution, transportation, or adulteration of an alcoholic product; 
C.  A crime involving Moral Turpitude; or 
D.  Any offense listed under Subsection 41-6a-501(2)(a) of the Utah Code, as amended. 
Failure to timely notify the Community Development Director or her/his designee of a conviction listed in this Subsection shall result in revocation of the City alcoholic beverage license. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.04.170 - Alcoholic beverage license/consent waiting list. 
The City shall not issue a City alcoholic beverage license, if doing so would cause the City to exceed the allowable number of licenses that the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control permits the City to issue for any particular category of business, or when doing so would cause the City to exceed any locally established quota. When the available number of licenses or consents is exhausted for a particular category of business, the City shall maintain a waiting list for applicable City alcoholic beverage license types. To be placed on the waiting list, an applicant shall complete an application for the type of license sought. The Applicant shall then be placed on the waiting list in chronological order based upon the date and time of application completion. When a license becomes available for the category of business for which the application was made, the City shall notify the applicant. Thereafter, the Applicant shall have one hundred twenty (120) days to take all steps necessary to obtain approval of its application from the City. An applicant on the waiting list may remove its name from the waiting list at any time but forfeits the nonrefundable application fee by removing its name. An applicant on the waiting list shall renew its application annually no later than 5 p.m. on the last City business day before the anniversary of the original application. Failure to pay the annual application fee on time will result in the applicant being returned to the bottom of the waiting list. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.04.180 - City alcoholic beverage license caps. 
The City shall limit its issuance of City alcoholic beverage licenses to the following license types in the amounts indicated below: 
A.  Off-Premise Beer and Package Agency. The total number of City alcoholic beverage licenses issued for a corresponding state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control Off-Premise Beer license or sublicense or Package Agency shall not exceed a ratio of one City alcoholic beverage license per 400 individuals of City population; 
B.  Banquet and Catering, Beer Recreational, Restaurant (Beer Only), Restaurant (Limited Service), Restaurant (Full Service), and Manufacturing (Brewery, Winery, & Distillery). The total number of City alcoholic beverage licenses issued for a corresponding state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control Banquet and Catering, Beer Recreational, Restaurant (Beer Only), Restaurant (Limited Service), or Restaurant (Full Service) license or sublicense shall not exceed a ratio of one City alcoholic beverage license per 800 individuals of City population; and 
C.  Bar Establishment and Tavern. The total number of City alcoholic beverage licenses issued for a corresponding state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control Bar Establishment or Tavern license or sublicense shall not exceed a ratio of one City alcoholic beverage license per 3,000 individuals of City population, except that an additional three City alcoholic beverage licenses may be allowed in excess of the quota if they are issued in the Downtown District. 
For purposes of this Section, population shall be determined by the most recent United States decennial or special census. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.04.190 - Notice of adverse decision. 
The City shall give notice to any applicant, licensee, or consentee of adverse action by mailing notice by regular mail to the representative of the applicant, licensee, consentee identified in the application made to the City at the address listed in the application. The notice shall be deemed served upon actual notice, three (3) days after mailing, or upon personal service at the business premises. The notice shall convey the following information: 
A.  A brief summary of the facts supporting the action; 
B.  A reference to the state law or section of City Code upon which the action is based; 
C.  A description of the action being taken (denial, suspension, revocation, fine, etc.); 
D.  The sanction imposed, if applicable; and 
E.  A brief explanation of the right to appeal the decision, including the deadline to appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.04.200 - Appeals. 
Decisions by the City that aggrieve either a licensee or an applicant may be appealed to the administrative law judge in accordance with Chapter 2.22 of the City Code unless a provision outside of this Chapter is used as the basis for the appealed decision, in which case the appeal process applicable to that provision will apply. Notwithstanding this provision, the decision of whether to grant consent for a City single event alcoholic beverage license is not appealable to the administrative law judge. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
Chapter 5.05 - SPECIAL EVENTS 
Sections: 
 
5.05.010 - Purpose. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the policy codified in this Chapter is to ensure that Special Events staged in or affecting the use of the public way are conducted to minimize the impact on traffic and neighborhoods. 
B.  Objective. The objective of this policy is to designate methods by which Special Events will be fairly and expeditiously managed by the City. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.05.020 - Application and Event Requirements and Restrictions. 
A.  Special Event applications must be submitted to the City recorder at least ten (10) days before any advertising for such event commences. 
B.  Special Event applications must include the following information: 
1.  Name of the Organizer, contact Person, and telephone number; 
2.  Type of event; 
3.  Date, time, and location of the event; 
4.  Map of the proposed route or site with barricade plan; 
5.  Expected length and duration of event; 
6.  Expected number of attendees; 
7.  Services requested from the parks (water, stage, etc.) police, public works, or other City departments, if available; 
8.  The admission fee or donation to be charged or requested; 
C.  Event support shall be provided by the City. Event Support Fees shall be paid for by the event Organizer. Costs may include an administrative overhead charge. 
1.  Upon City approval to hold the event or begin filming, the event Organizer will be required to pay the estimated support fees. 
2.  City support costs include, but are not limited to, police, fire and EMT protection, park maintenance and other costs to City directly attributable to the Special Event. 
3.  City support shall be limited to the minimum necessary to ensure a safe event. Police protection needs will be determined and assigned by the chief of police or designee; park maintenance will be performed by the parks department. Closure of roads and streets will be administered by the public works department. 
4.  The event Organizer will be billed by the City for the remaining support fees, if any, no later than thirty (30) days after the event has been held or film production is closed. Amounts due are payable within thirty (30) days of the date of invoice. Any refund due the Organizer will be paid by the City within thirty (30) days after the event. 
D.  The event Organizer must provide police and fire protection and traffic and crowd control to the extent determined by the chief or designee of the affected public safety department, at the sole expense of the Organizer. 
E.  Barricades must be provided by the event Organizer and must meet the requirements established by the transportation engineer. The public works department will provide event Organizers with the names of companies which lease suitable barricades. 
F.  The use of a park facility for the start or finish of races, runs, walks, bicycle races, etc., is subject to charges for services and will be held in accordance with parks department policies and procedures. 
G.  The City assumes no liability for the safety of participants or spectators. 
H.  Liability insurance is required of all Organizers. 
I.  An Organizer is strictly liable to City for any damage to City property caused by the Organizer, its employees and agents, and by attendees or audience members at the event. 
J.  Movie and commercial filming events are subject to the following additional requirements: 
1.  Production and support vehicles may not be parked overnight on any street in a residential zone without express permission from the police department; 
2.  Use of any pyrotechnic or similar flammable visual display must be approved by the City; 
3.  The Organizer's contact Person must notify Neighboring Business Owners and Residents in advance of filming and inform about potential impact of the event. The City may determine the extent and scope of this notice requirement. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.05.030 - Appeal process. 
Appeals of actions regarding Special Events shall be made using the administrative hearing process outlined in Chapter 2.22 of the City Code. All appeals must be made in writing and filed in the City recorder's office within ten (10) days of the date of the decision being appealed. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.05.040 - Critique of event. 
A.  All City agencies involved in the review and execution of Special Events are required to submit a "Critique of the Event" to the police department within thirty (30) days following any event. The police department will use such critiques to evaluate annual events for problem solving purposes for future events and will be reported to the mayor. 
B.  Event Organizers are encouraged to submit a "Critique of the Event" to the police department as well as for retention in the file. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
Chapter 5.06 - AMUSEMENT DEVICES 
Sections: 
 
5.06.010 - License Required. 
It is unlawful for any Person to operate, use, or permit to be operated or used on any property in his or her possession or control, any amusement device in his or her possession or control, without first having obtained a license from the City that shall be posted in a conspicuous place on each Amusement Device. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.06.020 - Form of License. 
Licenses shall be in the form of a label and must be posted onto the Amusement Device for which it is issued. Each separate Amusement Device requires a separate license. All licenses shall contain the words "Licensed Amusement Device, City of South Salt Lake," the device number, and the year issued. All licenses shall be numbered consecutively. All Amusement Devices shall be operated on the premises of the original licensee only. Amusement Device licenses expire annually. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.06.030 - Fee. 
The fee for an Amusement Device license shall be determined in accordance with the consolidated fee schedule, or any subsequent superseding ordinance or resolution passed by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.06.040 - Not Transferable. 
Licenses issued under this Chapter shall not be transferable either as to the licensee, the premises or location, or from one Amusement Device to another. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.06.050 - Limitations on Licenses. 
No license shall be issued for an Amusement Device that is located in any building within two hundred (200) feet of any church or school, except by special permission of the City Council. No business license issued to any Person or firm includes the right to operate an Amusement Device. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.06.060 - Gambling Devices not Licensed. 
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to permit the licensing of any type of gambling device. If any properly licensed Amusement Device is used for gambling the license shall be revoked, the Amusement Device shall be confiscated, and the owner or operator may be prosecuted for a misdemeanor violation as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
Chapter 5.07 - AUCTIONS 
Sections: 
 
5.07.010 - Limit of Scope of Chapter. 
The provisions of this Chapter shall not be applicable to Auction sales conducted by trustees or referees in bankruptcy, executors, administrators, receivers, or other public officers acting under judicial process, nor to the sale of real property at Auction; nor shall it apply to any Auction held for charitable or benevolent purposes or for any church, fair, festival or bazaar; nor to an Auction wherein the general public is not invited nor permitted to participate as bidders, or where the bidding and sale is wholly online or is restricted to wholesalers or retailers purchasing for resale. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.07.020 - Compliance Required for Auction Sales. 
No personal property (goods, wares, or merchandise) shall be sold at Auction in the City of South Salt Lake, except in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.07.030 - Auctioneer's License Required. 
It is unlawful to sell, cause, or permit to be sold at Auction, personal property (goods, wares or merchandise) in the City of South Salt Lake unless such sale is conducted by a properly licensed Auctioneer within the City of South Salt Lake. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.07.040 - Application for Auctioneer's License. 
An Auctioneer's license requires the following information: 
A.  Name of the applicant; 
B.  Residence and business address of the applicant; 
C.  The length of time for which an Auctioneer's license is desired; and 
D.  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal ordinance related to an Auction, and if so, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.07.050 - Inventory of Sale Articles. 
A.  At least fifteen (15) days prior to every Auction, a true and correct inventory of items to be sold shall be filed with the business license official of South Salt Lake. 
B.  Such inventory shall: (1) list the articles proposed to be sold at sale by Auction; (2) provide any identifying numbers or marks that may be on the articles to be sold; (3) indicate opposite the description of each article whether the same is new or used; and (4) list each of the articles described in the inventory with a number; provided, however, that no article need be listed in the inventory that has a retail value of less than five dollars ($5.00). Upon receipt of such inventory, it will be forwarded to the police department for investigation to establish insofar as possible that the property therein listed is not contraband or otherwise illegal for sale. After investigation, the police shall issue a written report to the business license official within ten (10) days after receipt of the inventory, and no Auction may be held until such report is received by the business license official, the Auction approved by the mayor, and the appropriate license issued by the City. It is unlawful to sell at Auction any item not listed on the inventory as set forth above. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.07.060 - Refusal or revocation of license. 
An Auctioneer's license may be revoked by a business license official or an application for issuance or renewal of such license may be refused by the business license official, if the official determines: 
A.  That the application contains any false, fraudulent, or misleading material statements; 
B.  That the applicant or license holder has made any false, fraudulent, or misleading material statement in the course of conducting an Auction sale of, or in offering for sale at Auction, any real or personal property (goods, wares or merchandise) in the City of South Salt Lake; 
C.  That the applicant or license holder has perpetrated a fraud upon any Person whether or not such fraud was perpetrated in the conduct of an Auction in the City of South Salt Lake; 
D.  That the applicant or license holder has violated any of the statutes of the state of Utah relating to Auctions or Auctioneers; 
E.  That the applicant has been convicted of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude related to an Auction; or 
F.  That the applicant or license holder has conducted an Auction sale, or offered for sale at Auction, any real or personal property (goods, wares or merchandise) in the City of South Salt Lake in an unlawful manner. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.07.070 - Bond Required Prior to License Issuance. 
Every applicant for an Auctioneer's license shall file with the City recorder a surety bond running to South Salt Lake City, in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and approved by the City Attorney conditioned that if an Auctioneer's license is issued the applicant shall: (1) comply fully with all ordinances of the City South Salt Lake and statutes of the state of Utah regulating and concerning Auctions and Auctioneers, will render true and strict accounts of all sales to any Person or Persons employing him to make the same; or (2) not commit any fraud or deceit at any Auction sale or permit any Person in his Employ to commit any such fraud or deceit, and shall pay all damages sustained by any Person by reason of any fraud, deceit, negligence, or other wrongful act on the part of the licensee, his agents, or employees in the conduct of any Auction or in the exercise of the calling of an Auctioneer. A liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state of Utah that conforms to the above requirements may be permitted by the City Attorney in his discretion in lieu of a bond. An Auctioneer employed by a Person holding an Auction House license or a Transient Auction House license, in lieu of filing a bond or certificate of insurance, may file a notarized affidavit from the license holder that affirms that the applicant is an Employee, that such license holder is responsible for all actions of his Employee, and that the Employee is covered by a valid bond as above required. 
It is unlawful for an Auctioneer who files a certificate of employment with an Auction House licensee or Transient Auction House licensee to conduct an Auction except under the direct supervision of the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.07.080 - Auction House License Required. 
It is unlawful for any Person to Engage in the Business of, or keep, conduct, or operate an Auction House in the City of South Salt Lake without first obtaining a license to do so and filing a bond as required in Section 5.07.120. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.07.090 - Auction House License Fee. 
The fee for such a license shall be determined in accordance with the consolidated fee schedule, or any subsequent superseding ordinance or resolution by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.07.100 - Transient Auction House Owner—License Period. 
It is unlawful for any Person to conduct an Auction as a Transient Auction House owner, without applying for and obtaining a Transient Auction House owner's license from the business license official. Provided, however, that a Person that holds an Auction House license shall not be required to also obtain a Transient auction house license. No Person shall be relieved from the provisions of this Chapter due to a temporary association with any licensed dealer, trader, merchant, or Auctioneer, notwithstanding the fact that such parties conduct such temporary or Transient Auction business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any other licensed dealer, trader, merchant, or Auctioneer. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.07.110 - Transient Auction House License Fee. 
The license fee for Engaging in Business as a Transient Auction House owner shall be payable in advance for each day such business shall continue. The fee a Transient Auction House license shall be determined in accordance with the consolidated fee schedule, or any subsequent superseding ordinance or resolution adopted by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.07.120 - Transient Auction House Bond Required. 
The applicant for a Transient Auction House license shall file with the City recorder of South Salt Lake City a corporate surety bond acceptable to and approved by the City Attorney in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and shall indemnify and run to South Salt Lake City and any person injured or damaged through dealing with the licensee, or their Employees or agents and be in full force and effect for the year in which they obtain a license. Any surety bond shall be conditioned on the licensee (1) fully complying with all ordinances of South Salt Lake City and statutes of the state of Utah regulating and concerning Auctions and Auctioneers; (2) rendering true and strict accounts of all auction sales to any Person or Persons employing the Auctioneer to make the same; (3) will not commit any fraud, deceit, or make any material misrepresentations of fact with reference to property or bidders or purchasers of property from any Auction sale conducted under the license and will pay all damages which may be sustained by any person by reason of any fraud, deceit, negligence, or wrongful act on the part of the licensee, his agents, or Employees and the conduct of Auctioneer in the exercise of the call of Auctioneer. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.07.130 - Sale Merchandise Must be Labeled. 
Before any sale is made at Auction, the licensee must attach to each article to be sold, that has a retail value of five dollars ($5.00) or greater, a card with the article number corresponding to the article as it is described in the inventory form on file with the business license official, as set forth in this Chapter. No article with a retail value of five dollars ($5.00) or greater shall be sold at any Auction, other than the merchandise described in the inventory form on file with the business license official. Where a sale is had at public auction of the stock on hand of any merchant or auction house, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, such sale shall not be fed or replenished. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.07.140 - False Representation Prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any Auctioneer, to describe any goods, wares, or merchandise, with respect to character, quality, kind, value, or otherwise, in a fraudulent, misleading, untruthful or unwarranted manner that would tend to mislead bidders, or to cause one item sold to be substituted for another. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.07.150 - Reserved Right of Seller to Bid. 
The right to bid may be reserved expressly by, or on behalf of, the seller; provided, however, that notice of such reservation shall be posted, and shall remain posted throughout the Auction sale, in a prominent and conspicuous place where the sale is being conducted, in letters large enough to be reasonably visible to any Person with normal vision, and shall read substantially as follows: 
SELLER RESERVES THE RIGHT TO BID ON ANY ARTICLE AT ANY TIME. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.07.160 - Unlawful for Seller to Bid at Sale Without Reserve. 
Where notice has not been given that a sale by Auction is subject to a right to bid on behalf of the seller, it shall not be lawful for the seller to bid or to Employ or induce any Person to bid on his behalf or for the Auctioneer to Employ or induce any Person to bid on behalf of the seller or knowingly to take any bid from the seller or any Person Employed by him. Any sale contravening this rule may be treated as fraudulent by the buyer. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.07.170 - By Bidders Prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any Person to act at any Auction as a by bidder or booster to buy on behalf of the Auctioneer or owner, to increase the price of the article to be sold, or to make a false bid. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.07.180 - Continuous Attendance by Licensee Required. 
The licensee or, if a corporation, one of the officers of the licensee, shall remain in continuous attendance at any Auction. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.07.190 - Representation of Quality Must be Truthful. 
All sales and all Persons participating in sales must truly and correctly represent to the public attending such Auction the facts in respect to quality of the sale merchandise. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.07.200 - Record of Sales to be Kept. 
The licensee in every case, where an article is sold for five dollars ($5.00) or more, shall keep a complete record of all such sales made at auction, showing the name and address of each purchaser, a description of each article sold, including the number thereof, corresponding with the numbers shown upon the inventory form on file with the business license official, and the date of each sale. The sales record shall be available for inspection by the business license official at any time. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.07.210 - Sale Merchandise to be in City for Fifteen Days. 
It is unlawful for anyone to sell or offer for sale at Auction any merchandise unless the merchandise shall have been within the City of South Salt Lake at least fifteen (15) days immediately prior to the sale or offer for sale and the City business license official shall be given five (5) days advance notice of any arrival of merchandise in South Salt Lake; provided that livestock shall be required only to be at the location where a sale is held not less than two (2) days prior to Auction. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.07.220 - Auction to be on Successive Days. 
All Auction sales shall be held on successive days, Sundays and legal holidays excepted. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.07.230 - Receipts for Goods—Commission. 
It is the duty of all licensed Auctioneers to receive all articles that may be offered for sale at Auction, and give receipts therefor; and at the close of any sale, that must be made as the owner directs, the Auctioneer shall deliver a fair account of such sale, and pay the amount received for such articles to the person entitled thereto, deducting therefrom a commission not to exceed ten (10) percent on the amount of such sale. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.07.240 - Prohibited Conduct at Auction Sales. 
All Auctioneers are prohibited from conducting their Auctions in such manner as to cause people to obstruct sidewalks. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.07.250 - Licensees to Conform to Other Laws. 
Nothing in this Chapter shall exempt any Auction House or Auctioneer, or the seller of any goods sold at Auction from any license, from tax, any ordinance of the City South Salt Lake, nor any of the laws of the state of Utah to which they may be subject. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.07.260 - Right to Return Articles—Sign Required. 
Purchasers at Auctions of valuable articles may return such articles purchased at auction for a period of ninety (90) days to the Auction House licensee and receive from the licensee a full refund upon tender of such merchandise with proof of purchase. Failure of the Auction House licensee to provide such refund within a period of five (5) days after presentation of such merchandise, proof of purchase, and demand for refund shall result in loss of Auction House license and forfeiture of posted bond to the extent necessary to satisfy the demand of claimants under this Section. To the extent that such auction house licensee fails to meet such claims, then the Auction House licensee shall be liable to such purchasers directly. 
All Auction House licensees shall post a notice in a prominent, conspicuous place wherein any Auction sales are being conducted, in letters large enough to be visible to any person with normal vision who may attend such sale, reading substantially as follows: 
PURCHASERS OF MERCHANDISE ACQUIRED AT THIS AUCTION MAY, FOR A PERIOD OF 90 DAYS FROM THE DATE OF PURCHASE, RETURN SUCH MERCHANDISE TO (THE AUCTION HOUSE LICENSEE) AND RECEIVE THE FULL REFUND OF ANY AMOUNTS PAID FOR SUCH MERCHANDISE. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.07.270 - Records to be submitted to license department. 
Any Auction House licensee providing facilities for Auctioneers of valuable articles shall, within a period of ten (10) days following the final day of any Auction of such valuable articles, provide the City licensing department with complete records of all sales of valuable articles including: 
A.  The names and addresses of all purchasers of all valuable articles at the auction and the date upon which such purchase was made. 
B.  A description of the valuable article purchased, and the purchase price paid for such article. 
C.  The name and address of the Auctioneer selling such articles and the name and address of the responsible Person or entity on whose behalf the Auctioneer made such sale. 
D.  The name and address of Auction House licensee. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
Chapter 5.08 - COMMERCIAL VEHICLES 
Sections: 
 
5.08.010 - When license required. 
It is unlawful for any Person to use, operate or run, or to cause or permit any of his employees or agents to use, operate or run, for the purpose of his business, any commercial vehicle, taxicab, auto stage, truck or other motor vehicle of any description upon the streets of the City of South Salt Lake without first paying the fee provided in the consolidated fee schedule, or any subsequent superseding ordinance or resolution by the City Council and obtaining a license for each vehicle so used and operated. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.08.020 - Issuance of decals. 
Every vehicle licensed under this Section shall have fastened thereupon in such manner that the same may be plainly seen a suitable decal to be furnished by the City indicating the year for which it is issued; and it is unlawful to use, operate or run any such vehicle, although the same be duly licensed, upon the streets of the City of South Salt Lake unless such decal is attached thereto; and it is unlawful for any Person, upon the expiration of such license, or upon the revocation of the same, to permit or suffer such license number to be or remain attached to his vehicle, or to operate or run his vehicle after his license has expired or has been revoked; and each day any vehicle is so used without the owner thereof having procured a license therefor in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter, shall constitute and be considered a separate and distinct offense under this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.08.030 - License not transferable. 
It is unlawful for any licensee to sell, transfer or assign any license issued under the provisions of this Chapter, except by permission of the business license official. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.08.040 - Exceptions, license requirements. 
Vehicles Licensed in Other Municipalities or exempt from Licensure by State Law. Any Person having a residence or Place of Business without the limits of the City of South Salt Lake, who shall use, operate or run a vehicle on the streets of the City for the purposes of his business shall be required to procure a license for each such vehicle, according to the schedule and provisions of this Chapter; provided, however, that any such vehicle, except an automobile stage, which has been licensed by any other City or municipality of the state of Utah, which municipality recognizes the license issued by the City of South Salt Lake shall be exempt from the license fees imposed by this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
Chapter 5.09 - PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS 
Sections: 
 
5.09.010 - New merchandise dealer exemption. 
The provisions of this Chapter are inapplicable to any merchant or dealer whose principal business is the selling of new merchandise and secondhand merchandise is taken in as a trade incident to the sale of new merchandise. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.09.020 - License required. 
It is unlawful for any Person to operate as a secondhand dealer, secondhand precious metal and/or precious gem dealer, Junk Dealer, Junk Collector, antique dealer, coin dealer, processor or pawnbroker, without first obtaining a license to do so. A separate license shall be required for each location and for the conduct of the business of a dealer. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.09.030 - Application for license. 
A.  Each application for a license shall be made on the form that the business license official requires, and the applicant shall certify that the information given is true and correct under the penalties of perjury. 
B.  Each application for a dealer's license shall contain such information as deemed necessary by the chief of police and the business license official, including, but not limited to, a statement that the applicant authorizes the South Salt Lake police department or other Category I peace officers, to inspect the books, records, inventory and premises of the business during normal business hours. 
C.  Only individuals may apply for a dealer's license. 
1.  If an application for a license is made on behalf of a corporation or limited partnership, the license shall be applied for by and issued to the president of the corporation or members of the partnership who are authorized to act for it. 
2.  If the application is made on behalf of a partnership, the license shall be applied for by and issued to all of the partners who are authorized to act for the partnership. Where any partner is a corporation or limited partnership, the application shall be made by and issued to the president of the corporation or members of the limited partnership who are authorized to act for it. 
3.  Each individual who applies for a dealer's license under this Section assumes, as an individual, all responsibilities of the dealer and, as an individual, is subject to all conditions, restrictions and requirements imposed on dealers. 
D.  Each individual applying for a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or secondhand precious metal/gem dealer license shall not be issued a license until such time as the police department has conducted a background investigation on the applicant and recommended favorable consideration of the application. No such applicant may be authorized to conduct any business until his application has been approved by the police department and the applicant has complied with all other licensing and bonding provisions contained in this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.09.040 - Bond required. 
Every Person licensed under this Chapter except Junk Collectors shall be required as a condition prerequisite to their obtaining a license or renewing a license provided for under this Chapter to deliver to the business license official a surety bond of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in a form and with sufficient sureties as is determined by the City Attorney for the faithful compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
A.  It is unlawful for any Person licensed by this Chapter to fail to keep a substantial and well-bound book, in a format specified by the chief of police in which he shall enter at the time of purchase, in the English language: 
1.  The name, date of birth, address and physical description of the Person selling the secondhand property; 
2.  The driver's license number or similar proof of identification of the Person selling the secondhand property; 
3.  The date and time of the transaction; 
4.  The identification of the Person making the record entry; 
5.  A description of the item purchased or obtained by the dealer, including, but not limited to, a description of the metallic composition, any jewels, stones or glass, and a listing of all numbers, marks, monograms, trademarks, manufacturer's names, serial numbers, and any other marks of identification appearing on the item; 
6.  The weight of the item or items, where payment is based on weight; and 
7.  The consideration paid for the item, or if pawned, the amount of money loaned or advanced. 
B.  In addition to the requirements of Subsection (A) of this Section, a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, antique dealer, coin dealer and a secondhand precious metal/gem dealer shall also obtain and keep the following: 
1.  A written certificate, on forms prescribed by the chief of police, that the Person delivering the property has the legal right to sell such property. 
2.  If the value of the property exceeds twenty dollars ($20.00), the secondhand dealer, pawnbroker, antique dealer, coin dealer, secondhand precious metal/gem dealer or Persons receiving such property shall also require the seller or Person delivering the property, whether known or not, to give a legible print, preferably the right thumb, at the bottom of the certificate next to his signature. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.09.050 - Legibility of records. 
A.  Inspection of Records and Premises. All entries shall be made with ink in a legible manner, and all records of all dealers defined in this Chapter shall be open to inspection by any Category I peace officer at any time. Category I peace officers shall also be permitted to have access to the premises licensed under this Chapter for the purpose of the inspection of such premises. 
B.  This Section does not apply to Coin Collectors, Junk Collectors, Junk Dealers, or Metal Processors, when dealing with other licensed dealers. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.09.060 - Copies to chief of police. 
It is unlawful for any Person licensed by this Chapter to fail to submit the certificates required to be maintained by Section 5.09.040(B) to the chief of police on the business day following the entry, except that the records regarding merchandise purchased from other dealers need not be so submitted, but shall be retained by the dealer at his Place of Business for inspection by any Category I peace officer. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.09.070 - Property to be kept thirty days before disposition. 
A.  It is unlawful for any Person licensed by this Chapter to sell, melt, change (except for customary testing), take apart, destroy, obliterate identification marks or dispose of any secondhand property purchased or obtained by a dealer until thirty (30) days have elapsed from the date of compliance with the reporting requirements of Sections 5.09.040, 5.09.050 and 5.09.060, or for such additional time as to any specific item or items as may be directed by the chief of police or his designee. All items being so stored shall be segregated from other items and shall be identified by a tag attached to the property numbered in a manner to correspond with the number of the transaction description in the business records required to be kept by Section 5.09.050. Items purchased in bulk may be tagged in bulk. Items may be stored at other locations in Salt Lake County approved by the chief of police. The dealer shall produce these items at the business location within one hour of a request to do so by a Category I peace officer. Where compliance is impossible because of the close of business hours, the item shall be produced within one hour of the opening of business on the next business day. 
B.  The requirements of Subsection (A) of this Section shall not be applicable to any unidentifiable secondhand precious metals which have been inspected and received written clearance for earlier disposition by the chief of police or his designee. 
C.  The chief of police may, by written directive, modify the holding, record keeping or reporting requirements of this Section as they pertain to gold and silver coins. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.09.080 - Receiving stolen property. 
A.  A Person commits theft if he receives, retains or disposes of the property of another knowing that it has been stolen, or believing that it probably has been stolen, or who conceals, sells, withholds or aids in concealing, selling or withholding any such property from the owner, knowing the property to be stolen, with a purpose to deprive the owner thereof. 
B.  The knowledge or belief required for Subsection (A) of this Section is presumed in the case of an actor who: 
1.  Is found in possession or control of other property stolen on a separate occasion; or 
2.  Has received other stolen property within the year preceding the receiving offense charged; or 
3.  Being a dealer in property of the sort received, retained or disposed, acquires it for a consideration which he knows is far below its reasonable value; or 
4.  Is a pawnbroker or Person who has or operates a business dealing in or collecting used or secondhand merchandise or personal property, or an agent, employee or representative of the pawnbroker or Person who buys, receives or obtains property and fails to require the seller or person delivering the property to certify, in writing, that he has the legal rights to sell the property. If the value given for the property exceeds twenty dollars ($20.00) the pawnbroker or Person shall also require the seller or person delivering the property to obtain a legible print, preferably the right thumb, at the bottom of the certificate next to his signature and at least one other positive form of identification. 
a.  Every pawnbroker or Person who has or operates a business dealing in or collecting used or secondhand merchandise or personal property, and every agent, employee or representative of the pawnbroker or person who fails to comply with the requirements of Subsection (B)(4) of this Section shall be presumed to have bought, received or obtained the property knowing it to have been stolen or unlawfully obtained. This presumption may be rebutted by proof. 
b.  When in a prosecution under this Section it appears from the evidence that the defendant was a pawnbroker or a Person who has or operates a business dealing in or collecting used or secondhand merchandise or personal property, or was an agent, employee, or representative of a pawnbroker or person, that the defendant bought, received, concealed or withheld the property without requiring the person from whom he bought, received, or obtained the property to sign the certificate required in Subsection (B)(4) of this Section and in the event the transaction involves an amount exceeding twenty dollars ($20.00) also places his legible print, preferably the right thumb, on the certificate, then the burden shall be upon the defendant to show that the property bought, received or obtained was not stolen. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.09.090 - Dealing with minors prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any licensee under this Chapter by himself, his agents or servants, to purchase or receive any personal property, book, current public-school textbook, or any articles whatsoever from any person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.09.100 - Secondhand dealers—Restrictions. 
No Person licensed under this Chapter as a secondhand dealer shall purchase, barter, exchange or sell any secondhand merchandise other than that of the same type and character which comprise his principal business. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.09.110 - Stolen goods. 
It is the duty of every pawnbroker or dealer to report to the police department any article pledged with or sold, or which is sought to pledge with him, or sell, if he shall have reason to believe that the article was stolen or lost, or found by the person attempting to pledge it or sell it in the case of a lost article. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.09.120 - Conduct of business—Partition. 
It is unlawful for any pawnbroker to keep or maintain his pawnbroker business in the same room or rooms with any other business whatsoever The partition walls separating the pawnbroker's business from other places of business must be of solid materials, and all connecting doors or other openings must be securely closed and locked at all times. Gratings, lattice or similar open work or contrivance will not be sufficient partition under the provisions of this Chapter. Patrons must enter and take their exit from all pawnbrokers' places of business through outside doors or entrances. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.09.130 - Liability of principal. 
The holder of a pawnbroker's or dealer's license is liable for any and all acts of his employees, and for any violation by them of any of the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.09.140 - Right to redeem forfeited articles—Interest rates. 
It is unlawful in all cases in which an article pledged has been forfeited, for a sale or other disposition thereof to be made by the pledgee within the period of six months after the forfeiture of the pledge, unless the period of loan is less than three months; in which case the period of redemption shall be three months. During such periods the pledgor shall have the right to redeem such articles at no greater advance than five percent per month on all sums up to and including fifty dollars ($50.00), and three percent per month on all sums in excess of fifty dollars ($50.00); provided that the pledgee shall, in any event, be entitled to a minimum charge of one dollar ($1.00). 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.09.150 - Vehicles. 
Every vehicle used by a Junk Dealer in the conduct of his business, shall bear thereon, in legible characters, the name and address of the owner and proprietor thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.09.160 - Premises. 
Any premises, area or piece or parcel of land licensed and used as a junk yard shall have not more than two entrances and two exits, each of which shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in width at the perimeter of the premises. Such premises, areas, pieces or parcels of land shall be enclosed with either a solid nontransparent wall or fence or link-weave steel wire or combination thereof with a minimum height of seven feet from the ground level excepting for entrances and exits. The fence or wall shall not contain any poster or advertising of any kind excepting one sign of the licensee not exceeding one hundred (100) square feet in size. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.09.170 - Reporting changed information. 
If, during any license year, there is a change in the information that a Person gave in obtaining or renewing a license under this Chapter, the Person shall report the change to the business license official within thirty (30) days after the change occurs and certify that the information given is true and correct under the penalties of perjury. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.09.180 - Grounds for refusal, suspension or revocation of license. 
The City may refuse to grant a license under this Chapter to any individual and may suspend, revoke or refuse to renew the license of any Person if it finds: 
A.  The Person has violated or is attempting to violate any provisions of this Chapter. 
B.  A similar license issued to the Person has been suspended, revoked or refused in another jurisdiction for a reason which would justify such action under this Section. 
C.  Any officer, Manager, agent or employee of the individual or dealer has violated or is attempting to violate any provisions of this Chapter unless the Person or dealer: 
1.  Had no knowledge of the wrongful conduct and in the exercise of reasonable diligence could not have known of the conduct; and 
2.  Was unable to prevent the violation or attempted violation with the exercise of reasonable diligence. 
D.  The Person or dealer has been convicted of theft or receiving stolen property on one or more occasions within the past five years. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
Chapter 5.10 - MOBILE ICE CREAM VENDORS 
Sections: 
 
5.10.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The City Council expressly finds that, absent regulation, the manner in which vendors sell ice cream, confections and other frozen dessert products from vehicles on the public streets is a detriment to the peace and quiet enjoyment of property and the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of South Salt Lake. It is the purpose of and intent of the City Council, in enacting this Chapter of this Code, to provide responsible companies and individuals who engage in the operation of ice cream trucks with clear regulations designed to assure the peace and quiet enjoyment of private property and to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.10.020 - Business license required. 
It is unlawful for any Person to Engage in the Business of mobile ice cream, confection or other frozen dessert vending unless he/she has first obtained a business license from the business license office. All business licenses shall be issued according to regulations established under this Title and all other applicable titles of this Code. In addition to the business license, any Person who operates an ice cream truck shall obtain an maintain in full force and effect a valid ice cream truck operator's work permit issued by the business license office of the City. The use of the term "ice cream" in this Chapter shall include confections and other frozen desserts. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.10.030 - Application for business license. 
The application for a mobile ice cream vending business license shall contain all information relevant and necessary to determine whether a particular license may be issued, including, but not limited to: 
A.  The full name, current address, telephone number, and proof of identity of the applicant and all Persons who will be operating an ice cream truck as a part of the applicant's business; 
B.  A brief description of the nature, character, and quality of goods, wares, or merchandise to be offered for sale; 
C.  The specific routes, if any, along which the vendor intends to conduct business; 
D.  If the applicant is employed by another, the name and address of the Person; and 
E.  A description of all ice cream trucks to be used in the business, together with the motor vehicle registration number and license number. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.10.040 - Health inspection certificate. 
Any application for a mobile ice cream vending license shall require a health permit from the Utah Department of Agriculture or its successor agency requiring such health permit in addition to the regular business license. The applicant's equipment shall be subject to inspections by the Utah Department of Agriculture or its successor agency requiring such inspections at the time of application and at periodic intervals thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.10.050 - Permitting unlicensed Operator—Unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any Person who owns or controls an ice cream truck to permit it to be driven, and no ice cream truck licensed by the City shall be so driven at any time in the operation of the business, unless the ice cream truck is operated by a driver who has then in force a valid ice cream truck operator's work permit issued under the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.10.060 - Operator's work permit application. 
An application for an ice cream truck operator's work permit shall be filed with the business license office of the City on forms provided by the City. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.10.070 - Application verification. 
The application for a mobile ice cream vendor business license and for an ice cream truck operator's work permit shall be verified by the applicant under oath, and he/she shall be required to swear to the truthfulness of the matters contained upon the application. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.10.080 - Application fee required. 
At the time the ice cream truck operator's application is filed, the applicant shall pay to the business license office a fee, in an amount to be established in the consolidated fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.10.090 - Operator application form requirements. 
The prospective applicant for an ice cream truck operator's work permit shall be required to complete an operator application form containing the following information: 
A.  The correct legal name of each applicant; 
B.  For each applicant, the application must also state: 
1.  Any other names by which the individual has been known, 
2.  The age, date and place of birth, 
3.  Height, 
4.  Weight, 
5.  Color of hair, 
6.  Color of eyes, 
7.  Present business address and telephone number, 
8.  Present residence and telephone number, 
9.  Utah driver license or identification number, and 
10.  Social security number; 
C.  A statement whether the applicant is currently required to register pursuant to the Utah Penal Code, Section 77-27-21.5, Utah Code Annotated, sex offender registration, or its successor. 
D.  A written certification from the mobile ice cream vending business by which the applicant operator is employed that the applicant operator has received training from the said ice cream vending business as to operational requirements of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.10.100 - Photographs required. 
The applicant for an ice cream truck operator's work permit shall be required to have a photograph taken of him/her at the business license office; applicants for renewal of such licenses shall furnish an up-to-date photograph or have an additional picture taken at the business license office, as shall be determined and directed by the business license official. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.10.110 - Public safety background check. 
Each applicant shall submit to a background check done to assure that he/she poses no threat to the community in terms of driving safety, use of the mobile vending vehicle to conduct illegal activity and suitability to interact with children away from immediate parental supervision. To this end, and at his/her own cost, the applicant shall obtain a background check from the Utah Bureau of Criminal Identification (BCI). If required, the applicant shall provide fingerprints as part of the BCI process. The applicant shall sign a release allowing the City to examine, but only for official licensing purposes, the report generated by BCI. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.10.120 - Driver's qualifications. 
A.  The City Council finds that applicants with certain history of criminal behavior involving crimes against children, crimes of violence, crimes involving distribution or manufacture of controlled substances, crimes of DUI or reckless driving or lack of maturity pose too great a danger to the peace and safety of the community and are prohibited from engaging the business of mobile ice cream vending. 
B.  Except as this Chapter set forth, no permit or renewal of an ice cream truck operator's work permit shall be issued to any of the following Persons: 
1.  Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years; 
2.  Any person who is currently required to register pursuant to the Utah Penal Code, Section 77-27-21.5, Utah Code Annotated, sex offender registration, or its successor; 
3.  Any person who has been convicted of a crime against a child, a crime of violence against any person, a crime involving distribution or manufacture of a controlled substance, driving under the influence of alcohol or a controlled substance or reckless driving unless a period of not less than five years shall have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for such offense, whichever is later. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.10.130 - Hearing upon rejection. 
If the application either for a business license or for an ice cream truck operator work permit is rejected, the applicant shall be entitled, upon request, to a hearing as provided in Chapter 5.02.140 of this Title, or its successor. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.10.140 - Issuance of license. 
A.  The business license administrator shall notify the applicant in writing of the City's decision to issue or deny either the business license or an ice cream truck operator's work permit, not later than five working days after the applicant has filed a completed application as provided herein. In the event the City's review of the business license application or the operator application has not been completed within five days of the filing of a completed application, the business license official shall send written notification to the applicant that the review period has been extended to a date no later than forty-five (45) days from the filing of the completed application. If the license has not been denied within forty-five (45) days of the filing of the completed application, the license for which the application was filed shall be deemed to be issued. 
B.  All licenses, permits, and identification cards issued pursuant to this Chapter are valid for one year, unless suspended or revoked, and shall be both non-assignable and non-transferable. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.10.150 - Business license fees. 
Any vendor granted a vending license under this Chapter shall pay the annual business license fee established in consolidated fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.10.160 - Display of identification cards and other permits. 
A.  Any license or permit issued by the business license office shall be carried with the licensee whenever he/she is engaged in vending. Work permits and health certificates shall also be properly and conspicuously displayed at all times during the operation of the vending business. 
B.  An ice cream truck operator's work permit shall be deemed to be properly displayed when it is attached to the outer garment of the vendor and clearly visible to the public and law enforcement officials. A health certificate shall be deemed to be properly displayed when attached to the ice cream truck and clearly visible to the public and law enforcement officials. 
C.  In addition to the foregoing, there shall be printed on both sides of the exterior of the vehicle being used for vending, in letters or numbers at least three inches high and three inches wide the name and current business telephone number of the mobile ice cream vending business for which said vehicle is operating. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.10.170 - Notification of name, address or telephone change. 
All vendors shall assure that a current and correct name, residence address, mailing address, and business telephone number are on file with the business license office. Whenever the name or address provided by a licensed vendor on his/her application for a vending license changes, the licensee shall notify the business license official in writing within fourteen (14) days of such change and provide the same with the name, address, or telephone number change. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.10.180 - Noise restrictions. 
No Person shall use, play or employ any sound, outcry, amplifier, loudspeaker or any other instrument or device for the production of sound from an ice cream truck: 
A.  When the ice cream truck is stationary; 
B.  Earlier than ten a.m., nor later than eight p.m. or one-half hour after sunset, whichever occurs first. Sunset shall be determined on any particular day by the times listed that day in any newspaper of general circulation in Salt Lake County; 
C.  In such a manner that such sound is plainly audible three hundred thirty (330) feet from such vehicle; or 
D.  Along the same block face traveling in either direction on the street more than once every two consecutive hours. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.10.190 - Use of public streets. 
The City Council finds that mobile ice cream vending businesses that attract children into the public streets to purchase ice cream subject children and the public to special dangers. Accordingly, each Person or business selling, offering to sell, or displaying for sale ice cream or similar frozen desserts from or on motorized vehicles on public streets shall abide by the following conditions and requirements. Failure to comply may result in the suspension or revocation of a business license or ice cream truck operator's work permit, and is a class B misdemeanor: 
A.  The motorized vehicle shall have a clearly audible backup warning device that activates whenever the vehicle is shifted into reverse gear. 
B.  The motorized vehicle shall have a convex mirror mounted on the front of the vehicle so that the driver, in a normal driving position, can see the area in front of the vehicle that is obscured by the hood. 
C.  The motorized vehicle shall have at least two flashing yellow beacons on the roof of the vehicle, one at the front and one at the rear, at least one of which is visible from all sides of the vehicle. These beacons shall be activated whenever merchandise is being sold, offered for sale, or displayed for sale. 
D.  The motorized vehicle shall have an operable swing-arm attached to its left side. This swing-arm shall be of a type, size, and description approved by the City, and shall be activated whenever the vehicle stops to sell, offer to sell, or display merchandise on a public street. 
E.  The motorized vehicle shall have a sign or decal on the front and on the rear of the vehicle in letters at least six inches in height and visible for two hundred (200) feet along a level, straight highway, identifying the vehicle as an ice cream truck and containing the words "Children Crossing." 
F.  The motorized vehicle shall be prohibited from pulling any type of trailer. 
G.  Retail merchandise may not be sold, offered for sale, or displayed for sale from or on motorized vehicles on public streets where the speed limit exceeds twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
H.  The operator of the motorized vehicle shall not sell to any person standing in the roadway. 
I.  The operator of the motorized vehicle shall sell, offer to sell, or display for sale retail merchandise only when the vehicle is completely stopped and lawfully parked, and shall sell only from the rear or side of the vehicle nearest to the curb or edge of the roadway. 
J.  The motorized vehicle shall not be moved backwards in order to sell, offer to sell, or display for sale retail merchandise. 
K.  Each applicant for a license or renewal under this Section shall submit, with its application, a certificate of insurance executed by an insurance company or association authorized to transact business in this state, approved as to form by the City Attorney, that there is in full force and effect general liability insurance in an amount not less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) for one person in anyone occurrence, five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for two or more persons in anyone occurrence and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage, or such greater amounts as set forth in Section 63-30-34, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended, or its successor. Such policy or policies shall include coverage of all motor vehicles used in connection with applicant's business. A current certificate of insurance shall be kept on file with the City recorder at all times that applicant is licensed by the City. 
L.  All motorized vehicles of the applicant and operators shall comply with all other requirements of this Chapter and any other requirements of ordinance or statute that may be applicable. 
The prohibitions of this Section shall not be construed to prohibit vehicles from carrying business markings or advertising not otherwise prohibited by law. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.10.200 - Vehicle inspection prior to licensing fee required. 
Prior to the use and operation of any vehicle under the provisions of this Chapter, and annually thereafter while being operated by the business licensee hereunder, the vehicle shall be thoroughly examined and inspected by an authorized representative of the City, and found to comply with the requirements of this Chapter. In addition, the vehicle shall at all times in which it is in operation as an ice cream truck within the City be maintained in conformity with the safety inspection requirements of Utah and federal law. The licensee shall pay to the City an inspection fee for each truck for inspected in an amount to be established in the consolidated fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.10.210 - Suspension and revocation of license. 
A.  In addition to any penalties that may be imposed, any license issued under this Chapter may be suspended or revoked for any of the following reasons: 
1.  Fraud, misrepresentation, or knowingly false statement contained in the application for the license; 
2.  Fraud, misrepresentation, or knowingly false statement in the course of carrying on the business of vending; 
3.  Conducting the business of vending in such a manner as to create a public nuisance; cause a breach of the peace; constitute a danger to the public health, safety, welfare, or morals, to interfere with the rights of property owners or in violation of this Chapter; 
4.  Conviction of a crime listed in this Section; or 
5.  Cancellation of Utah Department of Agriculture authorization, or of the required authorization of any successor agency, for a food or beverage vending unit due to uncorrected health or sanitation violations. 
B.  The business license official shall provide written notice of the suspension or revocation in a brief statement setting forth the complaint, the grounds for suspension or revocation, and notifying the licensee or permittee of the appeal procedure The licensee or permitee shall have the right to appeal the decision of the business license official pursuant to the procedures set forth in this Title. 
C.  If the City revokes a vending license or permit, the fee already paid for the license or permit shall be forfeited. A Person whose license or permit has been revoked under this Section may not apply for a new license for a period of one year from the date that the revocation took effect. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.10.220 - Renewals. 
A mobile ice cream vending license may be renewed, provided an application for renewal and license fees are received by the City no later than the expiration date of the current license. Any application received after that date shall be processed as a new application. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
Chapter 5.11 - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 
Sections: 
 
5.11.010 - Purpose; findings and rationale. 
A.  Purpose. It is the purpose of this Chapter to regulate Sexually Oriented Businesses in order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of Sexually Oriented Businesses within the City. The provisions of this Chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable access to any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this Chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this Chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
B.  Findings and Rationale. Based on evidence of the adverse secondary effects of adult uses presented in hearings and in reports made available to the City Council, and on findings, interpretations, and narrowing constructions incorporated in the cases of City of Littleton v. Z.J. Gifts D-4, L.L.C., 541 U.S. 774 (2004); City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc. , 535 U.S. 425 (2002); City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 529 U.S. 277 (2000); City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres, 427 U.S. 50 (1976); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); N.Y. State Liquor Authority v. Bellanca, 452 U.S. 714 (1981); Sewell v. Georgia, 435 U.S. 982 (1978); FW/PBS, Inc. v. City of Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990); City of Dallas v. Stanglin, 490 U.S. 19 (1989); and Doctor John's, Inc. v. Wahlen, 542 F.3d 787 (10th Cir. 2008); American Bush v. City of South Salt Lake, 140 P.3d 1235 (Utah 2006); Bushco v. Utah State Tax Comm'n, 225 P.3d 153 (Utah 2009); State v. Haltom, 156 P.3d 792 (Utah 2007); Midvale City Corp. v. Haltom, 73 P.3d 334 (Utah 2003); Abilene Retail #30, Inc. v. Bd. of Comm'rs of Dickinson County, 492 F.3d 1164 (10th Cir. 2007); Doctor John's, Inc. v. City of Roy, 465 F.3d 1150 (10th Cir. 2006); Heideman v. South Salt Lake City, 165 F. App'x 627 (10th Cir. 2006); Heideman v. South Salt Lake City, 348 F.3d 1182 (10th Cir. 2003); Z.J. Gifts D-4, L.L.C. v. City of Littleton, 311 F.3d 1220 (10th Cir. 2002); Essence, Inc. v. City of Federal Heights, 285 F.3d 1272 (10th Cir. 2002); O'Connor v. City and County of Denver, 894 F.2d 1210 (10th Cir. 1990); Z.J. Gifts D-2, L.L.C. v. City of Aurora, 136 F.3d 683 (10th Cir. 1998); Dodger's Bar & Grill, Inc. v. Johnson County , 98 F.3d 1262 (10th Cir. 1996); Dodger's Bar & Grill, Inc. v. Johnson County, 32 F.3d 1436 (10th Cir. 1994); American Target Advertising, Inc. v. Giani, 199 F.3d 1241 (10th Cir. 2000); Cortese v. Black, No. 95-1429, 87 F.3d 1327 (10th Cir. June 25, 1996) (table); Imaginary Images, Inc. v. Evans, 612 F.3d 736 (4th Cir. 2010); LLEH, Inc. v. Wichita County, 289 F.3d 358 (5th Cir. 2002); Ocello v. Koster, 354 S.W.3d 187 (Mo. 2011); 84 Video/Newsstand, Inc. v. Sartini, 2011 WL 3904097 (6th Cir. Sept. 7, 2011); Plaza Group Properties, LLC v. Spencer County Plan Commission, 877 N.E.2d 877 (Ind. Ct. App. 2007); Flanigan's Enters., Inc. v. Fulton County, 596 F.3d 1265 (11th Cir. 2010); East Brooks Books, Inc. v. Shelby County, 588 F.3d 360 (6th Cir. 2009); Entm't Prods., Inc. v. Shelby County, 588 F.3d 372 (6th Cir. 2009); Sensations, Inc. v. City of Grand Rapids, 526 F.3d 291 (6th Cir. 2008); World Wide Video of Washington, Inc. v. City of Spokane, 368 F.3d 1186 (9th Cir. 2004); Ben's Bar, Inc. v. Village of Somerset, 316 F.3d 702 (7th Cir. 2003); Peek-a-Boo Lounge v. Manatee County, 630 F.3d 1346 (11th Cir. 2011); Daytona Grand, Inc. v. City of Daytona Beach, 490 F.3d 860 (11th Cir. 2007); Williams v. Morgan, 478 F.3d 1316 (11th Cir. 2007); Jacksonville Property Rights Ass'n, Inc. v. City of Jacksonville, 635 F.3d 1266 (11th Cir. 2011); H&A Land Corp. v. City of Kennedale, 480 F.3d 336 (5th Cir. 2007); Hang On, Inc. v. City of Arlington, 65 F.3d 1248 (5th Cir. 1995); Fantasy Ranch, Inc. v. City of Arlington, 459 F.3d 546 (5th Cir. 2006); Illinois One News, Inc. v. City of Marshall, 477 F.3d 461 (7th Cir. 2007); G.M. Enterprises, Inc. v. Town of St. Joseph, 350 F.3d 631 (7th Cir. 2003); Richland Bookmart, Inc. v. Knox County, 555 F.3d 512 (6th Cir. 2009); Bigg Wolf Discount Video Movie Sales, Inc. v. Montgomery County, 256 F. Supp. 2d 385 (D. Md. 2003); Richland Bookmart, Inc. v. Nichols, 137 F.3d 435 (6th Cir. 1998); Spokane Arcade, Inc. v. City of Spokane, 75 F.3d 663 (9th Cir. 1996); City of New York v. Hommes, 724 N.E.2d 368 (N.Y. 1999); Taylor v. State, No. 01-01-00505-CR, 2002 WL 1722154 (Tex. App. July 25, 2002); Fantasyland Video, Inc. v. County of San Diego, 505 F.3d 996 (9th Cir. 2007); Gammoh v. City of La Habra, 395 F.3d 1114 (9th Cir. 2005); Z.J. Gifts D-4, L.L.C. v. City of Littleton, Civil Action No. 99-N-1696, Memorandum Decision and Order (D. Colo. March 31, 2001); People ex rel. Deters v. The Lion's Den, Inc., Case No. 04-CH-26, Modified Permanent Injunction Order (Ill. Fourth Judicial Circuit, Effingham County, July 13, 2005); Reliable Consultants, Inc. v. City of Kennedale, No. 4:05-CV-166-A, Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law (N.D. Tex. May 26, 2005); and based upon reports concerning secondary effects occurring in and around sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, Austin, Texas - 1986; Indianapolis, Indiana - 1984; Garden Grove, California - 1991; Houston, Texas - 1983, 1997; Phoenix, Arizona - 1979, 1995-98; Tucson, Arizona - 1990; Chattanooga, Tennessee - 1999-2003; Los Angeles, California - 1977; Whittier, California - 1978; Spokane, Washington - 2001; St. Cloud, Minnesota - 1994; Littleton, Colorado - 2004; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma - 1986; Dallas, Texas - 1997; Ft. Worth, Texas - 2004; Kennedale, Texas - 2005; Greensboro, North Carolina - 2003; Amarillo, Texas - 1977; Jackson County, Missouri - 2008; Louisville, Kentucky - 2004; New York, New York Times Square - 1994; the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group On The Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses, (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota); Dallas, Texas - 2007; "Rural Hotspots: The Case of Adult Businesses," 19 Criminal Justice Policy Review 153 (2008); "Correlates of Current Transactional Sex among a Sample of Female Exotic Dancers in Baltimore, MD," Journal of Urban Health (2011); "Stripclubs According to Strippers: Exposing Workplace Sexual Violence," by Kelly Holsopple, Program Director, Freedom and Justice Center for Prostitution Resources, Minneapolis, Minnesota; "Sexually Oriented Businesses: An Insider's View," by David Sherman, presented to the Michigan House Committee on Ethics and Constitutional Law, Jan. 12, 2000; Memphis, Tennessee - 2005-2011; Assorted Reports Concerning Secondary Effects; and "A Comparative Analysis of Infractions in Texas Alcohol Establishments and Adult Entertainment Clubs," Criminal Justice Studies; the City Council finds: 
1.  Sexually Oriented Businesses, as a category of commercial uses, are associated with a wide variety of adverse secondary effects including, but not limited to, personal and property crimes, prostitution, potential spread of disease, lewdness, public indecency, obscenity, illicit drug use and drug trafficking, negative impacts on surrounding properties, urban blight, noise, traffic, litter, and sexual assault and exploitation. Alcohol consumption impairs judgment and lowers inhibitions, thereby increasing the risk of adverse secondary effects. 
2.  Sexually Oriented Businesses should be separated from sensitive land uses to minimize the impact of their secondary effects upon such uses, and should be separated from other Sexually Oriented Businesses, to minimize the secondary effects associated with such uses and to prevent an unnecessary concentration of Sexually Oriented Businesses in one area. 
3.  Each of the foregoing negative secondary effects constitutes a harm which the City has a substantial government interest in preventing and/or abating. This substantial government interest in preventing secondary effects, which is the City's rationale for this Chapter, exists independent of any comparative analysis between Sexually Oriented and non-sexually oriented businesses. Additionally, the City's interest in regulating Sexually Oriented Businesses extends to preventing future secondary effects of either current or future Sexually Oriented Businesses that may locate in the City. The City finds that the cases and documentation relied on in this Chapter are reasonably believed to be relevant to said secondary effects. 
The City hereby adopts and incorporates herein its stated findings and legislative record related to the adverse secondary effects of Sexually Oriented Businesses, including the judicial opinions and reports related to such secondary effects. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.11.020 - License required. 
A.  Sexually Oriented Business License. It shall be unlawful for any Person to operate a Sexually Oriented Business in the City without a valid Sexually Oriented Business license. No premises shall be concurrently licensed for both a Sexually Oriented Business Use and a City alcoholic beverage Use. 
B.  Employee License. It shall be unlawful for any person to be an "employee," as defined in this Chapter, of a Sexually Oriented Business in the City without a valid Sexually Oriented Business employee license, except that a Person who is a licensee under a valid Sexually Oriented Business license shall not be required to also obtain a Sexually Oriented Business employee license. 
C.  Application. An applicant for a Sexually Oriented Business license or a Sexually Oriented Business employee license shall file in person at the office of the business license official a completed application made on a form provided by the business license official. A Sexually Oriented Business may designate an individual with an Influential Interest in the business to file its application for a Sexually Oriented Business license in person on behalf of the business. The application shall be signed as required by Subsection D herein and shall be notarized. An application shall be considered complete when it contains, for each Person required to sign the application, the information and/or items required in this Subsection C, accompanied by the appropriate licensing fee: 
1.  The applicant's full legal name and any other names used by the applicant in the preceding five years. 
2.  Current business address or another mailing address for the applicant. 
3.  Written proof of age, in the form of a driver's license, a picture identification document containing the applicant's date of birth issued by a governmental agency, or a copy of a birth certificate accompanied by a picture identification document issued by a governmental agency. 
4.  A complete set of fingerprints taken by the Utah Bureau of Criminal Identification which service is provided Monday through Friday 8:00 a.m.-5:00 p.m. without any need for an appointment. Alternatively, an applicant who states in writing that the Utah Bureau of Criminal Identification failed to render fingerprinting services to the applicant for more than two (2) hours after the applicant requested said services may submit a complete set of fingerprints taken by the City police department. The City police department shall provide fingerprinting service upon the request of such an applicant during regular office hours for a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00). 
5.  If the application is for a Sexually Oriented Business license, the business name, location, legal description, mailing address and phone number of the Sexually Oriented Business. 
6.  If the application is for a Sexually Oriented Business license, the name and business address of the statutory agent or other agent authorized to receive service of process. 
7.  A statement of whether an applicant has been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to a Specified Criminal Activity as defined in this Chapter, and if so, each Specified Criminal Activity involved, including the date, place, and jurisdiction of each as well as the dates of conviction and release from confinement, where applicable. 
8.  A statement of whether any Sexually Oriented Business in which an applicant has had an Influential Interest, has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the applicant had the Influential Interest): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Been subject to a court order of closure. 
9.  An application for a Sexually Oriented Business license shall be accompanied by a legal description of the property where the business is located and a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor area occupied by the business and a statement of floor area visible or accessible to patrons for any reason, excluding restrooms. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but shall be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. Applicants who are required to comply with the stage, booth, and/or room configuration requirements of this Chapter shall submit a diagram indicating that the setup and configuration of the premises meets the requirements of the applicable regulations. The business license official may waive the requirements of this Subsection (C)(9) for a renewal application if the applicant adopts a legal description and a sketch or diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
The information provided pursuant to this Subsection C shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the business license official within ten working days of a change of circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false or incomplete. 
D.  Signature. A person who seeks a Sexually Oriented Business employee license under this Section shall sign the application for a license. If a Person who seeks a Sexually Oriented Business license under this Section is an individual, he shall sign the application for a license as applicant. If a Person who seeks a Sexually Oriented Business license is other than an individual, each Person with an Influential Interest in the Sexually Oriented Business or in a legal entity that controls the Sexually Oriented Business shall sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under this Chapter and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
E.  The information provided by an applicant in connection with an application for a license under this Chapter shall be maintained by the office of the business license official on a confidential basis, and such information may be disclosed only as may be required, and only to the extent required, by governing law or court order. Any information protected by the right to privacy as recognized by state or federal law shall be redacted prior to such disclosure. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.11.030 - Issuance of license. 
A.  Sexually Oriented Business License. Upon the filing of a completed application for a Sexually Oriented Business license, the business license official shall immediately issue a temporary license to the applicant if the completed application is from a preexisting Sexually Oriented Business that is lawfully operating in the City and the completed application, on its face, indicates that the applicant is entitled to an annual Sexually Oriented Business license. The temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of the City to deny or grant an annual license. Within twenty (20) days of the filing of a completed Sexually Oriented Business license application, the business license official shall either issue a license to the applicant or issue a written notice of intent to deny a license to the applicant. The business license official shall issue a license unless: 
1.  An applicant is less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
2.  An applicant has failed to provide information required by this Chapter for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
3.  The license application fee required by this Chapter has not been paid. 
4.  The Sexually Oriented Business is not in compliance with the interior configuration requirements of this Chapter. 
5.  The Sexually Oriented Business is not in compliance with locational requirements of this Chapter or the locational requirements of any other part of the City Code. "Locational requirements," as used in the preceding sentence, does not include any license or permit required by another chapter of the City Code. A Sexually Oriented Business that is operating as a lawful, nonconforming use on the effective date of this Chapter shall not be required to comply with this Subsection (A)(5) as a condition of obtaining a license under this Chapter. 
6.  Any Sexually Oriented Business in which an applicant has had an Influential Interest, has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the applicant had the Influential Interest): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Been subject to an order of closure. 
7.  An applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a Specified Criminal Activity, as defined in this Chapter. 
B.  Employee License. Upon the filing of a completed application for a Sexually Oriented Business employee license, the business license official shall immediately issue a temporary license to the applicant if the applicant seeks licensure to work in a licensed Sexually Oriented Business and the completed application, on its face, indicates that the applicant is entitled to an annual Sexually Oriented Business employee license. The temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of the City to deny or grant an annual license. Within twenty (20) days of the filing of a completed Sexually Oriented Business employee license application, the business license official shall either issue a license to the applicant or issue a written notice of intent to deny a license to the applicant. The business license official shall issue a license unless: 
1.  The applicant is less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
2.  The applicant has failed to provide information as required by this Chapter for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
3.  The license application fee required by this Chapter has not been paid. 
4.  Any Sexually Oriented Business in which the applicant has had an Influential Interest, has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the applicant had the Influential Interest): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Been subject to an order of closure. 
5.  The applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a Specified Criminal Activity, as defined in this Chapter. 
C.  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the Person or Persons to whom it is granted, the number of the license issued to the licensee(s), the expiration date, and, if the license is for a Sexually Oriented Business, the address of the Sexually Oriented Business. The Sexually Oriented Business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the Sexually Oriented Business so that it may be read at any time that the business is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. A Sexually Oriented Business employee shall keep the employee's license on his or her person or on the premises where the licensee is then working or performing. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.11.040 - Alcohol prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any business licensed pursuant to this Chapter to allow the sale, storage, supply, or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the business Premises. It is unlawful for any Person to possess or consume any alcoholic beverage on the Premises of any Sexually Oriented Business. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.11.050 - Inspection. 
Sexually Oriented Businesses and Sexually Oriented Business employees shall permit the business license official and his or her agents to inspect, from time to time on an occasional basis, the portions of the Sexually Oriented Business premises where patrons are permitted, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the specific regulations of this Chapter, during those times when the Sexually Oriented Business is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. This Section shall be narrowly construed by the City to authorize reasonable inspections of the licensed premises pursuant to this Chapter, but not to authorize a harassing or excessive pattern of inspections. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.11.060 - Expiration and renewal of license. 
A.  Each license shall remain valid for a period of one calendar year from the date of issuance unless otherwise suspended or revoked. Such license may be renewed only by making application and payment of a fee as provided in this Chapter. 
B.  Application for renewal of an annual license should be made at least ninety (90) days before the expiration date of the current annual license, and when made less than ninety (90) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the current license will not be affected. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.11.070 - Suspension. 
A.  The business license official shall issue a written notice of intent to suspend a Sexually Oriented Business license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if the Sexually Oriented Business Licensee has knowingly or recklessly violated this Chapter or has knowingly or recklessly allowed an employee or any other person to violate this Chapter. 
B.  The business license official shall issue a written notice of intent to suspend a Sexually Oriented Business employee license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if the employee licensee has knowingly or recklessly violated this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.11.080 - Revocation. 
A.  The business license official shall issue a written notice of intent to revoke a Sexually Oriented Business license or a Sexually Oriented Business employee license, as applicable, if the licensee knowingly or recklessly violates this Chapter or has knowingly or recklessly allowed an employee or any other person to violate this Chapter and a suspension of the licensee's license has become effective within the previous twelve-month period. 
B.  The business license official shall issue a written notice of intent to revoke a Sexually Oriented Business license or a Sexually Oriented Business employee license, as applicable, if: 
1.  The licensee has knowingly given false information in the application for the Sexually Oriented Business license or the Sexually Oriented Business employee license; 
2.  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises of the Sexually Oriented Business; 
3.  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed prostitution on the premises of the Sexually Oriented Business; 
4.  The licensee knowingly or recklessly operated the Sexually Oriented Business during a period of time when the license was finally suspended or revoked; 
5.  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed any Specified Sexual Activity or Specified Criminal Activity to occur in or on the premises of the Sexually Oriented Business; 
6.  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly allowed a person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to consume alcohol on the premises of the Sexually Oriented Business; or 
7.  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly allowed a person under the age of eighteen (18) years to appear in a Semi-Nude condition or in a state of Nudity on the premises of the Sexually Oriented Business. 
C.  The fact that any relevant conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license, provided that, if any conviction which serves as a basis of a license revocation is overturned or reversed on appeal, that conviction shall be treated as null and of no effect for revocation purposes. 
D.  When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in this Chapter, the City revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a Sexually Oriented Business license or Sexually Oriented Business employee license for one year from the date revocation becomes effective. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.11.090 - Hearing; license denial, suspension, revocation; appeal. 
A.  When the business license official issues a written notice of intent to deny, suspend, or revoke a license, the business license official shall immediately send such notice, which shall include the specific grounds under this Chapter for such action, to the applicant or licensee (respondent) by personal delivery or certified mail. The notice shall be directed to the most current business address or other mailing address on file with the business license official for the respondent. The notice shall also set forth the following: The respondent shall have ten days after the delivery of the written notice to submit, at the office of the business license official, a written request for a hearing. If the respondent does not request a hearing within said ten days, the business license official's written notice shall become a final denial, suspension, or revocation, as the case may be, on the thirtieth (30th) day after it is issued, and shall be subject to the provisions of Subsection E of this Section. 
B.  If the respondent does make a written request for a hearing within said ten days, then the business license official shall, within ten days after the submission of the request, send a notice to the respondent indicating the date, time, and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted not less than ten days nor more than twenty (20) days after the date that the hearing notice is issued. The City shall provide for the hearing to be transcribed. 
C.  At the hearing, the respondent shall have the opportunity to present all of respondent's arguments and to be represented by counsel, present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf, and cross-examine any of the business license official's witnesses. The business license official shall also be represented by counsel and shall bear the burden of proving the grounds for denying, suspending, or revoking the license. The hearing shall take no longer than two days, unless extended at the request of the respondent to meet the requirements of due process and proper administration of justice. The Hearing Officer shall issue a final written decision, including specific reasons for the decision pursuant to this Chapter, to the respondent within five days after the hearing. 
D.  If the decision is to deny, suspend, or revoke the license, the decision shall advise the respondent of the right to appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction, and the decision shall not become effective until the thirtieth (30th) day after it is rendered. If the Hearing Officer's decision finds that no grounds exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of the license, the Hearing Officer shall, contemporaneously with the issuance of the decision, order the business license official to immediately withdraw the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license and to notify the respondent in writing by certified mail of such action. If the respondent is not yet licensed, the business license official shall contemporaneously therewith issue the license to the applicant. 
E.  If any court action challenging a licensing decision is initiated, the City shall prepare and transmit to the court a transcript of the hearing within thirty (30) days after receiving written notice of the filing of the court action. The City shall consent to expedited briefing and/or disposition of the action, shall comply with any expedited schedule set by the court, and shall facilitate prompt judicial review of the proceedings. The following shall apply to any Sexually Oriented Business that is lawfully operating as a Sexually Oriented Business, or any Sexually Oriented Business employee that is lawfully employed as a Sexually Oriented Business employee, on the date on which the completed business or employee application, as applicable, is filed with the business license official: Upon the filing of any court action to appeal, challenge, restrain, or otherwise enjoin the City's enforcement of any denial, suspension, or revocation of a temporary license or annual license, the business license official shall immediately issue the respondent a provisional license. The provisional license shall allow the respondent to continue operation of the Sexually Oriented Business or to continue employment as a Sexually Oriented Business employee and will expire upon the court's entry of a judgment on the respondent's appeal or other action to restrain or otherwise enjoin the City's enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.11.100 - Hours of operation. 
No Sexually Oriented Business shall be or remain open for business between two (2) a.m. and six (6) a.m. on any day. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.11.110 - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films on premises. 
A.  A Person who operates or causes to be operated a Sexually Oriented Business which exhibits in a booth or viewing room on the premises, through any mechanical or electronic image-producing device, a film, video cassette, digital video disc, or other video reproduction characterized by an emphasis on the display of Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas shall comply with the following requirements. 
1.  Each application for a Sexually Oriented Business license shall contain a diagram of the premises showing the location of all operator's stations, booths or viewing rooms, overhead lighting fixtures, and restrooms, and shall designate all portions of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. Restrooms shall not contain equipment for displaying films, video cassettes, digital video discs, or other video reproductions. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the license will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram shall be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The business license official may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
2.  It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted. 
3.  The interior premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five-foot candles as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that the premises is occupied by patrons or open for business. 
4.  It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that no Specified Sexual Activity occurs in or on the licensed premises. 
5.  It shall be the duty of the operator to post conspicuous signs in well-lighted entry areas of the business stating all of the following: 
a.  That the occupancy of viewing rooms less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet is limited to one person. 
b.  That Specified Sexual Activity on the premises is prohibited. 
c.  That the making of openings between viewing rooms is prohibited. 
d.  That violators will be required to leave the premises. 
e.  That violations of these regulations are unlawful. 
6.  It shall be the duty of the operator to enforce the regulations articulated in 5a though 5e above. 
7.  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from an operator's station of every area of the premises, including the interior of each viewing room but excluding restrooms, to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose. An operator's station shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area. If the premises has two or more operator's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms, from at least one of the operator's stations. The view required in this paragraph must be by direct line of sight from the operator's station. It is the duty of the operator to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each operator's station at all times that any patron is on the premises. It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in this paragraph remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials or enclosures at all times that any patron is present on the premises. 
8.  It shall be the duty of the operator to ensure that no porous materials are used for any wall, floor, or seat in any booth or viewing room. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for a Person having a duty under Subsections (A)(1) through (A)(8) to knowingly or recklessly fail to fulfill that duty. 
C.  No patron shall knowingly or recklessly enter or remain in a viewing room less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area that is occupied by any other patron. 
D.  No patron shall knowingly or recklessly be or remain within one foot of any other patron while in a viewing room that is one hundred fifty (150) square feet or larger in area. 
E.  No Person shall knowingly or recklessly make any hole or opening between viewing rooms. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.11.120 - Loitering, exterior lighting and monitoring, and interior lighting requirements. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the operator of a Sexually Oriented Business to: (i) ensure that at least two conspicuous signs stating that no loitering is permitted on the premises are posted on the premises; (ii) designate one or more employees to monitor the activities of persons on the premises by visually inspecting the premises at least once every ninety (90) minutes or inspecting the premises by use of video cameras and monitors; and (iii) provide lighting to the exterior premises to provide for visual inspection or video monitoring to prohibit loitering. Said lighting shall be of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which customers are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one-foot candle as measured at the floor level. If used, video cameras and monitors shall operate continuously at all times that the premises are open for business. The monitors shall be installed within an operator's station. 
B.  It shall be the duty of the operator of a Sexually Oriented Business to ensure that the interior premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which customers are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five foot candles as measured at the floor level and the illumination must be maintained at all times that any customer is present in or on the premises. 
C.  No Sexually Oriented Business shall erect a fence, wall, or similar barrier that prevents any portion of the parking lot(s) for the establishment from being visible from a public right-of-way. 
D.  It shall be unlawful for a Person having a duty under this Section to knowingly or recklessly fail to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.11.130 - Penalties and enforcement. 
A.  A Person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor. Each day a violation is committed, or permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense. The prosecuting agency shall have the discretion to charge any offense under this Chapter as an infraction. 
B.  The City's legal counsel is hereby authorized to institute civil proceedings necessary for the enforcement of this Chapter to enjoin, prosecute, restrain, or correct violations hereof. Such proceedings shall be brought in the name of the City, provided, however, that nothing in this Section and no action taken hereunder, shall be held to exclude such criminal or administrative proceedings as may be authorized by other provisions of this Chapter, or any of the laws in force in the City or to exempt anyone violating this Code or any part of the said laws from any penalty which may be incurred. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.11.140 - Applicability of Chapter to existing businesses. 
A.  Licensing Requirements. All preexisting Sexually Oriented Businesses lawfully operating in the City in compliance with all state and local laws prior to the effective date of this Chapter, and all Sexually Oriented Business employees working in the City prior to the effective date of this Chapter, are hereby allowed to continue operation or employment until December 31, 2012 provided that the business holds and maintains a valid 2012 license or, in the case of an employee, the employee holds or maintains a valid 2012 work permit. 
B.  Interior Configuration Requirements. Any preexisting Sexually Oriented Business that is required to, but does not, have interior configurations or stages that meet at least the minimum requirements of Section 5.11.110 and Subsection 5.11.150 shall have one hundred eighty (180) days from the effective date of this Chapter to conform its premises to said requirements. During said one hundred eighty (180) days, any employee who appears within view of any patron in a Semi-Nude condition shall nevertheless remain, while Semi-Nude, at least three feet from all patrons. 
C.  Other Requirements. Except as provided for in Subsections A and B of this Section, Sexually Oriented Businesses shall comply with this Chapter on the date that it takes effect. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.11.150 - Prohibited conduct. 
A.  No patron, employee, or any other person shall knowingly or intentionally, in a Sexually Oriented Business, appear in a state of Nudity or engage in a Specified Sexual Activity. 
B.  No person shall knowingly or intentionally, in a Sexually Oriented Business, appear in a Semi-Nude condition unless the person is an employee who, while Semi-Nude, remains at least three feet from all patrons on a stage at least two feet from the floor in a room of at least six hundred (600) square feet. 
C.  No employee who appears Semi-Nude in a Sexually Oriented Business shall knowingly or intentionally touch a customer or the clothing of a customer on the premises of a Sexually Oriented Business. No customer shall knowingly or intentionally touch such an employee or the clothing of such an employee on the premises of a Sexually Oriented Business. 
D.  No Person shall knowingly or recklessly allow a person under the age of eighteen (18) years to be or remain on the premises of a Sexually Oriented Business. 
E.  No operator of a Sexually Oriented Business shall knowingly or recklessly allow a room in the Sexually Oriented Business to be simultaneously occupied by any patron and any employee who is Semi-Nude or who appears Semi-Nude on the premises of the Sexually Oriented Business, unless an operator of the Sexually Oriented Business is present in the same room. 
F.  No operator of a Sexually Oriented Business shall violate the regulations in this Section or knowingly or recklessly allow an employee or any other person to violate the regulations in this Section. 
G.  A sign in a form to be prescribed by the business license official, and summarizing the provisions of Subsections A, B, C, and D shall be posted near the entrance of the Sexually Oriented Business in such a manner as to be clearly visible to patrons upon entry. No Person shall cover, obstruct, or obscure said sign. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.11.160 - Scienter required to prove violation or business licensee liability. 
This Chapter does not impose strict liability. Unless a culpable mental state is otherwise specified herein, a showing of a reckless mental state is necessary to establish a violation of a provision of this Chapter. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, for the purposes of this Chapter, an act by an employee that constitutes grounds for suspension or revocation of that employee's license shall be imputed to the Sexually Oriented Business Licensee for purposes of finding a violation of this Chapter, or for purposes of license denial, suspension, or revocation, only if an officer, director, or general partner, or a Person who managed, supervised, or controlled the operation of the business premises, knowingly or recklessly allowed such act to occur on the premises. It shall be a defense to liability that the Person to whom liability is imputed was powerless to prevent the act. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.11.170 - Failure of City to meet deadline not to risk applicant/licensee rights. 
In the event that a City official is required to act or to do a thing pursuant to this Chapter within a prescribed time and fails to act or to do such thing within the time prescribed, said failure shall not prevent the exercise of constitutional rights of an applicant or licensee. If the act required of the City official under this Chapter, and not completed in the time prescribed, includes approval of condition(s) necessary for approval by the City of an applicant or licensee's application for a Sexually Oriented Business license or a Sexually Oriented Business employee's license (including a renewal), the license shall be deemed granted and the business or employee allowed to commence operations or employment the day after the deadline for the City's action has passed. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.11.180 - Location of Sexually Oriented Businesses. 
A.  It shall be unlawful to establish, operate, or cause to be operated a Sexually Oriented Business in the City, unless said Sexually Oriented Business is in a location zoned for such business and is at least: 
1.  One thousand (1,000) feet from every parcel occupied by another Sexually Oriented Business or business licensed by the state of Utah to sell alcohol at the premises; 
2.  One thousand (1,000) feet from every parcel occupied by a house of worship, public library, public recreation center, public or private elementary or secondary school, public park, residence, and from every parcel zoned for residential use; and 
3.  One thousand (1,000) feet from every interstate interchange. 
B.  For the purpose of this Section, measurements shall be made in a straight line in all directions without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest part of any structure, including signs and roof overhangs, used in conjunction with the Sexually Oriented Business to the closest point on a property boundary or right-of-way associated with any of the land use(s) identified in Subsection A above. 
C.  A Sexually Oriented Business that is operating as a lawful, nonconforming use on the effective date of this Chapter shall not be liable for a violation of this Section by virtue of its continued operation in the location where it maintains the lawful, nonconforming use. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
Chapter 5.12 - VENDORS AT CITY EVENTS 
Sections: 
 
5.12.010 - Vendor permit required. 
It is illegal to sell or offer to sell any product or service at a City Event without first obtaining a permit from the City. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.12.020 - Permit application. 
Each vendor must apply for a permit to the City in writing for each separate event. Every application must be accompanied by the payment of a refundable cleanup deposit in an amount set by resolution or ordinance of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.12.030 - Permit in general. 
All vendor permits are single event permits and are nonexclusive as to location of sale and/or product type. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.12.040 - Vendor deposit return. 
Upon completion of the City Event, the City will assess the cleanliness and condition of the vendor's site or location. If the City finds the site or location sufficiently cleaned and in appropriate condition, the vendor may reclaim his deposit from the City. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.12.050 - Charitable and School Groups priority. 
Prior to three weeks before the City Event, charitable and School Groups shall have the right of first refusal and priority with regard to vendor permits. To be entitled to this right and priority, charitable and School Groups must submit their vendor applications to the City prior to three weeks before the event. From three weeks before the event up until the day of the event, vendor permits are to be offered to the general public. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
Chapter 5.13 - ELECTRICITY 
Sections: 
 
5.13.010 - License required. 
It is unlawful for any Person without a license, to Engage in the Business of generating, furnishing, or distributing electricity within the limits of the City of South Salt Lake. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.13.020 - Period of license. 
The period of the license required in this Chapter shall be for the calendar year in which the license is granted and shall begin January 1st, and end December 31st, of the particular year. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.13.030 - May require proof. 
The City Council shall have the right to require proof of the accuracy of the figures furnished as the gross receipts under this Chapter should it so desire and the books of the company shall be open for inspection by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
Chapter 5.14 - TELEPHONES 
Sections: 
 
5.14.010 - License required. 
It is unlawful for any Person without a license to carry on the business of supplying telephone service as a public utility within the corporate limits of the City of South Salt Lake. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.14.020 - Fee. 
A.  There shall be levied upon the business of every Person in the City that is Engaged in the Business of supplying telephone service, an annual license tax equal to five percent of the gross revenue from the sale and use of the services of such utility delivered within the corporate limits of the City. 
B.  Exclusions. The tax imposed under this Section shall not apply to extended area service charges provided by telephone public utilities to customers who qualify for and are receiving utility service that is provided as a part of the Utah Low Income Assistance Program as set forth in the "Lifeline" Rule of the Utah Public Service Commission, R746-341-1 et seq., of the Utah Administrative Code, Rules of Public Service Commission, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.14.030 - Remittance date. 
Within forty-five (45) days after the end of each month in a calendar year, the public utility taxed in this Chapter shall file with the City treasurer of South Salt Lake City a report of its gross revenue derived from the sale and use of the public utility service in South Salt Lake City as defined in this Chapter, together with a computation of the tax levied in this Chapter against the utility. Coincidental with the filing of such report, the utility shall pay to the City treasurer the amount of the tax due for that calendar month subject to such report. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
5.14.040 - Period of license. 
The period of the license shall be for the calendar year in which the license is granted and shall begin January 1st and end December 31st, of the particular year. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § II(Exh. A), 1-8-2020)  
Title 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-04, adopted April 22, 2015, repealed the former Title 6 in its entirety, and enacted a new title as set out herein. The former Title 6 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for a detailed history of derivation. 
 
Chapter 6.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
6.04.010 - Short title. 
This title shall be known as the "South Salt Lake City Animal Control Ordinance" or "Title 6, South Salt Lake City Code." 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.04.020 - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
"Abandonment" means placing an animal in an environment where the animal is separated from basic needs such as food, water, shelter, or necessary medical attention, for a period longer than twenty-four (24) hours; failure to reclaim an animal seventy-two (72) hours beyond the time agreed upon with a kennel, grooming service, or similar facility; and/or failure to reclaim a pet from an animal shelter beyond seventy-two (72) hours after notification or refusal to sign relinquishment authorization. 
"Animal at large" means any domesticated animal, whether or not licensed, not under restraint as defined in this section. 
"Animal boarding establishment" means any establishment that takes in animals for boarding for a fee. 
"Animal grooming parlor" means any establishment maintained for the purpose of offering cosmetologist services for animals for a fee. 
"Animal services division" or "division" means the animal services division of the City of South Salt Lake. 
"Animal shelter" means a facility that is owned or operated by a governmental entity or any non-profit animal welfare organization licensed by the State of Utah or a political subdivision thereof, which provides services for stray, lost, or unwanted animals, including holding and placing the animals for adoption, including any private humane society or private animal welfare organization. 
"Attack" means any action or attempted action by an animal which either directly or indirectly places a person or another animal in danger of bodily harm. Actual physical injury is not required to constitute an attack. 
"Bite" means the infliction of bodily injury upon a person or other animal, by the teeth of an animal. 
"Bodily injury" has the same definition as is found in section 76-1-601 of the Utah Code, as amended, and applies to both humans and other animals. 
"Cat" means any age feline of the domesticated types over four months in age. 
"Cattery" means an establishment for boarding, breeding, buying, grooming or selling cats for a fee. 
"Community cat" means a feral, free-roaming, homeless, wild or untamed cat, which lacks discernible or microchip owner identification of any kind, and has been sterilized, vaccinated, and ear-tipped. 
"Director" means the director of the urban livability department for the city of South Salt Lake. 
"Dog" means any canis familiaris over four months of age. 
"Domesticated animals" means animals accustomed to live in or about the habitation of man, including but not limited to cats, dogs, fowl, ferrets, gerbils, horses, swine and goats. A list of allowed domesticated animals may be adopted by the city council. 
"Ear-tipping" means removing approximately one quarter-inch off the tip of a cat's left ear while the cat is anesthetized for sterilization. 
"Enclosure" means a fence or structure of at least six feet in height, forming or causing an enclosure suitable to confine a vicious dog in conjunction with other measures which may be taken by the owner or keeper, such as tethering of the vicious dog. 
"Exotic animal" means: 
1.  An animal which does not appear on the list of "wild animals," is domestically bred, whose species' native habitat is not indigenous to the continental United States, and which is greater than three feet in length or height and weighs in excess of ten pounds; or 
2.  Any snake which exceeds ten feet in length. 
"Feral cat" means a cat which would normally be domesticated, but has reverted to the wild. 
"Ferret" includes a ferret which is bred and sold as a domestic pet, and not protected by the Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. 
"Guard dog" means a dog kept on the premises of a lawfully situated business for the protection of person or property. It does not include a dog which resides at a private residence. 
"Holding facility" means any pet shop, kennel, cattery, groomery, riding school, stable, animal shelter, veterinary hospital, humane establishment or any other such facility for holding animals. 
"Impound" means taken into the possession and custody of an animal control agency, law enforcement agency or an agent thereof. 
"Kennel" means an establishment having three or more dogs for the purpose of boarding, breeding, buying, grooming, letting for hire, training for fee or selling. 
"Leash" or "lead" means any chain, rope, or cable used to restrain an animal. 
"Livestock" means any animal traditionally kept for husbandry, regardless of the owner's intentions for keeping a specific animal, and includes fowl and hoofed domesticated animals. 
"Off-leash area" means an area specifically designated by the parks department and animal services as appropriate for a specified animal to exercise or socialize without leads, leashes or other restraints. 
"Person" means a natural person or any legal entity, such as a partnership, corporation or company. 
"Pet" means any domesticated animal kept for pleasure rather than utility, including but not limited to birds, cats, dogs, fish, hamsters, mice and other animals associated with the human environment, such as ferrets. 
"Pet shop" means any establishment containing cages or exhibition pens, not part of a kennel or cattery, wherein dogs, cats, birds or other pets for sale are kept or displayed. 
"Private cattery" means the land or building where more than three but less than eight surgically sterilized cats, owned by the permitee, are held indoors or in secure enclosures for exhibition or for the enjoyment of the household and not used for a commercial purpose. 
"Provoke" means any deliberate act by a person towards an animal done with intent to tease, torment, abuse, assault, or otherwise cause a reaction by the animal; provided, however, that any act by a person done with intent to discourage or prevent an animal from attacking shall not be considered a provocation. 
"Quarantine" means the isolation of an animal in a substantial enclosure so that the animal is not subject to contact with other animals or unauthorized persons. 
"Rescued animal" means an animal adopted from an animal shelter. It does not include an animal acquired by any other means. Proof of adoption at an eligible facility is required. 
"Riding school" or "stable" means an establishment which offers boarding and/or riding instructions for any horse, pony, donkey or mule which offers such animals for hire. 
"Service animal" has the same definition as found in section 62A-5b-102 of the Utah Code, as amended. 
"Sterilized" means that an animal has been surgically altered either by the spaying of the female animal or the neutering of the male animal, so that the animal is unable to reproduce. 
"Stray" means any animal at large as defined in this section. 
"Substantial bodily injury" has the same definition as it is found in section 76-1-601 of the Utah Code, as amended. 
"Supervisor" means the supervisor of the animal services division, or another individual given authority to act in the supervisor's place. 
"Transfer" means that an animal shelter sells, gives away, places for adoption, or transfers ownership of an animal to a recipient. 
"Under restraint" means an owner or person's having charge, care, custody or control of an animal to the extent that the animal is confined to the real property of that owner; except a dog shall not be considered under control of the owner unless on a leash or lead, confined within a vehicle, or restrained within the real property limits of the owner. An animal shall not be considered under restraint within the real property limits of the owner if an individual engaged in a normal and expected activity may come in conflict with such animal on the owner's property, unless there is sufficient protection to insure the individual's safety and warning is given of the presence of such animal. Electronic devices, such as training or electronic fences do not render an animal under restraint. 
"Vicious animal" means: 
1.  Any animal determined to be vicious pursuant to Section 6.16.030; or 
2.  Any animal which, because of its size, physical nature or vicious propensity, is capable of inflicting serious physical harm or death to humans and which would constitute a danger to human life if it were not kept in the manner required by this title. 
"Wild animal" means: 
1.  Any animal of a species that in its natural life is wild unless otherwise designated by the city council as domesticated upon a showing by the owner of domestication; 
2.  Any animal which is not commonly domesticated, or which is of a wild or predatory nature; 
3.  Any animal which, because of its size, growth propensity, vicious nature or other characteristics would constitute an unreasonable danger to human life, health or property if not kept, maintained or confined in a safe and secure manner; 
4.  Those animals, however domesticated, shall include but are not limited to: 
a.  Alligators, crocodiles, caiman, or venomous reptiles; 
b.  Bears (Ursidae). All bears including grizzly bears, brown bears and black bears; 
c.  Cat Family (Felidae). All except the commonly accepted domestic cats, including cheetahs, cougars, leopards, lions, lynx, bobcats, panthers, mountain lions, tigers and wildcats. Any cat crossbred with a wild animal as described herein shall be considered wild; 
d.  Dog Family (Canidae). All dogs, with the exception of domesticated dogs, including but not limited to fox, coyote, wolf and wild dingo. Any dog crossbred with a wild animal, as described herein, shall be considered wild; 
e.  Venomous fish and piranha; 
f.  Raccoons, skunks, porcupines, and all members of the weasel family, including weasels martins, wolverines, wild ferrets, badgers, otters, ermine, mink, mongoose, etc. 
g.  Primate (Hominidae). All subhuman primates; and 
h.  Ostriches, emus or birds of similar size; 
"Worry" means: 
1.  To harass by tearing, biting or shaking with the teeth; or 
2.  To charge at a person or domestic animal in an aggressive or threatening manner, when no fence or obvious enclosure separates the animal from the public. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.04.030 - Violations and enforcement. 
A.  Unless otherwise provided, any person violating the provisions of this chapter, either by failing to do those acts required herein or by doing any act prohibited by this chapter, shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor and punished accordingly. Each day such violation is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
B.  Violations of this chapter are strict liability offenses, unless otherwise provided. 
C.  This title may be enforced by officials through criminal actions, or through administrative or civil actions. The city has sole discretion over decisions of the remedies it will choose to pursue. 
D.  The possibility of an administrative remedy does not interfere in the city's right to prosecute violations of this chapter as criminal offenses. 
E.  If the city chooses to file both civil and criminal charges for the same violation, no civil penalties in the form of fines shall be assessed, but other remedies, such as removal, destruction, muzzling, or declaratory or injunctive relief are available to the city in that civil proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.04.040 - Appeals. 
A.  An animal owner may appeal the following to the city administrative law judge: 
1.  Removal orders; 
2.  Destruction orders; 
3.  Muzzling orders; 
4.  Revocation or denial of licenses; 
5.  Revocation or denial of a permit issued or applied for under this title; 
6.  A determination that an animal is a nuisance; 
7.  A determination that an animal is vicious; and 
8.  Administrative citations for violations of this title. 
B.  The administrative law judge shall conduct proceedings, and notices of appeal shall be filed, in accordance with Chapter 2.22 of this code, unless otherwise noted in this title. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.04.050 - Notice of determination. 
A.  Service of notice of a determination listed in Section 6.04.040 is complete upon the following: 
1.  Upon the owner of an animal licensed in the city, through: 
a.  Personal service to the owner, 
b.  Mailing a copy via certified mail or other means which requires the recipient's signature; or 
c.  Posting in a prominent location at the address listed on that animal's license. 
2.  Upon the owner of an animal which is not licensed - and only if that owner's name and address are known by the division: 
a.  By mailing a copy of the notification to the owner's last known address; 
b.  Upon personal service; or 
c.  Posting the determination in a prominent location at that address. 
3.  Upon a permitee: 
a.  By mailing a copy of the notification to the address listed on the permit or application; 
b.  Upon personal service on the permitee or a person left in charge of a permitted facility; or 
c.  Posting the notification at the listed address. 
4.  When service is accomplished by mail, there is added three additional business days for an appeal from that decision. 
B.  Notices of adverse decisions shall state that the person receiving the notice has the right to appeal that decision within ten days from the date of the decision, and shall refer that person to both this section and Section 2.22.040 of the this code. It shall include the procedures associated with filing an appeal with the administrative court. 
C.  Owners of animals are responsible for notifying the animal control division of changes to contact information and license information. The failure of an owner to receive a notice, when officers have followed the above procedures, is not a defense to the action and does not increase the time allowed to appeal the animal control official's decision. Extensions of the right to appeal shall only be granted for good cause, as good cause is defined by Utah courts. 
D.  If an animal is recovered or captured without a tag, microchip or other proof of ownership, the division is not required to ascertain the owner's identity or provide notice for any action identified in this chapter, and the provisions of [Section] 6.08.080 apply. 
E.  A person who fails to timely appeal an animal official's decision waives any and all objections to that decision, and waives any right to appeal that decision to the district court. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.04.060 - Special procedures in destruction and removal cases. 
A.  Appeals from a decision to destroy or remove an animal must be submitted within five days of impoundment. 
B.  Appeals from a decision to destroy or remove an animal shall be heard in an expedited fashion to avoid undue suffering or distress to the animal, to avoid additional boarding fees to the owner, and to avoid additional costs for the city. 
C.  Upon receiving a notice of appeal from such a decision, the administrative law judge shall set a hearing date to be held within ten calendar days of receiving the notice of appeal, or as soon as practicable under the circumstances. 
D.  The administrative law judge shall render a decision at the hearing if possible, or if the matter is taken under advisement shall render a decision within five calendar days. 
E.  A person who appeals a destruction or removal decision must, at the time of appeal, prepay all accrued boarding fees, and provide a bond as required in Section 6.08.090. 
F.  An animal in the custody of the city which is the subject of a destruction or removal order shall not be released prior to a hearing. 
G.  An order of destruction or removal may permit animal control officers to place the animal with another owner or a rehabilitation facility, if such placement is appropriate under the circumstances at the sole discretion of the animal control supervisor. 
H.  A person who further appeals an order of destruction issued by the administrative law judge to the district court shall post bond for an additional thirty (30) days. The person shall take steps to expedite the district court proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
Chapter 6.08 - ANIMAL CONTROL DIVISION ADMINISTRATION 
 
6.08.010 - Animal control division. 
The city of South Salt Lake shall have an animal control division within the urban livability department. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.08.020 - Powers of animal control officials. 
A.  The supervisor or any person employed by the division as an animal control officer is vested with the power and authority to enforce this chapter, as well as any other violations of city code or state law. 
B.  The supervisor, deputies, assistants and officers are authorized and empowered to apprehend, take custody of, and impound any animal found in violation of this chapter, including animals for which no license has been procured in accordance with this chapter. 
C.  In the enforcement of this chapter, any peace officer, the supervisor or a designee, when there is probable cause to believe that a violation of this chapter has occurred or is occurring, are authorized to enter onto the premises of any person to take possession of any animal in violation of this chapter. Such authority shall enable animals to be retrieved from any area of a person's property if it is necessary to impound an animal for failure by the owner of such animal to comply with the provisions of this chapter. Animal control officers who are denied access to a property may apply for a warrant to enter property and seize animals or other evidence, in accordance with Utah law. 
D.  The supervisor, deputies, assistants and officers shall charge applicable service fees as set by resolution of the city council and shall not have the authority to modify, reduce, alter, waive, increase or change applicable fees. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.08.030 - Duties of animal control officials. 
A.  The supervisor shall: 
1.  Enforce this chapter and perform other responsibilities pursuant thereto; 
2.  Supervise the municipal animal shelter(s); 
3.  Keep adequate records of all animals impounded and all moneys collected; 
4.  See that all animals and animal holding facilities in the city are licensed, controlled and permitted in accordance with any applicable statute, ordinance and/or regulations; 
5.  Establish, in cooperation with the Salt Lake City/County board of health and other interested governmental agencies, adequate measures for rabies immunization and control. 
B.  Each animal control officer shall: 
1.  Enforce this chapter in all respects pertaining to animal control within the city including the care and impounding of animals and prevention of cruelty to animals; 
2.  Carry out all duties prescribed or delegated by the supervisor. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.08.040 - Interference with officer prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person knowingly or intentionally to interfere with the supervisor or any animal control officer in the lawful discharge of that official's duties. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.08.050 - Animal shelter. 
A.  The city shall provide, or arrange to have provided, suitable premises and facilities to be used as an animal shelter where impounded animals can be adequately kept. 
B.  The city shall provide for the painless and humane destruction of animals required to be destroyed by this title or by the laws of the state of Utah. 
C.  The city may furnish, when necessary and feasible, medical treatment for such animals as may be impounded pursuant to this chapter. 
D.  The city shall sterilize animals according to the requirements of this title and the laws of the state of Utah. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.08.060 - Impounding—Animals to be impounded. 
A.  An animal control officer shall place all animals taken into custody in a designated animal impound facility. 
B.  The following animals may be taken into custody without the filing of a complaint: 
1.  Any animal being kept or maintained contrary to the provisions of this title; 
2.  Any animal running at large contrary to the provisions of this title; 
3.  Any animal which is not licensed, when such an animal is required to be licensed under the provisions of this title; however, any dog which is not wearing a tag is presumed to be unlicensed until an owner is identified; 
4.  Sick or injured animals whose owner cannot be located; 
5.  Any abandoned animal; 
6.  Animals which are not vaccinated for rabies in accordance with the requirements of this title; 
7.  Any animal which must be held for quarantine; and 
8.  Any vicious animal not properly confined as provided in Section 6.16.030. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.08.070 - Impound records. 
The impounding facility shall keep a record of each animal impounded, including: 
A.  Description of the animal; 
B.  Tag numbers or microchip data, if available; 
C.  The location of the pickup and name of the officer collecting the animal; 
D.  The manner and date of disposition; 
E.  The name and address of the redeemer or purchaser; 
F.  The name and address of any person relinquishing an animal to the impound facility; 
G.  All fees received; and 
H.  All expenses accrued during impoundment. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.08.080 - Disposition of animals. 
A.  Five-day Holding Period. Animals may be impounded for up to five business days before further disposition, except as otherwise provided herein. Reasonable effort shall be made to notify the owner of an animal which is wearing a license or tagged with a microchip. Notice is deemed given when sent to the last address of the listed owner kept in animal control records. A failure to reach the owner does not extend the five-day holding period. 
B.  Relinquishment. A property owner may voluntarily relinquish an animal to an animal control officer or the shelter. Immediately upon relinquishment, these animals may be destroyed, placed for adoption, relocated or otherwise disposed of in accordance with Utah law, without the traditional five-day holding period. 
C.  All animals, except those quarantined or confined by court order, held longer than the minimum impound period may be destroyed, placed, relocated or sold as the animal control officer directs. 
D.  Any licensed animal impounded and having or suspected of having serious physical injury or contagious disease requiring medical attention may, in the discretion of an animal control officer, be released to the care of the veterinarian with the consent of the owner. 
E.  When in the judgment of the animal control supervisor, it is determined that because of serious illness or injury an animal should be destroyed for humane reasons or that it is necessary to destroy an animal to protect the public from imminent danger to persons or property, such animal may be destroyed without regard to any time limitations otherwise established herein, and without court order. The division shall promulgate policies to determine whether such a disposition is necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.08.090 - Bond for impoundment beyond five days. 
A.  If an animal is impounded for neglect, cruelty, viciousness, destruction, removal, quarantine after biting a person or animal, or for revocation of an owner's license, then the owner is required to post a bond for the costs of boarding and caring for the animal. 
B.  Failure to provide such a bond within five days of impoundment constitutes abandonment of the animal. Upon occurrence of abandonment, the animal(s) shall become the property of the city, and all decisions regarding the disposition of the animal rest solely with the city. 
C.  A thirty-day bond is required for any appeal from a removal/destruction determination, covering the cost of boarding and care pending the hearing. 
D.  Amounts received by the city in excess of the fees due for the board and care of the animal shall be refunded by the city upon expiration of the order of impoundment, or may be applied to fines or fees owed by the owner to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.08.100 - Sterilization requirements—Adopted animals. 
A.  An animal control officer may not transfer an unaltered animal through adoption, except as provided in this section. 
B.  The supervisor may authorize the direct transfer of an animal to a veterinarian for purposes of sterilization, if the owner makes the request, the veterinarian has been retained to alter the animal, and the owner promises to provide proof of sterilization within ten (10) days of adoption. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.08.110 - Sterilization of animals impounded on multiple occasions. 
A.  An owner whose animal has been impounded by the animal control division on more than one occasion may not redeem the animal unless the owner pays all impound fees and: 
1.  Receipt of proof that the animal was sterilized; or 
2.  A sterilization deposit. 
B.  The sterilization deposit shall be refunded to the owner only if the owner provides proof of sterilization within thirty (30) days of release of the animal to the owner. 
C.  If an animal has been impounded on a fourth occasion and has not been sterilized, then the city may only release the animal into the custody of a veterinarian who has been retained to sterilize the animal. 
D.  The disposition of forfeited sterilization deposits shall be in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.08.120 - Redeeming impounded animals. 
A.  An owner of an impounded animal may redeem the animal if the owner does so before disposition, and if the owner pays: 
1.  The impound fee (impoundment of animals on multiple occasions are subject to increased fees as set forth in the consolidated fee schedule); 
2.  Daily board charges; 
3.  Any veterinary costs incurred during impoundment, including rabies vaccination; 
4.  License fees, if required by the code; and 
5.  A sterilization deposit, if required by Section 6.08.100 or 6.06.110. 
B.  Impound fees shall be established in the consolidated fee schedule, and may be divided into categories based upon species or size. 
C.  No impound fee is assessed if an owner reports a suspicion of rabies in the owner's animal, in compliance with this chapter, unless the suspected animal bit another animal or person. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.08.130 - Disposal of animals. 
The division shall have the authority to dispose of animals as set forth in this title or when requested by the owner of the animal. The fee for such service shall be set forth in the consolidated fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.08.140 - Adoption fee reduction or discount. 
A.  The director may offer reductions, discounts, or fee-free adoption promotions, subject to the conditions and restrictions of this section. 
B.  Promotions under this section shall comply with the following: 
1.  The promotion shall be available to all members of the public; and 
2.  Promotions shall be advertised at the shelter and on the city's website at least two weeks before the promotion begins. 
C.  The director shall take the following into consideration when offering a promotion: 
1.  The volume of animals currently in the shelter; 
2.  Promotions offered by surrounding agencies; and 
3.  Budgetary considerations related to the maintenance of animals at the shelter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
Chapter 6.12 - KEEPING AND CARING FOR ANIMALS 
 
6.12.010 - Owners responsible for care of animals. 
The owner of an animal is ultimately responsible for the behavior of an animal which belongs to that owner, regardless of whether the animal was in the care, custody or control of another individual. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.12.020 - Removal of animal waste. 
A.  The owner or custodian of any animal shall remove any feces left by said animal on any sidewalk, gutter, street or other public area. 
B.  The owner or custodian of an animal shall also remove any feces left by said animal on any private property for which consent has not been given to allow the leaving of feces. A person is subject to nuisance animal penalties if feces are not promptly removed by the owner or custodian on more than one occasion. 
C.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to a guide dog, hearing dog, or other service dog accompanying any person with a disability, if such animal is actually being used by a disabled person. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.12.030 - Animal cruelty. 
A.  Conduct falling under the provisions of the Utah Code's prohibitions against cruelty to animals, Utah Code Ann. § 76-9-301 et seq., shall be prosecuted in a criminal court, although civil remedies may be simultaneously sought. 
B.  For purposes of Section 76-9-305 of the Utah Code, the court in which the animal cruelty action is filed may make the determination that the animal be sold at public auction or destroyed, or that decision may be addressed by the administrative law judge. Animals seized due to cruel or inhumane circumstances, but for which criminal charges will not be pursued, shall be disposed of, redeemed or placed according to [Section] 6.04.170 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.12.040 - Animals running at large. 
A.  It is unlawful for the owner or another responsible person having charge, care, custody or control of an animal to allow such animal at any time to run at large. 
B.  The owner or person charged with responsibility of an animal found running loose shall be strictly liable for any property damage or injury to a person or another animal caused by such animal running at large, regardless of the precautions taken to prevent the escape of the animal and regardless of whether the person knows that the animal is running at large. 
C.  Any animal shall be considered running at large if it is found on public property or the property of another and is not under restraint. 
D.  The provisions of this section do not apply to dogs in a designated off-leash area of a public or private park. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.12.050 - Animals on unenclosed premises. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to chain, stake out or tether any animal on an unenclosed premises in such a manner that the animal may go beyond the property line or upon the sidewalk or roadway. 
B.  It is not a violation of this section for an animal to cross into the property of an adjacent property owner if that property owner has consented to the entry. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.12.060 - Animals in public places. 
It is unlawful to chain, stake out or tether any animal in a public place unless the person in charge of such animal is present and the animal is properly restrained so that the animal poses no threat of contact with a person engaged in a normal and expected activity. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.12.070 - Fences and enclosures. 
A.  The owner of or any person responsible for an enclosure or fence, which is intended to limit an animal's movement to a specific area, shall be liable under this chapter for a failure to properly maintain such enclosure or fence in a manner which prevents any part of the animal to protrude through the fence. 
B.  It shall not be necessary for an animal to have escaped from the enclosure for there to be a violation of this section. 
C.  No kennel, dog runs, shelter, dog house or similar structure shall be erected or maintained in a side yard, as defined in Title 17 of this code. 
D.  An electronic system by which an animal receives a shock or other stimulus when approaching the property boundary, or a similar product or method, does not qualify as a fence or enclosure under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.12.080 - Prolonged chaining prohibited. 
It is unlawful to chain or tether an animal outside in excess of six consecutive hours per day, unless there is provided adequate shelter, food and water for the animal. In no event shall an animal be chained or tethered outdoors for more than ten (10) consecutive hours per day. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.12.090 - Animals in vehicles. 
A.  In cases not amounting to animal cruelty, it is unlawful for any person intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence, to confine an animal within a vehicle without adequate ventilation, for an unusual length of time, when the vehicle's interior is subject to extreme temperatures, or any other condition which imperils the animal's welfare. A violation may be established by any one of these factors, or from their combination. 
B.  It is unlawful to allow any animal to jump from a vehicle while that vehicle is moving upon any public street within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.12.100 - Injury to animals by motorists. 
A.  Every operator of a motor or other self-propelled vehicle upon the streets of the city shall immediately upon injuring, striking, maiming or running down any domestic animal give aid as can be reasonably rendered. In the absence of the owner, the operator shall immediately notify the South Salt Lake City animal control division or police department and report the incident. 
B.  It shall be the duty of such operator to remain at or near the scene until such time as the appropriate authorities arrive, and upon the arrival of such authorities, the operator shall identify him or herself to such authorities. In the absence of an owner, a person may give aid by taking the animal to the animal control facility or another veterinary facility and notifying the animal control division. 
C.  Emergency vehicles are exempted from the requirements of this provision. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.12.110 - Unlawful to harbor stray animals. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this title or the laws of the state of Utah, it is unlawful for any person to harbor, feed on multiple occasions, or keep an animal which appears to be lost or strayed. 
B.  It is the duty of any person who finds stray, lost or feral animals to notify the animal control division within twenty-four (24) hours, and permit the division to impound the animals. 
C.  The provisions of this section do not apply to appropriately licensed animal shelters. 
D.  This section does not prohibit a permitted community cat colony caretaker from providing food to community cats. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.12.120 - Malicious impounding. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to secrete or impound the animal which belongs to another person. 
B.  The provisions of this section do not apply to animal control officers or peace officers acting within the scope of their authority. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.12.130 - Keeping dogs at travel trailer parks. 
A.  The city council finds that dogs kept or controlled by patrons of travel trailer parks presents a special hazard to other patrons and guests using those facilities even when otherwise restrained by leash or tether. 
B.  No person staying as a renter, guest or invitee at travel trailer park located in the city shall have charge, care, custody or control of any dog at such space or pad except that dog be: 
1.  Totally enclosed within a solid structure, such as a portable kennel, run, cage or similar enclosure or in a motor vehicle which is adequately ventilated; or 
2.  Is on a leash or tether physically controlled by that person. 
C.  The fact that the dog in question is otherwise tethered or not violating any other provisions of this chapter at the time in question shall not be a defense to a charge of violating this section. 
D.  Any dog being kept at any travel trailer park in violation of this section may be impounded by any police or animal control officer at any time a violation occurs without prior notice to the person having charge, care, custody or control of the dog. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.12.140 - Female dogs in heat. 
Any owner or person having charge, care custody or control of any female dog in heat shall, in addition to restraining such dog from running at large, cause such dog to be constantly confined in a building or secure enclosure so as to prevent it from attracting by scent or coming into contact with other dogs and creating a nuisance, except for planned breeding. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.12.150 - Places prohibited to animals. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to take or permit any animal, whether loose or on a leash or in arms, in or about any establishment or place of business where food or food products are sold or displayed, including but not limited to restaurants, grocery stores, meat markets and fruit or vegetable stores. This provision does not apply to licensed service animals. 
B.  Except in specifically designated parks, it is unlawful for any person to take or permit any animal to be loose in any public park located within the corporate limits of the city. In parks in which animals are permitted, animals must be on a leash which is of sufficient strength to ensure that the person has absolute control of the animal. Leads shall not exceed six feet in length. 
C.  In parks which contain specifically designated areas for off-leash animals, animals are to be kept on leashes or leads in accordance with subsection B, until they enter the designated "off-leash" areas. 
D.  Exceptions may be made for any show or clinic held with the permission of the parks division. 
E.  Properly licensed service animals shall not be prohibited from entry into an establishment or place of business, except as provided under federal or state law. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as denying access to properly licensed service animals. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.12.160 - Sale of animals. 
A.  Rabbits or Fowl. It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, barter or give away any live baby rabbits or fowl under two months of age in any quantity less than six. Such animals shall not be artificially dyed or colored. Nothing in this provision shall be construed to prohibit the raising of such rabbits and fowl by a private individual for his or her personal use and consumption, provided that he maintains proper brooders and other facilities for the care and containment of such animals while they are in his possession. 
B.  Premiums and Novelties. It is unlawful for any person to offer as a premium, prize, award, novelty or incentive to purchase merchandise, any live animal. 
C.  Pet Turtles. It is unlawful for any person to raise or sell any Pseudemys Scriptaelegans, or P. Troostii family Testudinidae, "pet turtles." 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.12.170 - Limits on number of animals. 
A.  No person may permit more than the designated number of animals in or upon one residence or commercial establishment (except permitted facilities otherwise governed by this title) at one time, except as otherwise provided herein, or in the case of a service animal, as defined by Utah law. One additional animal may be permitted only as indicated on the following table, in cases where the animal is a rescued animal. 
B.  The allowed number of animals is as follows: 
Type of Animal 	Number permitted per residence or commercial establishment 	Additional animals permitted if a rescued animal 
Dogs 	2 	1 
Cats 	2 	1 
Ferrets 	2 	
Exotic animals 	4 	
Rabbits 	6 	
 
C.  A resident who, prior to April 22, 2015, resided within the city and possessed a number of animals which was lawful under existing code, shall not be required to sell or remove the specific animals which the resident possessed, even if those numbers exceed the limits of this section. As it relates to those specific animals, the previous code related to animal limits applies. However, upon the death or removal of the specific animal, the resident is required to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.12.180 - Litters of animals. 
Notwithstanding Section 6.12.170, litters of animals may be kept in excess of the animal limit until no later than four months after the litter is produced. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.12.190 - Wild animals. 
A.  It shall be unlawful to keep, sell, barter, give away, own, harbor or purchase any wild animal, as defined by this title, except that an animal shelter, zoological park, veterinary hospital, humane society shelter, public laboratory, or facility for education or scientific purposes may keep such an animal if protective devices are provided which are adequate to prevent such animal from escaping or injuring the public. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep an animal of a species prohibited or protected by federal law or by any regulation or law of the state of Utah. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.12.200 - Livestock. 
Livestock are prohibited in the city, unless located in the agricultural zone or the owner has established a legal, non-conforming use, as defined by Title 17 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
Chapter 6.16 - DOMESTIC POULTRY AND BEEKEEPING 
 
6.16.010 - Intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards for the keeping of domestic poultry and domestic bees in appropriate residential zones in the City of South Salt Lake. it is intended to enable residents to keep a limited number of hens for non-commercial purposes, while establishing standards to limit the adverse impacts on neighboring properties, and ensuring the health and sanitation of the domestic poultry and related structures. It is also intended to impose requirements related to beekeeping to avoid problems with keeping bees in metropolitan and populated areas. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.16.020 - Agricultural zone exempt. 
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to property located within the agricultural zone. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.16.030 - Revocation of permit. 
Any permit issued under this chapter may be revoked for violations of the standards in this chapter, which revocation may be appealed as provided in Section 6.04.040 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.16.040 - General requirements for domestic poultry. 
A.  For parcels with a lot area of six thousand (6,000) square feet, residents may apply to keep up to four hens. One additional hen shall be permitted for every one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet greater than the minimum lot area, up to a maximum of six hens. 
B.  Parcels in single-family residential zones that contain more than two residential dwelling units or a non-conforming multifamily structure shall not be eligible for a domestic poultry permit. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any resident to keep hens in a single-family residential zone without a current domestic poultry permit from South Salt Lake City animal services. 
D.  Hens shall be kept for personal use only. The selling of eggs, fertilizer or breeding of hens is prohibited. 
E.  All hens shall be kept in a henhouse or run. Henhouses and runs shall be fenced and maintained in accordance with the design standards set forth in this chapter. Chickens only may be allowed outside of the henhouse during daylight hours, inside of an enclosed yard. 
F.  It shall be unlawful for any domestic poultry to be at large within city limits. 
G.  It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper or custodian of any domestic poultry to allow the animal(s) to be a nuisance to any neighbor(s), including: 
1.  Noxious odors from the animals or related structure, 
2.  Associated rodent or pest infestation, 
3.  Noise of a loud and persistent and habitual nature, or 
4.  Any other condition which constitutes a nuisance pursuant to Utah law. 
H.  An officer of South Salt Lake City animal services, South Salt Lake City code enforcement, South Salt Lake City police department or the Salt Lake County health department shall determine whether a nuisance exists. 
I.  The slaughtering of hens in public view is prohibited, but must be humane in any case. 
J.  It shall be unlawful for any resident to keep roosters, crowing hens, peafowl, or waterfowl, except where they are allowed as a legally nonconforming use. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.16.050 - Construction and maintenance requirements for henhouses and runs. 
A.  Location: 
1.  The henhouse and run shall be located in the rear yard only. On double frontage lots or corner lots, henhouses and runs shall not be allowed within twenty (20) feet of any dedicated street. 
2.  The henhouse and run shall be a minimum of five feet from any property line. 
3.  The henhouse and run shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the residence of the domestic poultry permit holder. 
4.  The henhouse and run shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any adjacent residential structure, school building, or church. 
B.  Design Requirements: 
1.  The henhouse shall be enclosed on all sides and have a roof and access door that are able to be shut and secured. The henhouse shall be ventilated and impermeable to rodents, wild birds, and predators including raccoons, skunks, dogs and cats. Any openings on the henhouse or the entire henhouse shall be elevated at least eighteen (18) inches above ground. Except for access doors, all other openings shall be sealed with rodent and predator-proof wire mesh with openings of one-quarter inch or smaller. 
2.  The henhouse shall be free-standing and accessible on all sides for cleaning and maintenance. 
3.  The run shall be fully enclosed, including a roof, by a secured fence at all times. The fence must be at least five feet in height and no more than six feet in height. The fence shall be made of one-quarter inch metal mesh hardware cloth and buried at least two feet in the ground. The buried portion of the fence shall be bent outward at least two feet and covered with soil or pavers. Chicken wire shall not be permitted. 
4.  The total area of the henhouse and run shall be at least of six square feet per hen and the total area of the henhouse shall be at least of two square feet per hen. The total area of the run shall not exceed forty-eight (48) square feet and the total area of the henhouse shall not exceed thirty-six (36) square feet. 
5.  Materials used for henhouses and runs shall be suitable for use in single-family residential zones. Wooden structures shall be painted or stained. Prefabricated henhouses are allowed, provided they meet the specification for excluding rodents. 
6.  The henhouse shall not exceed eight feet in height at its tallest point. 
C.  Sanitation Requirements. 
1.  All henhouses and runs shall be kept and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition; 
2.  All droppings shall be cleaned out at least once every week. 
3.  Chicken pens shall be thoroughly cleaned with a standard disinfectant at least three (3) times yearly, once in each of the months of March, July and October. 
4.  At all times, all hens shall have access to feed and clean liquid water. 
5.  Compost or manure which is generated by the use must comply with Salt Lake County regulations regarding storage and disposal. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.16.060 - Domestic poultry permit. 
A.  A domestic poultry permit shall be required for the keeping of hens. 
B.  Residents seeking a domestic poultry permit shall submit a completed written application to South Salt Lake City animal services. All requirements, attachments and fees set forth on the application shall be satisfied and submitted to South Salt Lake City animal services before the application shall be deemed completed. 
C.  Domestic poultry permit applications shall include the following documentation: 
1.  A completed and signed domestic poultry permit application. 
2.  Fee paid, per the South Salt Lake City consolidated fee schedule. 
3.  Site Plan. The domestic poultry permit application shall include a site plan that incorporates the following elements: 
a.  The site plan shall include a date, north arrow and appropriate scale to reflect the location of the henhouse and run; and 
b.  The site plan shall include the locations of and distances from all existing property lines, neighboring residences, and any other structure within fifty (50) feet of the proposed henhouse and run location; and 
c.  The site plan shall include the dimensions of the existing or proposed henhouse and run; and 
d.  A photograph or illustration of the design of the henhouse and run, including construction materials, height and width dimensions. 
4.  For residents who are renting or leasing property, a notarized affidavit from the property owner granting the applicant permission to keep hens. 
D.  Issuance of any domestic poultry permit is contingent upon successful completion of an on-site inspection by South Salt Lake City animal services. 
E.  A representative of South Salt Lake City or the Salt Lake Valley health department may inspect the domestic poultry enclosure and hen house at reasonable times to determine compliance. If entry during reasonable times is denied by the permit holder or property owner, the city may revoke the permit or may apply for a warrant to enter the property to conduct the inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.16.100 - General requirements for domestic beekeeping. 
A.  An apiary, consisting of not more than three (3) hives or an equivalent capacity, may be maintained in a side yard or rear yard of a parcel in single-family residential (R1) zones having a minimum lot area of four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet. 
B.  Residents renting or leasing property shall be required to submit a notarized affidavit from the property owner granting the applicant permission to maintain an apiary. 
C.  All apiaries shall comply with Salt Lake County health department regulations, as amended. 
D.  Parcels in single-family residential zones that contain more than two residential dwelling units or a non-conforming multifamily structures shall not be eligible to maintain an apiary. 
E.  Each beekeeper shall be registered with the Utah Department of Agriculture and Food as provided in the Utah Bee Inspection Act set forth in Utah Code, as amended. Proof of registration shall be sent to the city. 
F.  Apiaries shall be placed on property so the general flight pattern of bees is in a direction that will deter bee contact with humans and domesticated animals. 
G.  If any portion of an apiary is located within fifteen (15) feet from an area which provides public access or from a property line on the lot where an apiary is located, as measured from the nearest point on the hive to the property line, a flyway barrier of at least six feet in height shall be established and maintained around the hive except as needed to allow access. Such flyway, if located along the property line or within five feet of the property line, shall consist of a solid wall, fence, dense vegetation, or a combination thereof, which extends at least ten (10) feet beyond the hive in each direction so that bees are forced to fly to an elevation of at least six feet above ground level over property lines in the vicinity of the apiary. 
H.  Each beekeeper shall ensure that a convenient source of water is available to the colony in a manner which is appropriate for providing water to bees, continuously between March 1 and October 31 of each year. The water shall be in a location that minimizes any nuisance created by bees seeking water on neighboring property. 
I.  Each beekeeper shall ensure that no bee comb or other beekeeping equipment is left upon the grounds of an apiary site. Upon removal from a hive, all such equipment shall promptly be disposed of in a sealed container or placed within a building or other bee-proof enclosure. 
J.  The keeping of bees for commercial enterprises is prohibited in any zone outside of the agricultural (A-1) zone. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.16.110 - Requirements for hives. 
A.  Honeybee colonies shall be kept in hives with removable frames which shall be kept in sound and usable conditions. 
B.  Hives shall be placed at least five feet from any property line and six inches above the ground, as measured from the ground to the lowest portion of the hive with clear space underneath; provided, however, that the five-foot requirement may be waived in writing by the adjoining property owner. 
C.  Hives shall be operated and maintained as provided in the Utah Bee Inspection Act. 
D.  Each hive shall be conspicuously marked with the owner's name, address, telephone number, and state registration number. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.16.120 - Nuisance conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep beehives in a manner that is contrary to the provisions of this chapter or in a manner that threatens public health or safety, or creates a nuisance. In such cases, the city may apply for and receive an order of abatement to remove apiaries or bee colonies. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
Chapter 6.20 - ATTACKING, VICIOUS AND NUISANCE ANIMALS  
Division I. - Attack, Bites, and Nuisance 
 
6.20.010 - Animal attack. 
A.  It is unlawful for the owner or person having charge, care, custody or control of any animal, even if such care or custody is temporary, to allow that animal to attack any person, domestic animal or fowl, or any species of protected wildlife. The person having charge, care, custody or control is strictly liable for this offense. 
B.  In addition to being subject to prosecution under subsection A of this section, the owner or person having charge, care, custody or control of such animal shall also be strictly liable in damages to any person injured, for any property damaged, or to the owner of any animal injured or destroyed thereby. 
C.  Defenses. It is an affirmative defense if: 
1.  The attacking animal was deliberately or maliciously provoked; 
2.  The attacking animal was properly restrained on private property which was clearly marked with signs warning against trespassing, and was reacting to a trespasser on the property. 
D.  It is not a defense that a victim's injuries were caused by falling or attempting to break up a fight between animals. 
E.  When more than one animal or person is injured as a result of the attack, there are multiple violations in the same amount as the number of victims. 
F.  A violation of this section is a class C misdemeanor, unless the animal causes bodily injury due to a bite, in which case it is a class B misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.20.020 - Animal chasing or worrying another. 
A.  In cases not amounting to a violation of Section 6.16.010, it is unlawful for the owner or person having charge, care, custody or control of any animal, even if such care or custody is temporary, to allow that animal to chase or worry any person, domestic animal or fowl, or any species of protected wildlife. 
B.  A judge or the administrative law judge may impose a six-month muzzling order for any animal found to have engaged in conduct in violation of this section. 
C.  A violation of this section is an infraction. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.20.030 - Vicious animals. 
A.  Any animal which bites or attacks a person or animal in violation of Section 6.16.010 is deemed a vicious animal for a period of two years and may be subject to a muzzling, destruction or removal order, as determined by the supervisor. If, at the conclusion of two years from the date of determination, the animal has not been found running at large and has not attacked any other person or animal, it shall no longer be deemed a vicious animal. 
B.  Vicious animals are subject to additional fees. The owners of vicious animals must pay these additional fees and provide proof of liability insurance in an amount determined in the consolidated fee schedule, prior to redeeming the animal. 
C.  It is unlawful for a vicious animal to be off the premises of the owner unless the animal is under restraint and properly muzzled so as to prevent it from injuring any person or animal. 
D.  Vicious animals are prohibited from participating in off-leash areas of public parks. 
E.  Any animal which bites or attacks a person or animal in violation of Section 6.16.010 for a second time during the life of that animal shall be permanently deemed a vicious animal and subject to removal or destruction orders, as determined by the supervisor. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.20.040 - Muzzling orders. 
A.  Any judge may order the owner of any animal which has engaged in conduct in violation of this chapter to muzzle the animal when it is in public places. The muzzling order shall also require adequate restraint of the animal at all times to prevent the animal from leaving private property on its own. 
B.  All vicious animals are subject to muzzling orders so long as they are deemed vicious animals. 
C.  An owner or person with charge, care, custody or possession of an animal subject to a muzzling order, shall not permit that animal to enter public property or the property of another without the muzzle in place. 
D.  It is not a defense to a violation of this section that the animal removed the muzzle or escaped from the premises without the owner's knowledge. 
E.  A violation of this section is a class B misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.20.050 - Removal orders. 
A.  An order of removal may be issued by the supervisor if an animal has: 
1.  Attacked or worried another person or animal on more than one occasion within a one-month period, not leading to bodily injury; 
2.  Bitten a person; 
3.  Been treated cruelly, neglected or abused; or 
4.  Has run at large on more than one occasion during the previous twelve (12) months. 
B.  When the removal order takes effect, the supervisor may place the animal with another owner or agency, or otherwise dispose of the animal in accordance with this chapter, at the supervisor's sole discretion. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.20.060 - Destruction orders. 
A.  An order of destruction may be issued by the supervisor if an animal has: 
1.  On more than one occasion within a twelve-month period bitten a person or animal; 
2.  Inflicted substantial bodily injury on a person in a single attack; 
3.  Bitten multiple people and/or animals in a single incident; or 
4.  Has bitten a person or animal, and in the opinion of a licensed veterinarian is substantially likely to attack again. 
B.  Upon receiving a destruction order, the supervisor may dispose of the animal or place it with another owner or agency, at the supervisor's sole discretion. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.20.070 - Duty to report bites. 
A.  Any person having knowledge of any individual or animal having been bitten by an animal of any species subject to rabies shall report the incident immediately to the animal control division or to the Salt Lake County health department. 
B.  The owner of an animal that bites a person and any person bitten by an animal shall report the bite to the animal control division, South Salt Lake City police department, or the Salt Lake County health department immediately after the bite, regardless of whether or not the biting animal is of a species subject to rabies. 
C.  A physician or other medical personnel who renders professional treatment within the city to a person bitten by an animal shall report the fact that he or she has rendered treatment within twenty-four (24) hours of the first professional attendance. The physician shall state the name, sex and address of the person bitten as well as the type and location of the bite or other information necessary to ascertain the immunization status of the biting animal. 
D.  Any person treating an animal bitten, injured or mauled by another animal shall report the incident to the animal control division. The report shall contain the name and address of the owner of the wounded, injured or bitten animal, the name and address of the owner and description of the animal which caused the injury, and the location of the incident. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.20.080 - Nuisance animals. 
A.  Any owner or person having charge, care, custody or control of an animal causing a nuisance is in violation of this section. 
B.  A nuisance animal is one which: 
1.  Causes damage to the property of anyone other than its owner; 
2.  Has committed a second offense of Section 6.16.020 of this chapter within a twelve-month period; 
3.  Causes unreasonable fouling of the air by odors; 
4.  Causes unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings; 
5.  Defecates on any public sidewalk, park or building, or on any private property on more than one occasion without the consent of the owner of such private property owner, unless the owner or custodian promptly removes the defecation; 
6.  Barks, whines or howls or makes other disturbing noises in an excessive, continuous or untimely fashion, and at least one person's peace and repose is substantially or repeatedly disrupted by the noise; 
7.  Is found running at large on more than one occasion within a twelve-month period; or 
8.  Molests passers by or chases passing vehicles on more than one occasion during a one-month period. 
C.  Nuisance animals are subject to additional fees, in an amount determined by the consolidated fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
Division II. - Rabies Prevention 
 
6.20.090 - Rabies vaccinations. 
A.  Rabies vaccinations, as approved by the Salt Lake County health department board of health, are required for dogs, cats, ferrets, or any other animal which is kept and is susceptible to rabies. The owner or person having the charge, care, custody and control of a cat, dog, or ferret which is six months of age or older, shall have the animal vaccinated within thirty (30) days after it reaches six months. Other vaccination requirements are those set out in the laws of the state of Utah. 
B.  Any person permitting any such animal to habitually be on or remain, or be lodged or fed within such person's house, yard or premises shall be responsible for such vaccination. 
C.  Unvaccinated dogs or cats over six months of age acquired by the owner or moved into the city must be vaccinated within or before thirty (30) days of purchase or arrival. 
D.  Owners shall maintain current certifications of vaccination prepared by a veterinarian. 
E.  This section does not apply to licensed veterinarian or kennel operators temporarily maintaining on their premises animals owned by others. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.20.100 - Duties of veterinarians and tag requirements. 
A.  Each veterinarian, when vaccinating any animal for rabies, is required to complete a certificate of rabies vaccination (in duplicate) which includes the following information: 
1.  Owner's name and address; 
2.  Description of animal (breed, sex, markings, age, name); 
3.  Date of vaccination; 
4.  Rabies vaccination tag number; 
5.  Type of rabies vaccine administered; and 
6.  Manufacturer's serial number of vaccine. 
B.  A copy of the certificate shall be distributed to the owner and original retained by the issuing veterinarian. The veterinarian and the owner shall retain their copies of the certificate for the interval between vaccinations specified in this section. 
C.  A metal or durable plastic rabies vaccination tag, serially numbered, shall be securely attached to the collar or harness of the animal. A dog not wearing such a tag shall be deemed to be unvaccinated and may be impounded and dealt with pursuant to this chapter. 
D.  The provisions of this chapter with respect to vaccination shall not apply to any animal owned by a person temporarily remaining within the city for less than thirty (30) days. Such animals shall be kept under strict supervision of the owner. It is unlawful to bring any animal into the city which does not comply with the animal and health laws and import regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.20.110 - Impoundment of animals without valid rabies vaccination tag. 
A.  Any vaccinated animal impounded due to failure to wear a rabies vaccination tag may be reclaimed by its owner furnishing proof of rabies vaccination and payment of all impoundment fees prior to release. 
B.  Any unvaccinated animal may be reclaimed prior to disposal by payment of impound fees and by obtaining a rabies vaccination within seventy-two (72) hours of release. Failure to provide proof of timely vaccination within seven days of vaccination is an infraction. 
C.  Any animal not reclaimed prior to the period shall be disposed of pursuant to the provisions of Section 6.08.080. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.20.120 - Reporting rabid animals. 
Any person who has knowledge of the whereabouts of an animal known to have been exposed to, or suspected of having rabies, or an animal or person bitten by such a suspect animal, shall notify the animal control division, the Salt Lake County health department or the Utah Division of Health. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.20.130 - Quarantine and disposition of biting animals. 
A.  All animals of a species which can carry rabies which bite other animals, or which show signs of having rabies, shall be reported by the owner and immediately confined in a secure place by the owner. The owner shall turn over the animal to the animal control division upon demand. 
B.  Any animal of a species subject to rabies that bites a person or animal or is suspected of having rabies may be seized and quarantined for observation for a period of not less than ten days by the animal control division or the Salt Lake County health department. 
C.  Other arrangements, including confinement by an owner, may be made by the supervisor if the animal had a current rabies vaccination at the time the bite was inflicted, or in the event of other special circumstances justifying an exception. The person who has custody of an animal under quarantine shall immediately notify animal services if the animal shows any signs of sickness or abnormal behavior, or if the animal escapes confinement. It is unlawful to prevent an animal control officer from inspecting or examining the animal during the period of quarantine. 
D.  If an animal dies within ten days from the date of the bite, the person having custody shall immediately notify the supervisor or immediately remove and deliver the head of the animal to the state health laboratory to be examined for rabies. 
E.  If, at the end of the ten-day quarantine period, the supervisor finds no sign of rabies, then the animal may be returned to the owner, removed, or destroyed in accordance with the other provisions of this title. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.20.140 - Disposition of unvaccinated bitten animals. 
A.  If an unvaccinated animal species subject to rabies is bitten by a known rabid animal, then the exposed animal should be immediately destroyed. 
B.  If the owner of an unvaccinated animal is unwilling to destroy the bitten or exposed animal, the animal shall be immediately isolated and quarantined for sixty (60) days under veterinary supervision, the cost of such confinement to be paid in advance by the owner. The animal may only be released from quarantine at the conclusion of this period if, in the opinion of the veterinarian, the animal is not infected with rabies. 
C.  The animal shall be destroyed if the owner does not comply with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.20.150 - Disposition of vaccinated bitten animals. 
A.  If a bitten or exposed animal has been vaccinated, the animal shall be re-vaccinated within twenty-four (24) hours and quarantined for a period of ten (10) days following re-vaccination. 
B.  If the animal is not re-vaccinated within twenty-four (24) hours, the animal shall be isolated and quarantined under veterinary supervision for thirty (30) days. The animal may only be released from quarantine at the conclusion of this period if, in the opinion of the veterinarian, the animal is not infected with rabies. 
C.  The animal shall be destroyed if the owner does not comply with this section. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.20.160 - Removal of quarantined animal unlawful. 
Removing any animal from the place of quarantine without written permission of the supervisor is a class B misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
Chapter 6.24 - LICENSING 
 
6.24.010 - Dog and cat licensing. 
A.  All dogs and cats must be licensed annually with proof of vaccination, except as otherwise provided herein, to a person of the age of eighteen (18) or older, or to a person under the age of eighteen (18) with the written permission of a parent or guardian. 
B.  Any person owning, possessing or harboring a cat or dog shall obtain a license for such animal within thirty (30) days after the animal reaches the age of six months; or in the case of an animal over six months, within ten (10) days of acquiring the animal. 
C.  Animal sitting. A person who is temporarily harboring another person's dog or cat shall notify the supervisor if the animal has remained or will remain with that person for more than fourteen (14) consecutive days, and provide owner contact information. For purposes of this title, animals are deemed "owned" by the person in custody of that animal if that person does not notify the supervisor under this subsection, or if the animal remains at that person's residence or establishment for more than thirty (30) days. 
D.  License applications must be submitted to the supervisor, utilizing a standard form which requests name, address, e-mail and telephone number of the applicant; breed, sex, color and age of the animal and rabies information. The application shall be accompanied by the prescribed license fee and by a current rabies vaccination certificate. Rabies vaccinations shall be given by a licensed veterinarian every three years. 
E.  All fees for licensing are set by resolution of the city council. Fees for new applications and renewal applications shall be calculated on a monthly pro rata basis up to the date when vaccinations for animals become due unless such applications are submitted with new proof of vaccination; all application fees shall thereafter be paid concurrently with proof of vaccination. 
F.  No animal shall be licensed as spayed or neutered without proof that such surgery was performed. 
G.  Licenses shall expire one year from the date of issue, or in the case of new or renewal licenses which do not correspond with proof of vaccination requirements, upon the date when proof of vaccination is required. 
H.  No penalty may be assessed by the city against a cat owner for failure to license a cat until after November 1, 2015. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.24.020 - License tags. 
A.  Upon payment of a license fee, the supervisor shall issue to the owner a receipt and tag for each animal licensed. The tag shall have stamped thereon the license number corresponding with the tag number on the certificate. The owner shall attach the tag to the collar or harness of the animal and see that the collar and tag are worn at all times. Failure to attach the tag as provided is a violation of this chapter, except for police service dogs. 
B.  Exception for Cats. In lieu of requiring a collar and tag, a cat owner may request that the division implant a microchip in the animal. The microchip shall contain owner and licensing information. 
C.  Tags and licenses are non-transferrable between animals. No refunds shall be made on any dog license fee for any reason whatsoever. Replacements for lost or destroyed tags shall be issued upon payment of an administrative fee to the supervisor. 
D.  Any person removing or causing to be removed the collar, harness or tag from any licensed animal without the consent of the owner or keeper thereof, except a veterinarian or animal control officer who removes such for medical or other reasons, shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.24.030 - Exemptions. 
The provisions of Sections 6.20.010 and 6.20.020 do not apply to the following: 
A.  Licensed dogs or cats whose owners are nonresidents temporarily (up to thirty (30) days) within the city. Dog or cat owners who remain within the city longer than thirty (30) days may transfer to a local license upon payment of an administrative fee and proof of rabies vaccination. 
B.  Individual dogs or cats within a properly licensed kennel or establishment where animals are held for resale. 
C.  Fee provisions of Section 6.20.010 shall not apply to service animals. 
D.  Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to exempt any dog or cat from having a current rabies vaccination. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.24.040 - Ferret license. 
A.  All ferrets must be licensed with the city, which license must be renewed annually, with proof of current vaccination. 
B.  All licensed ferrets must be micro-chipped, and the microchip number must be included with all registration forms. 
C.  Owners of ferrets shall provide a cage or kennel of sufficient size and construction to allow proper space and safekeeping of the animals. 
D.  When a ferret is outside, it shall be kept on a harness with a leash not in excess of six feet in length specifically designed for ferrets. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.24.050 - First year's licensing fee waived for adopted animals—Vaccination clinics. 
The supervisor shall waive the first year's licensing fee for any rescued animal: 
A.  Which is adopted from an animal shelter; or 
B.  Which receives a vaccination as part of a vaccination clinic in which the city participates or sponsors. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.24.060 - Guard dog restrictions. 
Guard dogs may be kept pursuant to the following restrictions: 
A.  Guard dogs must be kept in a fenced run or other suitable enclosure and under absolute control during hours when the property is open to the public so as to prevent their direct contact with the public. 
B.  Guard dogs shall be at all times properly restrained in a sufficient manner, including chaining, fencing or both, to prevent their escape from the property. 
C.  Guard dogs shall be registered with the city according to procedures to be developed with the division and the police department. 
D.  The property shall be marked with signs near all entrances which warns of the presence of a guard dog. 
E.  Proof of liability insurance for all guard dogs shall be presented and kept current for at least fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) in benefits for injuries wrongfully inflicted by a guard dog. 
F.  Any registered guard dog which is discovered running at large or attacks an animal or person outside of the business premises shall have its registration revoked, and it may not be returned to the business premises. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.24.070 - License revocation or denial. 
A.  All of an owner's dog or cat licenses shall be revoked, or applications for licensure shall be denied, due to the following circumstances: 
1.  The owner has allowed one or more dogs to run at large on three or more occasions within twelve (12) months; 
2.  The owner or a member of the owner's household has been found by a judicial or administrative court to have treated an animal with abuse, cruelty or neglect within the past three years; 
3.  The city has ordered destruction or removal of an owner's animal within the past three years, which order was not reversed by an administrative or judicial court; 
4.  An animal was treated cruelly or abused in the owner's residence, and the person who perpetrated that behavior still resides in the residence, whether related to the owner or not; or 
5.  Keeping the animal for which license is sought would be a violation of the provisions of this code, county health department ordinances, state or federal law. 
B.  Any animal whose license has been revoked shall be impounded by the supervisor and dealt with under the same provisions as other impounded animals, except that the person under order of revocation shall not be allowed to redeem the animal under any circumstances. 
C.  A person who has had an animal license revoked or denied may not be issued another license by the city for a period of three years. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
Chapter 6.28 - REGULATORY PERMITS AND HOBBY LICENSES 
 
6.28.010 - Regulatory permits—Hobby licenses. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a kennel, cattery, pet shop, groomery, riding stable, veterinary clinic or hospital, or any similar establishment unless such person first obtains a regulatory permit from the supervisor, in addition to all other required permits or licenses. Permit applications must be submitted, on a form provided by the supervisor, to the city. Permits expire annually, and require a renewal fee. 
B.  A person who is granted a hobby license by the city may exceed the amount of animals permitted under Section 6.12.170, so long as the property on which the animals are kept comply with the provisions of this chapter, and the licensee remains eligible. Hobby licenses do not vest a property owner with the right to maintain a hobby license at that location. Hobby licenses expire annually, and require a renewal fee. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.28.020 - Regulations. 
A.  The supervisor shall promulgate rules and regulations governing the operation of kennels, catteries, groomeries, pet shops, riding stables, community cat colonies, premises of hobby licenses, and veterinary clinics or hospitals. Such regulations may provide for the structures, pens, cages, runways or yards required for the animals to be kept; measures relating to the health of the animals, noise and odor control, and the protection of persons and property; or other matters necessary to the quiet enjoyment of the neighborhood. 
B.  Regulations promulgated by the supervisor shall have the effect of law, and violation of such rules and regulations shall be deemed a violation of this chapter, and grounds for revocation of a permit issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.28.030 - Specific regulations related to hobby and private cattery licenses. 
A.  Animal Limits. A hobby licensee shall be permitted to keep no more than the following on the premises: 
1.  Five dogs over one year of age; 
2.  Six cats over one year of age; and 
3.  Four ferrets over one year of age. 
B.  Hobby and cattery licenses may only be located within a single family home, and issued to a resident of that home. 
C.  Litters of Animals. Licensee may keep, intact, one litter of puppies/kittens up to six months of age and may thereafter keep one animal from the original litter up to an age of twelve (12) months, or if there are less than the amount identified in subsection A. over one year of age, the licensee may keep from the original litter more animals, so long as the total number of animals over six months of age kept by the licensee does not exceed the amount identified in subsection A. 
D.  Statement of Hobby Interest. The applicant for a hobby license shall complete a form provided by the city which form shall indicate the applicant's desire to maintain animals for hobby purpose. Hobby purposes shall include, but not be limited to, the showing of dogs, the training of animals for field trials, training of animals for obedience, tracking and other purposes, or for recreation and sporting purposes. 
E.  Outdoor Requirements. 
1.  The minimum lot size for any location on which a hobby license will be located is ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
2.  Fencing must be of sufficient strength to prevent the escape of any animal housed within that fencing, and shall be maintained in that condition. 
F.  If dogs are to be kept outside at the licensee's premises, then the owner shall provide dog runs. Dog runs shall: 
1.  Include a shelter to protect the animals from foul weather, wind and excessive exposure to elements must be provided; 
2.  Be designed to prevent escape of any dog contained therein; 
3.  Be located at least thirty-five (35) feet from the nearest portion of any building, not owned by the licensee, which is used as a dwelling. 
4.  Be no less than thirty-two (32) square feet in size if the dog restrained therein is over fifty (50) pounds in weight; 
5.  Be no less than eighteen (18) square feet in size when the dog restrained therein is less than fifty (50) pounds in weight; 
6.  If communal dog runs are provided, the dog runs shall be proportionately larger for each additional dog. 
G.  Bedding shall be of a material which may be disposed of by sanitary means, or removed and cleaned. Absorbent material shall be used and replaced daily to absorb moisture in bedding areas, and the areas beneath them cleaned and disinfected daily. 
H.  Dog runs shall be cleaned and maintained in the following manner: 
1.  All runs shall be cleaned and disinfected as needed each day to prevent fecal accumulation; 
2.  Cleaning agents which are harmful to animals may not be used if there is a possibility of contact or ingestion of the chemical by the animal; 
3.  Fecal material shall be properly handled and disposed of in accordance with applicable regulations of the Salt Lake County health department; 
4.  Accumulations of waste material or garbage in and around any dog run shall be cleaned up and disposed of at least daily; and 
5.  The floors of a dog run, if constructed of concrete, shall consist of a resting board or some type of bedding for the dogs restrained therein. 
I.  Food and Water. The feed given to animals shall be stored in a manner so as to prevent contamination from any source, and fresh water shall be available to the animals at all times. The food shall be kept and provided to the animals in such a method which prevents rodents from accessing it. 
J.  Noise Control. Licensee shall take steps necessary to assure that noise generated by the dogs kept or owned by licensee does not exceed the noise levels or limits established by the Salt Lake County health department regulations. All animals shall be enclosed within a shelter between the hours of nine p.m. and seven a.m. the following day. 
K.  Private Cattery. In addition to the applicable requirements in this section, all cats kept in a private cattery shall be sexually sterilized and kept vaccinated for rabies. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.28.040 - Permits and hobby licenses non-transferrable. 
Permits and hobby licenses may not be transferred to other individuals or premises. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.28.050 - Fees. 
The city council shall set regulatory permit fees by resolution, in the following categories: 
1.  Kennels, catteries, groomeries, pet shops, veterinary clinics or hospitals: 
a.  Class A, three to fifteen (15) animals; 
b.  Class B, sixteen (16) to thirty (30) animals; 
c.  Class C, thirty-one (31) or more animals; 
2.  Riding school or stable; 
3.  Community cat colonies; 
4.  Hobby licenses; and 
5.  Late fees. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.28.060 - Inspections. 
Permitted and licensed establishments are subject to periodic inspections in order to ensure the continued humane treatment of animals, the safety of people, and abatement of any nuisance to neighboring properties or the community. Inspection reports shall be filed with the supervisor. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.28.070 - Suspension or revocation of permit. 
A permit or license may be suspended or revoked, or a permit application rejected, on any one or more of the following grounds: 
A.  Falsification of facts in permit application; 
B.  Violation of the provisions of this chapter or other laws or regulations governing the establishment, including noise, building and zoning ordinances; or 
C.  Conviction or an administrative finding of a charge of cruelty to animals by any owner or individual currently employed by or volunteering with the permitee, or allowing such a person to return to the premises after notification of the offense. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.28.080 - Notice. 
A.  Unless accompanied by a substantial hazard to public health, permit suspension or revocation shall not proceed until ten (10) days following notice. Notice is deemed served as provided in Section 6.04.050. 
B.  The notice shall include: 
1.  The specific violations constituting cause for the adverse action; 
2.  If the notice is due to a violation of [Section] 6.24.070B., a specific and reasonable period of time for the correction of the discovered violations; 
3.  If the notice is due to a violation of [Section] 6.24.070C., a period of time by which the offender must be removed and trespassed from the premises; 
4.  The date on which suspension or revocation will be effective; and 
5.  A statement that an appeal from the notice will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed in the city recorder's office within ten (10) days of the date of the decision which is being appealed. 
C.  A timely appeal of the notice stays the suspension or revocation pending the administrative hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.28.090 - Emergency suspension. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, when the supervisor discovers unsanitary conditions in the operation of kennels, catteries, groomeries, veterinary clinics or hospitals, riding stables, pet shops, community cat colonies or any similar establishment, which constitutes a substantial hazard to public health, the supervisor may without warning or hearing issue a written notice to the permitee or operator citing such condition, and specifying the corrective action to be taken. 
B.  Such an order may state that the permit is immediately suspended, and that all operations are to be immediately discontinued. 
C.  Animals located at the facility at the time of this order may be impounded by the supervisor or otherwise provided for according to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.28.100 - Exemptions. 
State-licensed research facilities where bona fide medical or related research is being conducted, animal shelters, or establishments licensed by federal law are excluded from the licensing requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
Chapter 6.32 - COMMUNITY CATS 
 
6.32.010 - Purpose. 
The city council recognizes that Utah state law provides additional restrictions related to community cats. While the city does not adopt a permitting process pursuant to section 11-46-304 of the Utah Code, the following regulations apply to community cats and those who provide care for them. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.32.020 - Feeding community cats. 
A.  Those who provide food for community cats may only feed the group twice per day, with feeding times not to exceed one hour each. 
B.  Between feedings, all community cat food shall be kept in a sealed container. 
C.  During feedings, the food shall be spread on a tarp or other implement used to keep food from dropping to the ground, and food which is not consumed by the community cats during feeding time shall be captured and secured in the sealed container or disposed of in a lidded garbage receptacle. 
D.  Feeding areas may not be located within thirty (30) feet of a primary residential or commercial structure. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.32.030 - Nuisance. 
If one or more community cats have been found to cause a nuisance to neighbors due to excessive and disruptive noise, odor or hazards to health and safety, then the supervisor may remove the community cat and attempt to relocate it. If relocation attempts are unsuccessful, the supervisor may destroy the cat. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
6.32.040 - Community cat exemptions. 
Community cats are exempt from: 
A.  Licensing requirements of this chapter; 
B.  Feeding bans; 
C.  Prohibitions against harboring strays; and 
D.  The five-day holding period otherwise mandated by law for stray animals. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 4-22-2015)  
Title 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY 
Chapters:  
Chapter 8.04 - BOARD OF HEALTH 
Sections: 
 
8.04.010 - Creation. 
The city council of the city of South Salt Lake adopts by ordinance the ordinance creating a Salt Lake City-County board of health, passed by the board of county commission of Salt Lake County on the 14th day of August, 1969, and becoming effective thereon. The adoption of the ordinance shall rescind any and all previous ordinances creating a board of health for the city of South Salt Lake. The Salt Lake County board of health shall hereafter be known as the Salt Lake City-County board of health and shall be referred to as "the board of health." 
(Prior code 6-1-1)  
8.04.030 - Powers and duties. 
The board of health shall supervise all matters pertaining to the sanitary and health condition of the city, and shall have power and authority to order nuisances, or the cause of any special disease or mortality to be abated or removed. 
(Prior code 6-1-3)  
8.04.050 - Power to stop and prevent discharge of sewerage and pollution. 
The board of health shall have the power to stop and prevent the discharge of any sewerage or filth from any premises within the city limits, into and upon any public highways, stream, water course or public place, or into any drain, cesspool or private sewer and may by appropriate measures require any such person to use the city sewer system if the same is available. It shall use all due measures to prevent the befouling of any stream, water courses, reservoirs or any source furnishing water to any of the inhabitants of the city. 
(Prior code 6-1-9)  
8.04.060 - Interference with board of health. 
It is unlawful for any person to tear down, deface or remove any card or flag place for quarantine or other purposes by the board of health, without the consent of the board or in any matter to hinder, interfere with or delay the board of health in the performance of its duties. 
(Prior code 6-1-12)  
Chapter 8.08 - NUISANCES 
Sections: 
 
8.08.040 - Noise abatement measures. 
A.  No remaining undeveloped lands in South Salt Lake adjacent to state highways shall be developed for any purpose incompatible with a noisy environment, unless the development of said property shall include appropriate noise abatement measures determined necessary by South Salt Lake and consistent with the UDOT's noise impact criteria in effect at the time. 
B.  Violation of this section shall constitute a Class B misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 255 §§ 1, 2, 1993)  
Chapter 8.12 - CITY-COUNTY HEALTH REGULATIONS ADOPTED 
Sections: 
 
8.12.010 - Adoption of rules and regulations. 
The city of South Salt Lake does adopt by reference the following health regulations and any amendments, additions, changes or modifications which may subsequently be made, as established by the Salt Lake City-County health department, the sections of which are set out below: 
1.  Solid waste management facilities. 
2.  Design, construction and operation of public swimming pools. 
3.  Housing. 
4.  Food establishments. 
5.  Food service establishments. 
6.  For the preparation of meat, food products and rabbits and the processing of wild game and fowl for human consumption. 
7.  General sanitation. 
8.  Honeybees and envenomating invertebrates. 
9.  Kennels, catteries and groomaries. 
10.  Pigeon and wild bird. 
11.  Individual water systems. 
12.  Subdivisions. 
13.  Wastewater disposal systems. 
14.  Watersheds. 
15.  Mobile home parks. 
16.  Recreational vehicle parks. 
17.  Mass gatherings. 
18.  Massage establishments, bathhouses, health salons and outcall massage services. 
19.  Tattoo establishments. 
20.  Barber shops and beauty salons. 
21.  Noise control. 
22.  Motor vehicle emissions. 
23.  Asbestos. 
24.  Commercial tanning facilities. 
25.  Bed and breakfast. 
(Ord. 96-7 § 1: Ord. 112 §§ 1, 3, 1983: prior code § 6-2-1)  
8.12.030 - Violation—Penalty. 
The failure of any person to do those acts required to be done or the doing of any act prohibited in this code or any other provisions set forth in the codes or pamphlets incorporated in this chapter by reference, the act shall be a Class B misdemeanor and may be punishable by a fine of two hundred ninety-nine dollars ($299.00) or six months in jail and/or by both such fine and imprisonment. If the violation shall continue for more than one day, each and every day may be considered a separate violation and may be punished accordingly. At its discretion, the city may impose civil penalties for the violation of this chapter in an amount to be established in the consolidated fee schedule. At its discretion, the city may choose to enforce this chapter by civil citation and/or notice of violation as provided in Chapter 8.14. 
(Ord. 2004-01; prior code § 6-2-5)  
Chapter 8.14 - CODE ENFORCEMENT PROGRAM* 
Sections: 
 
8.14.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Code Enforcement Program." This chapter shall also be known as Title 8, Chapter 14 of the city of South Salt Lake Municipal Code. It may be cited and pleaded under either designation. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): Ord. 2005-13 (part))  
8.14.020 - Purpose. 
The city council finds that the enforcement of the city of South Salt Lake Municipal Code is essential to the peace, quality of life, health, safety and morals of the community. The city council recognizes that code enforcement is effective only when done quickly and fairly. The city council further finds that an enforcement system that allows a combination of judicial and administrative remedies is effective in correcting violations. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): Ord. 2005-13 (part))  
8.14.030 - Scope. 
The provisions of this chapter may be applied to all violations of the city of South Salt Lake Municipal Code which occur within South Salt Lake City limits and such territory outside South Salt Lake City limits over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional provision or law. This chapter establishes procedures and remedies that may be used by the city to achieve compliance with applicable codes. This chapter also provides an appeal procedure from code enforcement actions. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): Ord. 2005-13 (part))  
8.14.040 - Existing law continued. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not invalidate any other title, chapter, or ordinance of the city of South Salt Lake Municipal Code, but shall be read in conjunction with those titles, chapters, and ordinances and shall be used as an additional remedy for enforcement of violations thereof. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): Ord. 2005-13 (part))  
8.14.050 - Criminal prosecution right. 
The city shall have sole discretion in deciding whether to file a civil or criminal judicial case or pursue an administrative enforcement action for the violation of any of its ordinances or applicable code requirements. The enactment of this chapter shall not be construed to limit the city's right to prosecute any violation as a criminal offense. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): Ord. 2005-13 (part))  
8.14.060 - Effect of headings. 
Title, chapter, and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): Ord. 2005-13 (part))  
8.14.070 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, portion, or provision of this chapter is, for any reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council declares that it would have adopted this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, portion, or provision thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, clauses, phrases, portions, or provisions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. This section shall apply to all amendments made to this chapter. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): Ord. 2005-13 (part))  
8.14.080 - Civil liability. 
By establishing performance standards or by establishing obligations to act, it is the intent of the city council that South Salt Lake City employees and officers are exercising discretionary authority in pursuit of an essential governmental function and that any such standards or obligations shall not be construed as creating a ministerial duty for purposes of tort liability. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): Ord. 2005-13 (part))  
8.14.090 - General rules of interpretation. 
For purposes of this chapter: 
A.  Any gender includes the other gender; 
B.  "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive; 
C.  The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular; 
D.  Words used in the present tense include the past and future tense, and vice versa; 
E.  Words and phrases used in this chapter and not specifically defined shall be construed according to the context and ordinary usage of the language; 
F.  Unless otherwise specified, the terms "hereof," "herein," and similar terms refer to this chapter as a whole. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): Ord. 2005-13 (part))  
8.14.100 - Definitions. 
In the construction of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be as defined as set forth in this section unless a different meaning is specifically defined elsewhere in this chapter and specifically stated to apply: 
"Administrative citation" means a citation issued to a responsible person which gives notice of a violation and the civil fee for such violation. 
"Administrative costs" means a fee established in the consolidated fee schedule, representing the proportional cost to the city of administering its code enforcement program over and above the actual cost of an abatement. 
"Administrative hearing" means a hearing held pursuant to the procedures established by Chapter 2.22 of this code. 
"Administrative law judge" means the person appointed by the mayor or his designee to preside over administrative hearings. 
"Administrative order" means an order issued by an administrative law judge. The order may include an order to enter upon private property to abate a violation of this code or state statute, to pay civil fees and administrative costs, to reverse or modify decisions of city officials as provided elsewhere in this code or take any other action as authorized or required by this chapter and applicable codes. 
"City" means the city of South Salt Lake, Utah, including the mayor and all other employees of the administrative branch of the city. 
"Director" means the director of the city's code enforcement program as appointed by the mayor, or his designee. 
"Enforcement official" means any person authorized by the city to enforce violations of the city of South Salt Lake Municipal Code, including, but not limited to, zoning officers, police officers, building inspection officials, fire marshals, and animal control officers. 
"Imminent life safety hazard" means any condition that creates a serious and immediate danger to life, property, health, or public safety. 
"Itemized statement of costs" means a written notice to a responsible person, itemizing the city's actual costs and administrative cost of abating a code violation, ordering payment of those costs and advising the responsible person of the right to contest the reasonableness of the costs at an administrative hearing. 
"Municipal action" means a notice of violation and summons, an administrative citation, an itemized statement of costs, a notice of emergency abatement or other notice of any other adverse municipal decision for which the right to an administrative hearing is specifically provided by ordinance. 
"Notice of compliance" means a document or form approved by the director that indicates that a property complies with the requirements outlined in a notice of violation and summons. 
"Notice of emergency abatement" means a written notice that informs a responsible person of emergency abatement actions taken by the city and provides an itemized statement of costs for those actions. 
"Notice of violation and summons" means a written notice that informs a responsible person of code violations, orders certain steps to correct the violations, demands appearance at an administrative hearing and sets forth a date and time for the hearing. 
"Property owner" means the record owner of real property as shown on the records of the Salt Lake County assessor. 
"Responsible person" means the person(s) determined by the city who is responsible for causing or maintaining a violation of the city of South Salt Lake Municipal Code. The term "responsible person" shall include, but is not limited to, a property owner, agent, tenant, lessee, occupant, architect, builder, contractor, or other person who individually or together with another person is responsible for the violation of any provision of the city of South Salt Lake Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): Ord. 2005-13 (part))  
8.14.110 - Acts include causing, aiding, and abetting. 
Whenever any act or omission is made unlawful in this chapter, it shall include causing, permitting, aiding, or abetting such act or omission. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): Ord. 2005-13 (part))  
8.14.120 - Service of notice requirements. 
A.  Whenever a notice is required to be given under this chapter, the notice shall be served by one of the following methods, unless different provisions are otherwise specifically stated to apply: 
1.  Upon an owner of real property: 
a.  Service by sending a copy of the notice of violation and summons by mail to the address of the property owner as listed on the rolls of the Salt Lake County assessor; 
b.  Personal service. 
2.  Upon a tenant of real property: 
a.  Service by sending a copy of the notice of violation and summons by mail addressed to "resident" or the name of the tenant, if known, at the address of the property that is the subject of the code enforcement proceeding. 
b.  Personal service. 
B.  Failure of a responsible person to actually receive notice shall not affect the validity of any action taken hereunder if notice has been served in the manner set forth in subsection A of this section. 
C.  Service by mail in the manner set forth in subsection A of this section shall be deemed served on the day upon which the notice is sent. 
D.  As long as any responsible person is served, the failure to serve any other responsible person with notice in accordance with this section shall not affect the validity of any proceeding taken hereunder. 
E.  Whenever a document is recorded with the county recorder as authorized or required by this chapter or applicable state codes, recordation shall provide constructive notice of the information contained in the recorded documents. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): Ord. 2005-13 (part))  
8.14.130 - General enforcement authority. 
Whenever an enforcement official finds that a violation of the city of South Salt Lake Municipal Code has occurred or continues to exist, he may undertake any of the procedures herein. The director or any designated enforcement official shall have the authority to gain compliance with the provisions of the city of South Salt Lake Municipal Code subject to the provisions of this chapter. Such authority shall include the power to issue notices of violation and summons and administrative citations, inspect public and private property, abate nuisances on public and private property, and to use any remedy available under this chapter or law. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): Ord. 2005-13 (part))  
8.14.140 - Hearing and review authority. 
The administrative law judge is to be the default arbiter for review of code violations charged by administrative citation or notice of violation and summons. The administrative law judge shall have the authority to make final administrative determinations in administrative proceedings, may assess civil fines, may order the abatement of violations, may assess costs of abatement to a responsible person and conduct any other form of administrative review as designated by ordinance. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): Ord. 2005-13 (part))  
8.14.150 - Adoption of policy and procedures. 
The mayor or his designee shall establish policies and procedures relating to the enforcement of city ordinances, maintaining records and other administrative functions. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): Ord. 2005-13 (part))  
8.14.160 - Choice of remedies. 
The director shall have the choice of which remedies to pursue in a given violation. Abatement does not have to be preceded by a citation, nor is there any necessity to hold a hearing prior to any remedy, unless stated by this chapter. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): Ord. 2005-13 (part))  
8.14.170 - Authority to inspect. 
Enforcement officials are authorized, in accordance with applicable law, to enter upon any property or premises to ascertain whether the provisions of the city of South Salt Lake Municipal Code are being obeyed and to make any reasonable examination or survey necessary to determine compliance with the city of South Salt Lake Municipal Code. This may include the taking of photographs, samples, or other physical evidence. All inspections, entries, examinations, and surveys shall be done in a reasonable manner. If a property owner or responsible person refuses to allow an enforcement official to enter property, the enforcement official shall obtain a search warrant before entering the property. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): Ord. 2005-13 (part))  
8.14.180 - False information or refusal prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to wilfully make a false statement or refuse to give his name or address with intent to deceive or interfere with an enforcement officer when in the performance of his official duties under the provisions of this chapter. A violation of this section shall be a Class B misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): Ord. 2005-13 (part))  
8.14.190 - Failure to obey a subpoena. 
It is unlawful for any person to wilfully refuse or fail to obey a subpoena issued for an administrative hearing. A violation of this section shall be a class B misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): Ord. 2005-13 (part))  
8.14.200 - Administrative citation. 
A.  Upon discovering a violation of the city of South Salt Lake Municipal Code, an enforcement official may serve an administrative citation on the responsible person. 
B.  The administrative citation shall be served in the manner prescribed in Section 8.14.120 of this chapter. 
C.  If served personally, the enforcement official shall attempt to obtain the signature of the responsible person on the administrative citation acknowledging receipt. If the responsible person refuses or fails to sign the administrative citation, such failure or refusal shall not affect the validity of the citation and subsequent proceedings. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): Ord. 2005-13 (part))  
8.14.210 - Contents of citation. 
Each administrative citation shall contain the following information: 
A.  The name and address of the responsible person; 
B.  The date and location of all violations; 
C.  Code sections violated; 
D.  The amount of the civil fee imposed for each violation; 
E.  An explanation of how the civil fee shall be paid, the time period in which the civil fee shall be paid, and the consequences of failure to pay the civil fee when due; 
F.  Identify the right to and the procedures for requesting an administrative hearing as set forth in Section 2.22.040 of this code. 
G.  The signature of the enforcement official and, if possible, the signature of the responsible person. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): Ord. 2005-13 (part))  
8.14.220 - Civil fees assessed. 
A.  Civil fees shall be due and payable immediately upon service of an administrative citation. 
B.  The civil fee for each violation listed on the administrative citation shall be established in the consolidated fee schedule, and shall be paid within ten days of service. 
C.  Civil fees shall be double if paid after ten days but within twenty (20) days of service. 
D.  Civil fees shall be triple if paid after twenty (20) days but within thirty (30) days of service. 
E.  A timely request for an administrative hearing shall stay the doubling or tripling of fees. 
F.  Civil fees not paid after thirty (30) days shall be subject to collection costs, including, but not limited to, administrative fees, attorney fees, interest and other expenses, subject to any statutory maximum in city code or state law; as well as the initial treble fee set out by subsection D of this section. 
G.  Payment of any civil fee shall not excuse a failure to correct a violation or any reoccurrence of the violation, nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city. 
H.  Civil fees shall be paid to the city of South Salt Lake community and economic development department. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): Ord. 2005-13 (part))  
8.14.230 - Administrative citation hearing. 
A.  A responsible person that has received an administrative citation shall have the right to contest the citation at an administrative hearing. A request for hearing shall comply with the requirements set forth in Section 2.22.040 of this code. 
B.  Failure to request an administrative hearing shall constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing and a waiver of the right to appeal. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): Ord. 2005-13 (part))  
8.14.240 - Authority to mandate appearance at hearing. 
A.  When issuing an administrative citation, an enforcement official may require a responsible person to appear at an administrative hearing to answer the allegations. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with Section 2.22.080 of this code, and the citation shall be issued so as to comply with the notice requirements of Section 2.22.050. 
B.  The administrative citation shall be served upon the responsible person in the same manner of a notice of violation and summons, as described in Section 8.14.120. 
C.  The responsible person shall not be required to pay an administrative hearing fee if the enforcement official issues a citation requiring appearance at an administrative hearing, and doubling and tripling fee provisions shall be calculated from the date of adjudication, rather than the date of violation. 
(Ord. No. 2009-15, 12-2-2009)  
8.14.250 - Contents of mandatory citation. 
A citation mandating appearance shall contain the following information: 
A.  The name and address of the responsible person; 
B.  The date and location of all violations; 
C.  Code sections violated; 
D.  The date of the mandatory hearing; 
E.  A demand that the person appear at the administrative hearing; 
F.  A summary of the responsible person's rights at the administrative hearing; 
G.  A statement that failure to appear at the administrative hearing will result in an administrative order being entered against the responsible person and that the right to appeal the order will have been waived; 
H.  The signature of the enforcement official, and if possible, the responsible person. 
(Ord. No. 2009-15, 12-2-2009)  
8.14.260 - Failure to appear at mandatory hearing. 
When a responsible person who, after receiving notification of a mandatory appearance at a hearing, fails to appear at the hearing, the administrative law judge shall take evidence of the violation, which may be received by proffer, and may enter an administrative order upholding the citation and imposing fees in accordance with the fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2009-15, 12-2-2009)  
8.14.300 - Administrative abatement. 
Any condition caused, maintained, or permitted to exist in violation of any provision of the city of South Salt Lake Municipal Code may be abated by the city pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter. The director shall establish by departmental policy whether abatement, administrative citation or other choice of action is preferred for a certain circumstance. Abatement is an additional remedy to an administrative citation and not subordinate or superior to it. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): Ord. 2005-13 (part))  
8.14.310 - Notice of violation and summons and hearing. 
A.  Whenever an enforcement official determines that a violation of the city of South Salt Lake Municipal Code has occurred or continues to exist, a notice of violation and summons may be served upon the responsible person. The notice of violation and summons shall include the following information: 
1.  The name and address of the responsible person; 
2.  The street address of the violation; 
3.  The date of the violation; 
4.  The code section(s) violated; 
5.  A description of the condition(s) that violates the applicable code; 
6.  A statement of the remedial action required to voluntarily abate any violation, including corrections, repairs, demolition, removal, or other appropriate action; 
7.  The deadline to correct the violation; 
8.  An explanation of the consequences should the responsible person fail to comply with the terms and deadlines as prescribed in the notice of violation and summons, including civil fines; revocation of permits; recordation of the notice of violation and summons; withholding of municipal permits; involuntary abatement of the violation; payment of actual costs of abatement; payment of administrative costs; liens placed on real property and any other legal remedies; 
9.  A statement that civil fees will begin to accrue immediately on expiration of the deadline to correct violation together with the amount of the civil fee for each violation and a statement that the civil fee shall accrue daily until the violation is corrected; 
10.  A demand that the responsible person cease and desist from further action causing the violation and commence and complete all action to correct violations as directed by the city; 
11.  A statement that when the violation is brought into compliance, the responsible person must request an inspection; 
12.  The date and time set for the administrative hearing; 
13.  A demand that the responsible person appear at the administrative hearing; 
14.  A summary of the responsible person's rights at the administrative hearing; 
15.  A statement that failure to appear at the hearing will result in an administrative order being entered against the responsible person and that the right to appeal the administrative order will have been waived; and 
16.  A statement that an administrative fee will be assessed regardless of whether the violation is corrected by the established deadline. 
B.  The notice of violation and summons shall be served by one of the methods of service listed in Section 8.14.120 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): Ord. 2005-13 (part))  
8.14.320 - Failure to attend notice of violation and summons hearing. 
When a responsible person who, after receiving notification of an administrative hearing as provided in Section 8.14.310 of this chapter, fails to appear at the hearing, the administrative law judge shall enter an administrative order requiring the action demanded in the city's notice of violation and summons and granting the city authority to go upon the private property to abate the violation if the responsible person fails to do so by the deadline established in the "notice of violation and summons." 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): Ord. 2005-13 (part))  
8.14.330 - Failure to comply with administrative order. 
It is unlawful for any responsible person to fail to comply with the terms and deadlines set forth in an administrative order enforcing a "notice of violation and summons." Violation of this section shall be a Class B misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): Ord. 2005-13 (part))  
8.14.340 - Inspections. 
It is the duty of the responsible person to request an inspection when a violation has been corrected. If no inspection is requested, it shall be deemed prima facie evidence that the violation remains uncorrected. If city conducted abatement occurs, no such inspection shall be necessary for work conducted by the city or its agent. If more than one inspection is necessary, an inspection fee set by the consolidated fee schedule shall be assessed for each subsequent inspection. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): Ord. 2005-13 (part))  
8.14.350 - Authority to abate. 
Under authority of an administrative order enforcing a "notice of violation and summons" or a citation for which appearance was mandatory and a hearing was held, the director is authorized to enter upon private property to abate a violation of the city of South Salt Lake Municipal Code. The director shall assess all costs for abatement to the responsible person and may use any remedy available under the law to collect such costs. If additional abatement is necessary within two years, treble fines, penalties and costs shall be assessed against the responsible person for the actual abatement. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): Ord. 2005-13 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2009-15, 12-2-2009)  
8.14.360 - Procedures for abatement. 
A.  Violations may be abated by city personnel or by a private contractor acting under the direction of the city. 
B.  Pursuant to an administrative order, city personnel or a private contractor may enter upon private property in a reasonable manner to abate a violation as specified in the notice of violation and summons and administrative order. 
C.  If a responsible person abates the violation before the city abates the violation pursuant to a notice of violation and summons or administrative order, the director shall nevertheless assess all costs actually incurred by the city against the responsible person. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): Ord. 2005-13 (part))  
8.14.370 - Civil fees. 
A.  If a responsible person fails to correct a violation by the deadline listed in a notice of violation and summons and administrative order or an administrative order entered after a hearing on a citation for which appearance was mandated, civil fines shall be paid to the city as follows: 
1.  For any violation, the civil fine shall be as shown on the consolidated fee schedule; 
2.  Each and every subsequent day of violation shall be a separate violation until the violation is corrected; 
3.  The maximum amount of civil fines accruable under subsection (A)(2) of this section shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); 
4.  An administrative charge in an amount to be established in the consolidated fee schedule shall be assessed regardless of whether a responsible person remedies the violation by the deadline set forth in the notice of violation and summons. 
B.  Payment of any civil fine shall not excuse any failure to correct a violation or the reoccurrence of the violation, nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city. 
C.  Civil fines shall be paid to the South Salt Lake City community and economic development department. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): Ord. 2005-13 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2009-15, 12-2-2009)  
8.14.380 - Procedures for recordation/lien. 
A.  For violations of the city of South Salt Lake Municipal Code, when a notice of violation and summons or a citation mandating appearance has been served on a responsible person, an administrative hearing held, and the violation remains uncorrected after the deadline to correct set forth in the notice of violation and summons and administrative order or the administrative order entered after a hearing, the director shall record the notice of violation and summons and administrative order or mandatory citation and administrative order with the Salt Lake County recorder's office. 
B.  The recordation of an administrative order shall not be deemed an encumbrance on the property, but shall merely place interested parties on notice of any continuing violation found upon the property. However, if costs are incurred by the city, either in administration or in abating the violation or other related tasks, and the costs are not paid, a lien or garnishment may be placed to recover costs, and may be considered an encumbrance on the property. 
C.  Notice of the recordation shall be served on the responsible person and the property owner pursuant to any of the methods of service set forth in Section 8.14.120 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): Ord. 2005-13 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2009-15, 12-2-2009)  
8.14.390 - Notice of compliance. 
A.  When a violation is corrected, a responsible person shall request an inspection from the director. 
B.  When the director receives such request, the director shall perform a subsequent inspection of the property as soon as practicable to determine whether the violation has been corrected, and whether all necessary permits have been issued and final inspections have been performed as required by applicable codes. 
C.  The director shall serve a "notice of compliance" upon the responsible person and property owner in the manner provided in Section 8.14.120 of this chapter if the director determines that: 
1.  All violations listed in the recorded notice of violation and summons and administrative order have been corrected; 
2.  All necessary permits have been issued and finalized; 
3.  All assessed civil fees have been paid; and 
4.  All assessed administrative fees and costs have been paid. 
D.  If a notice of violation and summons and administrative order has been recorded with the Salt Lake County recorder, the director shall record the "notice of compliance" with the recorder's office. Recordation of the "notice of compliance" shall have the effect of canceling the recorded notice of violation and summons and administrative order. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): Ord. 2005-13 (part))  
8.14.400 - Prohibition against issuance of municipal permits. 
The city shall withhold business licenses; permits for kennels; or permits for any alteration, repair, or construction pertaining to any existing or new structures or signs on the property, or any permits pertaining to the use and development of the real property or the structure where a violation is located. The city shall withhold such permits until a "notice of compliance" has been issued by the director. The city shall not withhold permits necessary to obtain a "notice of compliance" or to correct serious health and safety violations. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): Ord. 2005-13 (part))  
8.14.410 - Emergency abatement. 
A.  Whenever the director determines that an imminent life safety hazard exists that requires immediate correction or elimination, the director shall exercise the following powers without prior notice to the responsible person: 
1.  Order the immediate vacation of any tenants, and prohibit occupancy until all repairs are completed; 
2.  Post the premises as unsafe, substandard, or dangerous; 
3.  Board, fence, or secure the building or site; 
4.  Raze and grade that portion of the building or site to prevent further collapse, and remove any hazard to the general public; 
5.  Make any minimal emergency repairs as necessary to eliminate any imminent life safety hazard; or 
6.  Take any other action appropriate to eliminate the emergency. 
B.  The director may, based on exigent circumstances, enter property without a search warrant or administrative order to accomplish the above listed acts. 
C.  The director shall pursue only the minimum level of correction or abatement as necessary to eliminate the immediacy of a hazard. Costs incurred by the city during the emergency abatement process shall be calculated and an itemized statement of costs shall be prepared. Further correction needed to bring the violation into compliance will follow the "notice of violation and summons" procedures set forth in this chapter. 
D.  The director may also pursue any other administrative or judicial remedy to abate any remaining violations. 
E.  After an emergency abatement, the city shall, within ten days, serve the itemized statement of costs upon the responsible person by one of the methods approved in Section 8.14.120 of this chapter. Such notice shall include a description of the imminent life safety hazard warranting the emergency abatement. 
F.  A responsible person has the right to contest the need for the emergency abatement and/or the reasonableness of the itemized statement of costs at an administrative hearing. A request for such hearing shall be filed within ten days from the date of service of the notice of itemized bill for costs in accordance with Section 2.22.040 of this code. Failure to request an administrative hearing shall constitute a waiver to an administrative hearing and waiver of the right to appeal. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): Ord. 2005-13 (part))  
8.14.500 - Assessment of costs. 
A.  Whenever actual costs are incurred by the city to remedy violations of the city of South Salt Lake Municipal Code, such costs shall be assessed against the responsible person. In addition to the actual costs to the city to abate the violation, an administrative cost, in the amount established in the consolidated fee schedule, shall also be assessed to reimburse the city for its administrative costs. 
B.  When abatement is completed, the director shall prepare an itemized statement of costs. 
C.  The director shall serve the itemized statement of costs by certified mail to the last known address of the responsible person. The notice shall demand full payment within thirty (30) days to the South Salt Lake City community and economic development department. It shall advise the responsible person of the right and the procedures to request an administrative hearing to challenge the reasonableness of the costs assessed. 
D.  A responsible person shall have a right to an administrative hearing to contest the reasonableness of an itemized statement of costs. After receiving an itemized statement of costs, the responsible person shall pay the costs assessed within thirty (30) days unless a hearing is requested to challenge the accuracy of the statement. A request for such hearing shall be in writing and shall be filed within ten days from the date of service of the itemized statement of costs in accordance with Section 2.22.040 of this code. Failure to request an administrative hearing as provided shall constitute a waiver to an administrative hearing and a waiver of the right to appeal. 
E.  If a responsible person fails to pay costs by the deadline imposed in an administrative order, the director shall take such steps as are necessary to record with the Salt Lake County treasurer a lien against the property. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): Ord. 2005-13 (part))  
8.14.510 - Late fee and interest. 
The failure of any person to pay assessed costs by the deadline specified in an invoice shall result in a late fee calculated at the rate of one and one-half percent per month, but shall not be less than the minimum late fee established in the consolidated fee schedule. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): Ord. 2005-13 (part))  
8.14.520 - Administrative cost fund. 
Administrative costs and fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in a fund, as established by the city for the enhancement of the city's code enforcement efforts and to reimburse city departments for costs associated with the administration of this chapter. Fees and costs deposited in this fund shall be allocated pursuant to the city's budget process and as authorized by applicable law. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): Ord. 2005-13 (part))  
8.14.530 - Allocation of civil fees. 
Civil fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in the South Salt Lake City general fund. Civil fees deposited in the general fund may be allocated pursuant to the city's budget process and as authorized by applicable law. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): Ord. 2005-13 (part))  
Chapter 8.18 - FIREWORKS 
Sections: 
 
8.18.010 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter: 
"Fireworks" are those designated as "Class C common state-approved explosives" by the state of Utah pursuant to Utah Code 53-7-202 and 53-7-220 through 53-7-225 and any subsequent amendments and/or revisions. Additionally, "Fireworks" includes all sparklers of any length or size. 
"Indoor sales" means sales conducted inside a permanent structure located in areas properly zoned for retail sales or sales from a vehicle or trailer. 
"Outdoor sales" means sales conducted in a temporary and moveable stand erected for the primary purpose of selling fireworks. 
"Permanent structure" means a nonmoveable building which is securely attached to a foundation. 
"Vehicle or trailer" means any mobile structure or vessel, including but not limited to, enclosed or flatbed trailers, mobile homes, trucks, campers, vans. 
(Ord. 97-11 § 2 (part))  
8.18.030 - Permitted sales. 
Only outdoor sales of fireworks are permitted in the city of South Salt Lake subject to all requirements and limitations of this chapter. 
(Ord. 97-11 § 2 (part))  
8.18.040 - Selling fireworks—License required. 
No person, firm, company or other entity shall offer for sale or sell at retail any fireworks without having first applied for and received a license from the city of South Salt Lake. 
(Ord. 97-11 § 2 (part))  
8.18.050 - License application. 
All applications for a license to sell fireworks shall: 
A.  Be in writing and directed to the business license official; 
B.  Set forth the proposed area and location where the fireworks will be sold and stored; 
C.  Include written consent for the sale of fireworks and the erection of the fireworks stand from the owner of the property upon which fireworks are to be sold; 
D.  Include for delivery to the business license official insurance certificates evidencing public liability coverage in favor of the applicant in the amount of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) to four hundred thousand dollars ($400,000.00); and property damage coverage in favor of the applicant in the amount of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) designating the city as an additional insured; 
E.  Be accompanied by a fee set by resolution of the city council; 
F.  Be accompanied by a refundable cleanup fee set by resolution of the city council; 
G.  Include a statement that the applicant agrees to comply strictly with the terms of any license granted and to furnish any additional information upon request; and 
H.  Include a sales tax permit. 
(Ord. 99-12 § 1: Ord. 97-11 § 2 (part))  
8.18.060 - Appeals. 
Appeals of actions regarding fireworks shall be made using the administrative hearing process outlined in Chapter 2.22 of the city code. A hearing request shall be in writing and must be received no later than ten days following such actions. 
(Ord. 2008-21 (part): Ord. 97-11 § 2 (part))  
8.18.070 - Display of license and sales tax permit. 
The license to sell fireworks and the sales tax permit shall be displayed in a prominent place in the immediate area where fireworks are sold. 
(Ord. 97-11 § 2 (part))  
8.18.080 - Outdoor sales—Stand requirements. 
A.  In each area where fireworks are sold or stored, there shall be located an easily accessible two and one-half gallon water pressure type fire extinguisher or equivalent. 
B.  "No Smoking" signs shall be prominently displayed throughout the area where fireworks are sold or stored. 
C.  Smoking, use of an open flame or the discharge of fireworks shall be prohibited within fifty (50) feet of any location in which fireworks are sold or stored. 
D.  Every fireworks stand shall have posted on it in a prominent manner signs which read substantially as follows: 
1.  No smoking, open flames or discharge of fireworks within one hundred (100) feet; and 
2.  The dates on which fireworks may be legally discharged pursuant to state law. 
E.  No fireworks stand shall be erected on any sales site more than five days prior to each of the dates that sales are permitted under state law. 
F.  Every fireworks stand must be removed within five days after the end of each of the sales periods. 
G.  All electrical installations associated with any fireworks stand must conform with the applicable electrical code and be accompanied by an electrical permit obtained from the city building department. 
H.  Each stand shall be installed or located in accordance with the applicable city zoning ordinances. 
I.  No stand shall be located in such a way as to eliminate the off-street parking required by the applicable zoning ordinances. 
J.  All stands shall have an aisle within them that shall be maintained free and clear of all obstructions and which shall be at least three feet in width. 
K.  All stands shall be so constructed that the customers may not reach the fireworks until the fireworks are actually purchased. 
L.  All stands must be securely locked when not in use, and no person shall be allowed to sleep overnight in the stand. 
M.  The area surrounding the stand shall be kept free and clear of all weeds, debris and other flammable materials for a distance of twenty-five (25) feet in all directions. 
N.  Every stand must be located on hard-surfaced areas only. 
O.  No stand shall be located within one hundred (100) feet of any gasoline, propane, oil, or other flammable material storage site or dispensing device. 
P.  Each stand shall be maintained in a neat and orderly fashion. All wastepaper, spilled powder and broken fireworks are to be removed from the stand and properly disposed of. 
Q.  There shall be at least one supervisor, eighteen (18) years of age or older, on duty at all times. No person under fourteen (14) years of age shall be employed anywhere fireworks are sold or offered for sale. 
(Ord. 2000-14 § 1: Ord. 97-11 § 2 (part))  
8.18.090 - Fireworks stand cleanup assessment and deposit return. 
Upon removal of the fireworks stand, the fire department will assess the cleanliness and condition of the stand site. If the fire department finds the site sufficiently cleaned and in appropriate condition, the licensee may reclaim his deposit from the city. 
(Ord. 97-11 § 2 (part))  
8.18.100 - Persons under sixteen—Prohibited acts. 
It is illegal for any person under sixteen (16) years of age to purchase fireworks unless accompanied by a parent or guardian. It is illegal to sell fireworks to any person under sixteen (16) years of age unless such person is accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
(Ord. 97-11 § 2 (part))  
8.18.110 - Dates for sale and discharge. 
In accordance with Utah Code 53-7-225 together with any subsequent state law changes, revisions or amendments: 
A.  Fireworks may be sold: 
1.  After June 19th and before July 26th; 
2.  After December 19th and before January 3rd; 
3.  Fifteen days before and on the Chinese New Year. 
B.  Fireworks may be discharged three days before, on the day of, and three days following: 
1.  July 4th; 
2.  July 24th; 
3.  January 1st; 
4.  The Chinese New Year. 
C.  In the event of a change in the Utah-state-mandated dates for the sale and discharge of fireworks, the dates listed above shall change in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. 97-11 § 2 (part))  
8.18.120 - Discharge restriction. 
A.  It is illegal for any person to ignite, explode, project, or otherwise fire or use, or to permit the ignition, explosion, projection, firing or use of any firework upon or over or onto the property of another without the property owner's consent. 
B.  It is illegal to ignite, explode, project, or otherwise fire or use any firework within twenty (20) feet of any residence, dwelling or other structure. 
C.  It is illegal to ignite, explode, project, or otherwise fire or use any firework in any area of the city west of 900 West. 
D.  It is illegal to ignite, explode, project, or otherwise fire or use any firework on any property owned by the city without express written consent from the fire chief or the chiefs designee(s). 
E.  Authority Of Fire Chief. The fire chief, or the chiefs designee(s), during times of adverse fire and hazardous environmental conditions, may review information regarding meteorological conditions, moisture content of plants and soil, and other information related thereto, and is hereby authorized to exercise discretion based thereon, in the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the public, to prohibit the ignition or use of all fireworks. Such a prohibition is to be for a defined period of time and may be limited to identified areas of the city, or may be applicable throughout the city in mountainous, brush covered, forest covered or wildland urban interface areas. 
F.  The fire chief, or the chief's designee(s), upon a finding that such a prohibition should take place, shall cause to be published with the City a map of the specific identified areas of the city where the restrictions shall occur. 
G.  No person shall ignite, discharge or otherwise use any fireworks in any area of the city designated by the fire chief as hazardous as provided in subsection E. of this section. 
H.  A violation of this section is a class B misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 97-11 § 2 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2018-16, § 1, 12-12-2018)  
8.18.130 - Penalties and license revocation. 
Persons violating any of the provisions set forth in this chapter, or anyone who fails to comply with the terms of this chapter, shall be deemed guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. Any violations of the provisions of this chapter by a licensee under this chapter or his agents or servants shall be grounds for immediate revocation of the license, and the police or fire chief is authorized, upon probable cause to believe there have been or are violations occurring, or any threat to health and safety, to enter upon and seize such license as well as all fireworks offered for sale, sold or in the possession of an individual in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 97-11 § 2 (part))  
Chapter 8.20 - FOOD REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
8.20.010 - Offering unwholesome food for sale. 
No person shall offer for sale in this city any unwholesome, watered or adulterated milk or milk known as swill milk, or milk from cows that are fed on swill, garbage or other like substance; or any butter or cheese made from such milk; nor shall any person expose or offer for sale, or sell for human food, any blown, meagre, diseased or bad meat, poultry or game, or any unsound, diseased or unwholesome fish, fruit, vegetables or other market produce. No person shall, within this city, expose or offer for sale or sell for human consumption any sick or diseased animal, or the flesh of any animal, which when killed was sick or diseased, or that dies a natural or accidental death; any article or animal that shall be offered or exhibited for sale in any market, though it were intended for sale, shall be deemed offered and exposed for sale within the meaning of this section; and it is the duty of the board of health to seize and confiscate any article or animal offered for sale in violation of this section. 
(Prior code 6-1-5)  
8.20.020 - Regulation of the sale of milk. 
It is unlawful for any person to bring or send into this city for sale or to offer for sale, or to sell in this city, any milk without first having obtained a permit from a board of health to do so. Such permit shall be given by the board of health or the Salt Lake City-County board of health whenever, upon inspection of the premises where cows are kept, and inspection of the vessels and premises where milk is bottled these are kept in good sanitary condition, and providing that the milk meets the requirements of the ordinances and rules adopted by such board of health, and/or those required by the State Board of Health concerning milk, and upon the further condition that none but pure, wholesome, unadulterated and undiluted milk shall be sold or offered for sale. 
(Prior code 6-1-6)  
Chapter 8.24 - CESSPOOLS—PRIVY VAULTS 
Sections: 
 
8.24.010 - Cesspools and privy vaults unlawful when. 
A.  It is unlawful for the owner, or his agent, or other person having charge of or occupying any property located upon any street, alley, court, passageway or area in South Salt Lake which is situated within two hundred (200) feet of a public sewer on any street or alley or passageway in South Salt Lake, to maintain or use or cause or permit to exist any privy vault, septic tank or cesspool on such property. 
B.  The city shall cause appropriate notice to be served upon the owner, agent or occupant of such building or house to connect all plumbing therein with the public sewer. It is unlawful for the plumbing in any house or building to remain unconnected to any public sewer for more than twenty (20) days after an accepted public sewer line is ready to receive connections thereto. 
(Prior code 6-1-10)  
Chapter 8.28 - COMMUNICABLE DISEASES 
Sections: 
 
8.28.010 - Physicians to report communicable diseases. 
A.  It shall be the duty of every physician or other person caring for the sick within the city of South Salt Lake to make a written report to the board of health of the existence of any case of a communicable disease in his or her charge; and it shall be the duty of every person, owner, agent, manager, principal or superintendent of any public or private institution, dispensary, hotel, boarding house or lodging house to make a report in like manner of any inmate, occupant or boarder contacting or suffering from any communicable disease. 
B.  It is unlawful for any physician, nurse or other person having knowledge of the existence of any communicable disease or having reason to believe that any such disease exists in the city of South Salt Lake to fail to report the same to the board of health; provided, however, that it shall not be necessary to make such a report if the same has been reported by any other person. The responsibility for determining whether or not the disease has been reported shall rest with the person required to make the report and it shall be no defense to a prosecution under this section that the person required to make the report thought that the report had been turned in by others having the same duty or obligation herein. 
(Prior code § 6-1-11)  
Chapter 8.32 - BURGLARY AND FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS 
Sections: 
 
8.32.010 - Definitions. 
"Alarm business" means any persons engaged in the business of selling, installing, planning the installations, assisting in planning, servicing, maintaining, monitoring, repairing, replacing, moving or removing alarm systems in the city. 
"Alarm administrator" means the individual designated by the chief of police to issue permits and enforce the provisions of this title. 
"Alarm dispatch request" means a notification to the police by the alarm business that an alarm, either manual or automatic, has been activated at a particular site. 
"Alarm site" means a single premise or location served by an alarm system or systems. Each tenancy, if served by a separate alarm system in a multi-tenant building or complex, shall be considered a separate alarm site. 
"Alarm system" means any mechanism, equipment, or device which is designated to detect an unauthorized entry into any building or onto any property, or to direct attention to a robbery, burglary, or other emergency in progress, and to signal the above occurrences either by a local or audible alarm or by a silent or remote alarm. The following devices shall not constitute alarm systems within the meaning of this subsection: 
1.  Devices which do not register alarms that are audible, visible, or perceptible outside the protected premises; 
2.  Devices which are not installed, operated or used for the purpose of reporting an emergency to the police department; 
3.  Alarm devices affixed to motor vehicles, unless the vehicle is permanently affixed to the real property at the alarm site; and 
4.  Alarm devices installed on a temporary basis by the police department. 
"Alarm user" means the person, occupant, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind in control of any building, structure or facility or portion thereof wherein an alarm system is maintained. 
"Apartment complex" means any building or group of buildings containing two or more rental units. 
"Automatic dialing device" means an alarm system which automatically sends over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded voice message indicating the existence of an emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect. 
"Central station" means an office to which alarm systems are connected, where operators supervise the circuits on a continuous basis and the subsequent relaying of such messages by a live voice to the police department. 
"Duress alarm" means an alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a crisis situation requiring police response. 
"Emergency" means the commission or attempted commission of a robbery, burglary or other criminal action. 
"Employee" means any person who is employed by an alarm business and who sells, installs, services, maintains, repairs, or replaces alarm systems in the city. 
"False alarm" means the activation of an alarm system, which results in an arrival at the alarm site by the police department, where an emergency does not exist. It includes an alarm signal caused by conditions of nature, which are normal for that area and subject to control by the alarm business operator or alarm user. "False alarm" does not include an alarm signal caused by extraordinarily violent conditions of nature such as tornados, floods and earthquakes not reasonably subject to control. 
"Holdup alarm" means an alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a robbery in progress. 
"Intrusion alarm system" means an alarm system signaling an entry or attempted entry into the area protected by the system. 
"Local alarm" means any alarm device audible at the alarm site. 
"One plus duress alarm" means the manual activation of a silent alarm signal by entering at a keypad a code that adds one to the last digit of the normal arm/disarm code. (Normal code = 1234; One plus duress code = 1235) 
"Permittee" means the person to whom an alarm user permit is issued. 
"Person" means and includes natural persons, without regard to number or gender, and any partnership, corporation, and any other type of legal entity. 
"Verification" means an attempt by the alarm business, or its representative, to contact the alarm site by telephonic or other electronic means, whether or not actual contact with a person is made, before requesting a police dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request. 
"Visual obscuring device" means an alarm system or device which emits or produces real or simulated smoke, fog, vapor or any like substance that obscures vision. 
(Ord. 99-17 § 1 (part))  
8.32.020 - Applicability of provisions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all alarm users, businesses, employees and alarm systems which are installed, connected, monitored, operated or maintained on or prior to the date on which the ordinance codified in this chapter became effective, and subsequent thereto. 
(Ord. 99-17 § 1 (part))  
8.32.030 - Registration required to operate an alarm business. 
It is unlawful for any person, partnership, corporation or association to own, manage, conduct or carry on the business of selling, leasing, installing, servicing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, moving or removing, or causing to be sold, leased, installed, serviced, maintained, repaired, replaced, moved or removed in or on any building or other property within the city any device known as an intrusion or physical duress alarm system, or automatic dialing device connected to an answering service, unless there exists a valid security certificate therefor, granted and subsisting in compliance with the provisions of the Utah Burglar Alarm Certification Act, Sections 13-18-1 et seq., Utah Code Annotated 1953, as amended, and the name, address and certificate number or I.D. card number registered with the chief of police. Alarm users and/or alarm companies attempting alarm permit registration listing alarm and monitoring companies, not currently licensed with the Utah Division of Professional Licensing, will not be issued a permit number. There shall be no fee for registration under this section. 
(Ord. 99-17 § 1 (part))  
8.32.040 - Alarm user permits. 
A.  Every alarm user shall have in his/her possession an alarm user permit issued by the chief of police. Such permit shall be issued upon filing by the user or alarm business with police department a completed alarm permit application as provided by Section 8.32.060 or its successor. A separate permit shall be required for each alarm site. The permit application fee shall be submitted to the alarm administrator no later than five days following the alarm installation or following an existing system being taken over by a different alarm user or alarm company. The alarm user shall be responsible for the maintenance and operation of the alarm system and for payment of all fees and penalties under this section. 
B.  An alarm business or its representative must not request a police response to an alarm signal for seven days after the alarm user registers the alarm system with the alarm administrator, unless this provision is waived in writing by the alarm administrator because of imminent danger to people or property. 
C.  It is unlawful to report to the police department or other emergency service agency any alarm from an alarm system that has no use permit. Alarm signals from an intrusion alarm with no permit, suspended or revoked permit, will result in no police response. This shall not apply to the reporting of the sounding of a local alarm. 
D.  Effective January 1, 2000, a one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) penalty per incident shall be charged to a central station and/or alarm company for each request for police response where no valid alarm user permit is provided to police dispatch by the central station. 
E.  An alarm user shall continue in effect until there is a change in ownership of the alarm system, at which time the permit shall expire. An alarm business must notify the alarm administrator of any alarm user, who has a service contract with or is monitored or maintained by the alarm business, who has canceled or otherwise terminated their alarm services with the alarm business. Alarm permits shall not be transferable. 
F.  Registration of an alarm system is not intended to, nor will it, create a contract, duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, of response. Any and all liability and consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond to a notification is hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity as provided by law is retained. By registering an alarm system, the alarm user acknowledges that police response may be based on factors such as: 
1.  Availability of police units 
2.  Priority of calls 
3.  Weather conditions 
4.  Traffic conditions 
5.  Emergency conditions 
6.  Staffing levels 
(Ord. 99-17 § 1 (part))  
8.32.050 - Employees and installers identification cards. 
It is unlawful for any person to engage directly in the installing, servicing, maintaining, repairing, moving or removing, in or on any building or other property within the city, any burglar, robbery or other emergency alarm system, or monitoring and relaying calls for such system, unless such person has in his/her possession a valid identification card issued by the state pursuant to Section 13-18-14, Utah Code Annotated, or successor sections. 
(Ord. 99-17 § 1 (part))  
8.32.060 - Alarm user information. 
A.  An alarm permit application shall be completed by the user or by the alarm business and submitted to the police department alarm administrator system prior to the operation of the system. 
B.  This permit application shall set forth the full name, address, and telephone number of both the owner or lessee on whose premises the system will be installed, operated, connected, monitored or maintained, and the name of the person of licensed alarm system business installing, monitoring, maintaining or servicing the system. The permit application shall further contain the names, addresses and telephone numbers of three individuals who may be contacted by peace officers responding to an alarm. The persons listed shall have authority to act for the alarm user in granting peace officers' access to any portion of the premises concerned and shall be knowledgeable in the basic operation of the alarm system. The alarm permit shall contain such additional information as the chief of police shall reasonably deem necessary to properly identify and locate the user, the alarm business installing, servicing, monitoring or maintaining the alarm system and the persons to be contacted in the event of the filing of an alarm report. 
(Ord. 99-17 § 1 (part))  
8.32.070 - User instructions. 
Every alarm business selling, leasing or furnishing to any user an alarm system which is installed on premises located in their area subject to this chapter shall furnish the user with written instructions and training that provide information to enable the user to operate the alarm system properly and avoid false alarms. Written operating instructions and the phone number of the monitoring station shall be maintained at each alarm site. The alarm business shall notify the alarm user of the permit requirements and this alarm ordinance. 
(Ord. 99-17 § 1 (part))  
8.32.080 - False burglary alarms. 
A.  Any burglary alarm user having more than four false alarms within any twelve-month period shall be subject to suspension of police response and/or revocation of the permit and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Revocation of a user permit shall be in accordance with the license revocation provisions specified in Chapter 5.02 of this code, or its successor provisions. A certified letter will be sent to the alarm user and alarm business after the fourth false intrusion alarm informing them of the upcoming suspension or revocation. A hearing officer hearing a revocation proceeding shall have authority to suspend a user permit in lieu of revocation in appropriate cases. Any city burglary alarm user whose user permit is suspended or revoked by the city shall pay a reinstatement fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to the city before such permit shall be reinstated or reissued. 
B.  A penalty is imposed for false alarms on an intrusion alarm system to which a peace officer responds to the call or arrival. The penalty is assessed on the user of the alarm system for each false alarm, after two false alarms, in any twelve-month period. The amount of the fee is one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for the third and consecutive intrusion alarms. 
C.  The South Salt Lake city police department will respond to all robbery/duress/panic alarms, when possible, regardless of the alarm permit holder's status; however, the police department's response to these types of activations are limited to burglar alarm systems which require an intentional act by a person on the premises to activate these types of alarms. Activation of these types of alarms which are determined to be false by the police department will be assessed a penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) on the first, one hundred dollars ($100.00) on the second, two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the third, three hundred dollars ($300.00) for the fourth, five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the fifth and each additional alarm. If the alarm system is determined to be faulty, a nuisance, or in noncompliance with this chapter, and any amendments thereto, the police department has the option to not respond to the alarm activation. 
D.  All alarm dispatch requests caused by an actual criminal offense, or with evidence of an attempted criminal offense, shall not be counted as a false alarm. The criminal offense must be reported within five business days of the activation and must be accompanied by a police report. 
E.  The alarm administrator or any law enforcement supervisor may cancel, without notice, any alarm dispatch caused by power or weather related causes or other emergencies based upon priority, or alarm considered to be a nuisance. 
F.  All penalties assessed under this chapter shall be due and payable on the date written notice of any penalty due is issued by the city treasurer. Any penalty which is paid within thirty (30) days of the due date shall be reduced by fifty dollars ($50.00). Any penalty, which is paid after thirty (30) days and within sixty (60) days of the due date, shall be reduced by twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Any penalty paid after sixty (60) days from the due date shall not be reduced. If any penalty is not paid within ninety (90) days of the due date, the city may use such lawful means as are available to collect such penalties. In the event the city files an action in court to recover such penalties, the city shall be entitled to recovery of its costs and attorney's fees in addition to the penalties due and owing. 
(Ord. 99-17 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2011-14, 11-19-2011)  
8.32.085 - False fire alarms. 
A.  Any alarm user having four or more false fire alarms within any twelve-month period shall be subject to nuisance alarm fees for each incident. The fee shall be established in the city's consolidated fee schedule. The fee shall be due and payable upon written notice by a city official, which may be provided through citation or a notice of violation prepared in compliance with chapter 8.14 of this code. Unpaid fees shall be subject to collections actions. The reductions identified in Section 8.32.080(F) are not applicable to fees assessed for false fire alarms. 
B.  Fire officials shall send notice to a responsible person after the third false alarm, notifying the owner of the malfunction, and the potential fees which will be imposed on the next false alarm. Notice shall be provided by mailing or hand-delivering a copy of the letter to the business address. 
C.  Appeal. A person may appeal the imposition of the nuisance alarm fee by filing a notice of appeal to the administrative law judge, as provided in Chapter 2.22 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2011-14, 11-19-2011)  
8.32.090 - False alarm prevention course. 
The alarm administrator may implement a "false alarm prevention course." The course shall inform alarm users of the problems created by false alarm dispatches and how users may operate an alarm system without generating false alarm dispatches. Users who complete the course shall be issued a certificate worth the dismissal of one false alarm penalty equal to one hundred dollars ($100.00). No permittee shall be entitled to take such course and receive a penalty waiver more than once per year. 
(Ord. 99-17 § 1 (part))  
8.32.100 - Inter-agency communications. 
A.  All central stations or other answering services shall provide the police department's dispatch, at the time of filing the alarm report, with the alarm user's permit number, with a toll-free telephone number for contacting the central station dispatchers and for obtaining the information required under Section 8.32.060, or its successor. 
B.  A central station performing monitoring services shall attempt verification of every alarm signal, except duress or hold-up alarm activation, before requesting a police response to an alarm signal. Violation of this section shall result in a civil penalty of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) per incident. 
C.  In the event that a central station becomes aware that an intrusion alarm which has been called into the police dispatch by such central station is false, the central station shall cancel the alarm call with the police dispatch. 
(Ord. 99-17 § 1 (part))  
8.32.110 - Deliberate false alarms. 
No person shall cause to be transmitted any intrusion or physical duress alarm knowing the same to be false or without basis in fact. Central stations shall not request law enforcement officers to respond to alarm scenes when monitoring equipment indicates an alarm system malfunction signal or when there have been four or more false alarms within a twenty-four-hour period. 
(Ord. 99-17 § 1 (part))  
8.32.120 - Local alarm system-cutoff required when. 
Burglary, robbery or other emergency alarm systems which use a local audible or visual device to attract the attention of the public shall be equipped with an automatic cutoff device which will terminate the audible or visual alarm within fifteen (15) minutes and which will not sound again as a result of the same event that resulted in the original activation. 
(Ord. 99-17 § 1 (part))  
8.32.130 - Police call records. 
Alarm businesses which request police response to alarm signals shall maintain a record of all police calls, the time, date and location of the alarm and the name, address and phone number of the alarm user. The records shall indicate the cause of the alarm, if known. This record shall be current and shall be made available to the chief of police or the chief's designated representative at any time during normal business hours. 
(Ord. 99-17 § 1 (part))  
8.32.140 - Administration and enforcement. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the chief of police. The chief of police, or his/her authorized representative, which may be the chief building inspector, is authorized to make inspections of burglar, robbery and other emergency alarm systems and of the premises wherein said devices or systems are located. Such individual shall have authority at reasonable times and upon oral notice to enter upon any premises within the city to undertake such inspections and to determine whether such systems are being used in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Subject to the approval of the mayor, the chief of police, or his or her authorized representative, shall have power to make such reasonable rules and regulations as may, in the discretion of the chief of police, be deemed necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-17 § 1 (part))  
8.32.150 - Operational defects to be rendered. 
A.  All alarm users must have the user's alarm system inspected by an alarm business on a regular yearly basis. 
B.  All alarm systems shall have a sufficient backup power supply that will become effective in the event of power failure or outage in the source of electricity from the utility company. Such power supply shall last a minimum of three hours. 
C.  After December 31, 1999, no alarm business shall program alarm systems so they are capable of sending one plus duress alarms. Alarm businesses may continue to report one plus duress alarms received from alarm systems programmed with this feature prior to December 31, 1999. However, after December 31, 1999, when performing a takeover or conversion, an alarm business shall remove the one plus duress alarm capability from the alarm system being taken over or converted. Violation of this section shall result in civil penalty of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) per incident. 
D.  After December 31, 1999, alarm companies shall not install a device for activating a hold-up alarm, which has a single action, non-recessed button. Violation of this section shall cause a civil penalty of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) per incident. 
E.  It is the responsibility of the alarm business and technician to prevent false alarms during installation, system repairs or system service. Proper notification should be made to the monitoring company that the system use a test mode to avoid dispatching of law enforcement. Violation of this section shall result in a civil penalty of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) per incident. 
F.  Vision Obscuring Device. It is unlawful for any person to install or use an alarm system or device that emits or produces real or simulated smoke, fog, vapor or any like substance that obscures vision. 
(Ord. 99-17 § 1 (part))  
8.32.160 - Automatic dialing and prerecorded message alarm systems unlawful. 
It is unlawful to maintain, operate, connect, or allow to be maintained, operated or connected, any automatic dialing device which automatically dials the police department and then relays any prerecorded message to report any robbery, burglary or other emergency. 
(Ord. 99-17 § 1 (part))  
8.32.170 - City liability limitations. 
The city shall not be liable for any defects in operation of burglar or robbery alarm systems, for any failure or neglect to respond appropriately upon the receipt of an alarm nor for failure or neglect of any person registered or issued a permit pursuant to this chapter in connection with the installation, operation or maintenance of the equipment necessary to or incident to the operation of such system. In the event the city finds it necessary to order the system disconnected, the city shall incur no liability for such action. 
(Ord. 99-17 § 1 (part))  
8.32.180 - Violation—Penalty. 
Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter, failure of any person to comply with the requirements of this chapter shall constitute a Class B misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 99-17 § 1 (part))  
8.32.190 - Appeal procedures. 
A.  Appeals of actions regarding burglary and fire alarm systems shall be made using the administrative hearing process outlined in Chapter 2.22 of the city code. A hearing request shall be in writing and must be received no later than ten days following such actions. 
B.  Suspension and/or revocation will result in loss of police response for one year. A reinstatement fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and a certificate signed by the alarm business and alarm user stating the problem has been corrected will be required before police response will be resumed. Two additional false alarms will place the user on immediate suspension without an appeal for an additional year. 
C.  If the administrative law judge finds that no violation of this chapter occurred, or that a violation occurred, but one or more of the defenses set forth in this section is applicable, the administrative law judge may dismiss the penalty and release the alarm user from liability thereunder, or may reduce the penalty associated therewith as he or she shall determine. Such defenses are: 
1.  The false alarm for which the penalty has been assessed did not originate at the premises of the alarm user who has been assessed the fee; 
2.  The alarm for which the penalty has been assessed was, in fact, not false, but was rather the result of an actual or attempted burglary, robbery or other emergency; 
3.  The police dispatch office was notified by the permit holder or the alarm company that the alarm was false prior to the arrival of a peace officer to the subject premises in response to the false alarm; or 
4.  Such other mitigating circumstances as may be approved by the city law department. 
D.  If the administrative law judge finds that a false alarm did occur and no applicable defense exists, the administrative law judge may, in the interest of justice and on behalf of the city, enter into an agreement for the timely or periodic payment of the applicable fees and penalties. 
(Ord. 2008-21 (part): Ord. 99-17 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 8.34 - EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES ABUSE 
Sections: 
 
8.34.010 - Purpose. 
The city has experienced repeated calls from citizens for emergency medical services when there exists no real emergency. Further, responding to such nonemergency calls requires the use of personnel and equipment so that they are not readily available in the event of a real emergency. Therefore, the purpose of this chapter is to reduce such abuse and the use of emergency medical services provided by city of South Salt Lake, thus keeping personnel and equipment available for use in real emergency situations, conserving energy and reducing costs. 
(Ord. 97-4 § 1)  
8.34.020 - Unlawful request of service. 
A.  Any person who shall repeatedly request that the fire department emergency medical system of city of South Salt Lake respond to unnecessary, false, and capricious requests for assistance, or for nonemergency situations, shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor. 
B.  For the purpose of this section, nonemergency situations shall be the following: 
1.  Alcohol intoxication; 
2.  Minor lacerations; 
3.  Minor contusions and sprains; 
4.  Minor illnesses; 
5.  Insect and animal bites not deemed emergencies; 
6.  Rash, skin disorders, hives without dyspnea (difficulty of breathing); 
7.  Home delivery to avoid doctor and hospital services; 
8.  Venereal disease; 
9.  Patients seeking nonemergency transportation; 
10.  Forehead and scalp lacerations only; 
11.  Cold syndrome; 
12.  Sore throat; 
13.  Earache; 
14.  Hiccough; 
15.  Nervousness/anxiety; 
16.  Toothache; 
17.  Minor bruises; 
18.  Non life-threatening overdoses; 
19.  Non life-threatening self-inflicted injuries. 
(Ord. 97-4 § 2)  
8.34.030 - Assessment of costs. 
A.  For each nonemergency call made and for which emergency medical personnel arrived, the responsible person shall be assessed the cost associated with the emergency response, as included in the city's consolidated fee schedule. 
B.  For purposes of this section, a nonemergency call is one which does not require emergency care on an expedited basis. This includes, but is not limited to, scratches, abrasions, bruises, anxiety attacks and similar injuries of a medically insignificant nature. 
C.  The requirement of fees under this section do not foreclose the possibility of criminal prosecution for conduct described in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2011-14, 11-19-2011)  
Chapter 8.44 - SECURING OF VACANT BUILDINGS AND PROPERTY[2] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-18, adopted Nov. 8, 2012, amended §§ 8.44.020—8.44.220 of Ch. 8.44 in their entirety to read as herein set out. The former §§ 8.44.020—8.44.240 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2009-06, adopted Aug. 26, 2009. 
 
8.44.010 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to impose a legal duty upon the owners of vacant buildings and properties to secure them, to prevent the buildings from deteriorating into havens for crime and vagrancy to the degree that a nuisance is created, ruining the safe, peaceful and quiet enjoyment of neighboring properties. This chapter creates a system to notify owners of the problems reasonably attributable to their vacant property and a process to secure the vacant property. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, 8-26-2009)  
8.44.020 - Definitions. 
"Abandoned" or "idle construction site" means a site or building(s) where construction has begun but where construction has ceased, the building permit has expired for more than three months and where exposed foundations, footings, rebar, framing, construction waste, large holes, piles of soil, sand, rock and other open excavation exists. 
"Boarded building" means a building in which all or some of the utilities have been disconnected in which some or all windows or doors are boarded to prevent entry at the ground and second level (if a second level exists). 
"Boarding" means the secured covering of openings to a building or structure to prevent entrance pursuant to the provisions and standards of this chapter. 
"Closed to occupancy" means a building in which no person may eat, sleep, live or otherwise reside or occupy the building or any portion thereof for any purpose. Buildings closed to occupancy may only be entered by the owner, owner's agent or other authorized persons to do repair work. 
"Compromised, vacant building" means a vacant building for which the city has received evidence that unlawful entry has been made. "Compromised, vacant building" also includes any building which is unsecured. 
"Dilapidated" means: (1) a building or structure or part thereof that by reason of inadequate maintenance, structural deterioration, or abandonment is unsafe, unsanitary, or constitutes a hazard and is no longer fit for use as originally intended; or (2) a building in which no legitimate human occupancy is occurring, as determined by the city, and where any of the following exist: (i) the utilities have been disconnected, (ii) windows are missing, (iii) windows are open or broken, (iv) doors are open, missing or broken or (v) the interior of the building is in such a condition because of lack of utilities, vermin presence, structural defects, electrical and plumbing defects, or filth, that the building is not habitable. 
"Emergency conditions" means one or more conditions that exist in a building or on a property that create the likelihood of imminent danger to the life or safety of anyone who enters or occupies the property or building. 
"Habitable building" means a building fit for human habitation, or in non-residential buildings, immediate occupancy, without any additional repairs or rehabilitation and for which utility meters and service lines are in place, although they may be locked off. All windows are in place, securely closed and glazed and all exterior doors are securely closed by means of a lock. Buildings which have any condition rendering them dilapidated are not habitable buildings. 
"Maintained, vacant building" means a building which maintains the appearance of occupancy, including the following indicators: maintained landscaping, including watering and timely vegetation management; well-maintained exterior appearances of facades, roofs, windows, doors and paint; securely locked and glazed windows, with appropriate window coverings; securely locked doors; and yards free from refuse or debris. Maintained, vacant buildings do not have any boarded windows or doors. 
"Notice and order" means a written notice to the property owner stating the reason(s) why a building/property must be secured, the date by which it must be secured, the method(s) for securing the building, and the appeal process. 
"Nuisance, vacant building" means a property containing a vacant building for which three or more code enforcement cases have been sustained during the vacancy and within a one-year period. 
"Property owner" means the owner of record as it appears on the Salt Lake County recorder's official records. 
"Rehabilitation" means the correction of conditions which render the property/building unfit or dilapidated or unsecured. 
"The city" means the mayor, city attorney, police chief, fire chief, fire marshall, director of community and economic development, director of urban livability, building official or designees of any acting singly or in concert. 
"Unsecured building" means a vacant building where one or more window(s) and/or door(s) or other openings that are or can be reasonably used for entry into a building are missing, broken or are not otherwise secured against unauthorized persons entering the building. 
"Vacant building" means a habitable building unoccupied by the property owner or tenants for a period longer than sixty (60) days. 
"Vermin" means rats, mice, cockroaches, bedbugs, feral cats, mosquitoes or any other pest as determined by the city to be harmful to life, health, or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2012-18, 11-8-2012)  
8.44.040 - Civil liability—Other remedies available. 
A.  By establishing performance standards or by establishing obligations to act, it is the intent of the city council that South Salt Lake City employees and officers are exercising discretionary authority in pursuit of an essential governmental function and that any such standards or obligations shall not be construed as creating a ministerial duty for purposed of tort liability. 
B.  Obtaining a vacant building permit is not a substitute for effective property management, and does not supersede any of the owner's responsibilities. 
C.  Obtaining a permit does not prevent an enforcement official from taking action against a property owner, nor does taking action under this section prevent the city from seeking additional enforcement actions, including civil or criminal citations, or the abatement of violations or unsafe conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2012-18, 11-8-2012)  
8.44.050 - Owner responsibilities for vacant properties. 
A.  Property owners of vacant building or properties bear ultimate responsibility to maintain and secure their property against unlawful entry. 
B.  Vacant buildings shall be maintained so as to appear capable of occupancy. In the event that the vacant property is not so maintained, the owner shall take appropriate measures to secure the building against unlawful entry, and make repairs when others unlawfully break through their security measures. 
C.  Properties containing vacant buildings shall be maintained in accordance with landscaping standards in this code. 
(Ord. No. 2012-18, 11-8-2012)  
8.44.060 - Vacant buildings. 
A.  The city, through enforcement officials, shall maintain a program to identify nuisance or compromised vacant properties, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Vacant buildings are classified in one of the following tiers: 
1.  Tier 1: Maintained, vacant buildings; 
2.  Tier 2: Nuisance, vacant buildings; 
3.  Tier 3: Boarded buildings; 
4.  Tier 4: Compromised, vacant buildings. 
C.  Tier 2 and 3 properties may be periodically checked by enforcement official for signs of broken windows or doors, unauthorized dumping, and violations. When such problems are identified, the enforcement official shall notify the property owner of the issue. Property owners who fail to correct these identified issues are subject to enforcement action and re-classification in to higher tiers of vacant buildings. 
D.  Tier 3 properties are subject to higher annual vacant building fees, due to their increased risk of vandalism and trespass, and the attention which must be paid to these properties by city officials. 
E.  It is unlawful to maintain a vacant building in a condition rendering it a Tier 4 compromised vacant building. 
F.  It is unlawful to maintain a vacant building in a condition rendering it a Tier 2 or Tier 3 vacant building, without payment of the associated fee. 
G.  The property's tier shall be re-evaluated on an annual basis, during which properties shall be adjusted to the tier that best fits that property's description. Notice of this re-evaluation shall be provided to the property owner, as provided in Section 8.14.150 of this title. 
(Ord. No. 2012-18, 11-8-2012)  
8.44.070 - Procedures. 
A.  Upon discovery of a previously unidentified Tier 2, 3 or 4 vacant building, an enforcement official shall notify the property owner in accordance with Section 8.14.150 of this code. Within ten days of mailing, the property owner shall: (1) for properties identified as Tier 2 properties, contact the city and pay the fee associated with that tier; (2) for properties identified as unpermitted Tier 3 properties, (a) apply for a permit to maintain the Tier 3 property as a boarded, vacant building, or (b) request a stay in order to rehabilitate the building; or (3) for properties identified as Tier 4 properties, either (a) apply for a boarding permit, or (b) request a stay in order to rehabilitate the building. 
B.  A property owner who fails to comply with subsection A of this section is subject to fines, in amounts to be determined by the consolidated fee schedule. 
C.  A property owner who files a notice of appeal with the city stays the enforcement action, but fees continue to accrue while the appeal is pending and being heard, and are imposed retroactively if the city's actions are upheld. 
D.  A vacant property which has been rehabilitated and maintained in the same manner as a Tier 1 vacant building for six months shall no longer be required to maintain a vacant building permit. The property owner who wishes to terminate the permit must make written request and pay an inspection fee. Upon receipt of this request, an enforcement official shall inspect the property to ensure that it is being maintained appropriately. 
E.  A property is no longer vacant once a tenant or property owner has occupied the structure, and the structure has been approved for habitation. 
(Ord. No. 2012-18, 11-8-2012)  
8.44.080 - Notice and order to board building. 
A.  It is unlawful to maintain a Tier 4 vacant building. All compromised, vacant buildings shall be boarded or rehabilitated as provided in this chapter. 
B.  Upon discovery of a compromised, vacant building, the city shall send a written notice and order by certified mail, return receipt requested, and regular mail, to the property owner. The notice shall include: the reason(s) why the building must be boarded, the method for obtaining a permit, the date by which it must be boarded, the method(s) for boarding the building procedures to request a stay for rehabilitation, what will happen for failure to comply, and the appeal process. The city shall also, on the same day, post a notice on the building 
C.  If, due to the existence of emergency conditions, it is not possible or practical to give notice in advance, the city may nevertheless board the building without giving a prior notice and order to the owner or occupant, but the city shall provide all required notices immediately following the boarding of the building in accordance with Section 8.14.520 of this title. 
(Ord. No. 2012-18, 11-8-2012)  
8.44.090 - Failure to comply with notice and order. 
A.  If, within the time specified in the notice and order, the property owner fails to comply with the notice and order sent pursuant to this chapter. 
1.  For Tier 2 notices, assess a one hundred dollar ($100.00) fine and bill the property owner for the Tier 2 annual fee; 
2.  For Tier 3 notices, assess a two hundred dollar ($200.00) fine and bill the property owner for the Tier 3 annual fee; and 
3.  For Tier 4 notices, assess a three hundred dollar ($300.00) fine, abate the nuisance by boarding the building in accordance with this chapter, and bill the property owner for the Tier 3 annual fee. 
B.  If the city boards a building, the city shall send the property owner a bill for: 
1.  The actual costs incurred by the city in securing the building or property; 
2.  The annual Tier 3 program fee; and 
3.  A one hundred dollar ($100.00) fee to partially recover the city's administrative costs in boarding the building. 
C.  Property owners shall be required to pay an annual fee equal to the renewal fee adopted in the fee schedule for each year. 
D.  The city may follow lien procedures or collections actions, as described in Chapter 8.14 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2012-18, 11-8-2012)  
8.44.100 - Permit required to board a building. 
A.  It is unlawful to board a vacant building except pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter or pursuant to a catastrophic event, such as a structural fire or earthquake. 
B.  Permits for boarding a building must be applied for on forms provided by the city. 
C.  Boarding of the building must be completed within twenty-one (21) days of issuance of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2012-18, 11-8-2012)  
8.44.110 - Boarding a building without a permit. 
Boarding a building before obtaining a permit pursuant to this chapter is a class C misdemeanor and requires payment of a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). The city may pursue administrative penalties in lieu of criminal prosecution. Payment of a fine does not excuse payment of permit fees. 
(Ord. No. 2012-18, 11-8-2012)  
8.44.120 - Fees. 
A.  Application Fee. As adopted in the fee schedule. 
B.  Renewal Fee. On or before the yearly anniversary of a building/property securing permit, the city will mail, to the address on the application, a renewal permit form. The property owner desiring to continue the permit shall pay a renewal fee as adopted in the fee schedule. 
C.  A daily late fee, as adopted in the fee schedule, in addition to the renewal fee, shall be assessed by the city for each day the renewal fee is delinquent. 
D.  If the property owner fails to pay any fee imposed by this chapter, the city may take legal action to collect the fees. 
E.  The city may establish payment plans for property owners. 
(Ord. No. 2012-18, 11-8-2012)  
8.44.130 - Stays authorized. 
The property owner of a Tier 4 vacant building may apply for a stay of the boarding requirement and payment of the Tier 3 fee. The stay may only be granted for the rehabilitation of the identified building. 
(Ord. No. 2012-18, 11-8-2012)  
8.44.140 - Stay process. 
A.  A property owner who seeks to rehabilitate a building may apply for a six-month stay of a Tier 3 program fee by doing the following: 
1.  Filing a stay request; 
2.  Paying the Tier 2 fee; 
3.  Applying for building permits to rehabilitate the property, as required by applicable building codes; and 
4.  Completing the rehabilitation within the six-month period. 
B.  No extensions shall be granted for stays, and the property owner who fails to complete the rehabilitation within six months shall pay the balance of the Tier 3 fee and board the building. 
(Ord. No. 2012-18, 11-8-2012)  
8.44.150 - Method of boarding buildings. 
All buildings shall be boarded in the following manner: 
A.  All doors, except as allowed in subsection D of this section, and windows of the structure on the first two floors, and other openings easily accessible from the ground, and openings with broken glass, shall be secured either by erecting a single one-half inch thick layer of exterior grade plywood sheathing, or exterior-grade wafer board, covering over all exterior openings, overlapping the opening on every edge by three inches, and fastened with two and one-half inch exterior grade screws along the outside edges spaced every six inches or by fastening with eight penny common nails spaced every six inches on the outside edges; 
B.  Alternately, the openings may be secured by conventional wood-frame construction. The frames shall use wood studs of a size not less than two inches by four inches (nominal dimension) placed not more than twenty-four (24) inches apart on center. The frame stud shall have the four-inch sides or the wide dimension perpendicular to the face of the wall. Each side of the frame shall be covered with exterior grade plywood or exterior wafer board sheathing of at least one-half inch thickness or equivalent lumber nailed or screwed over the opening by using eight penny common nails or two and one-half inch exterior screws spaced every six inches on the outside edges and every twelve (12) inches along intermediate stud supports; 
C.  All coverings shall immediately be painted the same color as the building or its trim; and 
D.  Exterior doors shall be secured by a solid wood core, or metal door with a dead bolt type lock to preclude entry of unauthorized persons, or shall be secured as described in subsection A or B of this section. 
E.  The city may place a placard on the boarded building which states that the building is closed to occupancy and that it is unlawful for any unauthorized person to enter the building. The placard shall also provide phone numbers to call if people are seen on the property or if doors or windows are unsecured. 
(Ord. No. 2012-18, 11-8-2012)  
8.44.160 - Securing abandoned or idle construction sites. 
A.  When an enforcement official identifies an abandoned or idle construction site, the official shall notify the property owner of the need to secure the site, as provided in Section 8.14.150 of this title. 
B.  Abandoned or idle construction sites shall be secured by removing all volunteer tree growth, removing or mowing weed growth, leveling or removing piles of soil, sand and rock, removing all construction waste, removing unused construction material, burying or removing exposed footings and foundations, boarding all partially constructed buildings according to Section 8.44.150 of this code and by erecting a six-foot high chain link fence around the entire perimeter of the property. 
C.  If the property owner returns the property to the state of a vacant lot, the property owner need not erect a fence around the property, nor pay any annual fees associated with vacant buildings or properties. This section does not excuse a property owner from thereafter maintaining the vacant lot in accordance with applicable zoning and landscaping ordinances. 
D.  This section does not excuse the payment of vacant building fees, if boarded buildings remain on the abandoned or idle construction site. 
(Ord. No. 2012-18, 11-8-2012)  
8.44.170 - Landscape maintenance. 
A.  Existing landscaping and lawn on the property where a permit exists shall be routinely mowed, watered, pruned and maintained as though the building was occupied and as required in Section 17.06.090, Landscaping. 
B.  If the city determines that the landscaping on the property surrounding a permitted vacant building is not being maintained, the city shall send a notice to the property owner, requiring compliance with landscaping standards within ten days. 
C.  If the city determines that the property owner has failed to comply with the notice and order, the city may cause the work to be done by a contractor employed by the city. 
D.  The city shall bill the property owner: 
1.  An administrative fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year, for administrative expenses in contracting for the landscaping maintenance; and 
2.  The actual cost of landscaping maintenance billed to the city by the city's contractor. 
(Ord. No. 2012-18, 11-8-2012)  
8.44.180 - Exterior maintenance. 
A.  Exterior walls and surfaces must be properly maintained. Severely weathered, peeling or unpainted wood or unpainted or damaged siding, and damaged roofing must be replaced or repaired with similar materials and colors. 
B.  If the city determines that a boarded building is not being maintained, the city shall send a notice to the property owner and/or the property owner's agent requiring compliance with the building maintenance standards within seven days. 
C.  If the city determines that the property owner has failed to comply with the notice and order, the city may cause the work to be done by a contractor employed by the city. 
D.  The city shall bill the property owner: 
1.  An administrative fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year for administrative expenses in contracting for the building maintenance; and 
2.  The actual cost of building maintenance billed to the city by the city's contractor. 
(Ord. No. 2012-18, 11-8-2012)  
8.44.190 - Snow removal. 
A.  Snow must be removed from public sidewalks surrounding the property in the manner otherwise required by law. 
B.  If the city determines that sidewalks adjacent to a property containing a vacant building are not having the snow removed as required by city ordinance the city shall send a notice to the property owner and/or the property owner's agent, requiring snow from the present snowfall to be removed and notifying the property owner that if snow from a subsequent snowfall is not removed as required, the city will contract for the removal and charge the property owner. 
C.  If the city determines that the property owner has failed to comply with the notice and order, the city may cause snow, during the winter, to be removed by a contractor employed by the city. 
D.  The city shall bill the property owner: 
1.  An administrative fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year, for administrative expenses in contracting for snow removal; and 
2.  The actual cost of snow removal billed to the city by the city's contractor. 
E.  Once city-initiated removal has begun, the removal and billing to the property owner shall continue until the owner demonstrates that the owner has a snow removal plan independent of the city-initiated removal. 
(Ord. No. 2012-18, 11-8-2012)  
8.44.200 - Inspections required. 
Whenever a property owner, manager or tenant intends to clean, repair, renovate, reopen or reoccupy a building that has been boarded, the building is to be inspected and a permit must be issued by city prior to the building owner, manager or tenant initiating any of the above actions. Any person conducting any work on a building that has been boarded or closed to occupancy must have a copy of the permit on the site at all times. 
(Ord. No. 2012-18, 11-8-2012)  
8.44.210 - Legal action authorized. 
The city may take appropriate legal action tocollect all unpaid fees or bills provided by thischapter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-18, 11-8-2012)  
8.44.220 - Appeal process. 
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city may appeal the decision to the administrative law judge (ALJ) by following the provisions of Chapter 2.22 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2012-18, 11-8-2012)  
Chapter 8.48 - SUPPLEMENTAL FIRE CODE REGULATIONS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Note— Ord. No. 2014-18, adopted July 16, 2014, states that this Ch. 8.48 is immediately and retroactively applicable to all properties maintaining such uses, regardless of prior uses, plans, or site approvals, with the exception of §§ 8.48.030 and 8.48.040, which shall be effective immediately and not retroactively. 
 
Part I. - General Provisions 
 
8.48.010 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to meet the public safety needs of the city when, due to the unique circumstances and hazards associated with certain uses, materials, and structures in the city and the urban nature of the city's composition, there is a need for more restrictive ordinances related to fire safety than exist in the state fire code. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, 7-16-2014)  
8.48.020 - Enactment of more restrictive ordinances. 
When a more restrictive fire code requirement is enacted by the city, the city shall follow the procedures contained within the State Fire Code Administration Act, as amended, in order to notify the appropriate state officials. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, 7-16-2014)  
8.48.030 - Violations; fines. 
A.  Any violation of this chapter is punishable as a Class B misdemeanor. In the discretion of the fire marshal or a designee, violations may also be punished by an administrative citation. 
B.  The fine for a violation of this chapter is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day that the violation occurred or continues to occur. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, 7-16-2014)  
8.48.040 - Administrative action. 
In addition to criminal penalties, if a property owner or other responsible person is maintaining premises contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the fire marshal or a designee is permitted to take such measures as is necessary to protect the public or neighboring properties from the risk of fire, including evacuation or immediate closure to occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, 7-16-2014)  
Part II. - Specific Regulations 
 
8.48.100 - Outdoor storage of wood chips and associated materials. 
A.  Any person who operates a business which generates, collects or sells chipped or ground-wood based materials, including wood chips, hogged material, or compost as a major function of the business, and which stores more than three thousand six hundred (3,600) cubic feet of such product outdoors at any one time, shall comply with the provisions of this section. Nothing in this section shall prevent the fire marshal or other fire authority from enforcing generally applicable fire codes to smaller piles of such materials, in appropriate circumstances. 
B.  Maximum amount of product per business location. No business may store greater than an aggregate total of five hundred ten thousand (510,000) cubic feet of wood chips or materials regulated by this section, piles of which are subject to the further regulations in this section. 
C.  Combustible waste materials such as bark, chips and other combustible debris shall not be permitted to accumulate in a location which constitutes, in the opinion of the fire marshal, an undue fire hazard. Such locations shall be affirmatively identified by the fire marshal. 
D.  Smoking shall be prohibited on the entire premises, except designated, permanent locations which shall be kept free of any combustible materials and shall be clearly marked. The manager or owner must post "No Smoking" signs throughout the property. 
E.  Storage areas shall be: 
1.  Enclosed with a minimum eight-foot chain link fence with privacy slats with locked gates and a fire department box for keyed access by fire personnel, located as necessary to allow for entry of fire apparatus; and 
2.  Approved by the fire marshal using International Fire Code, Appendix "D" Section D102 "Required Access, Fire Apparatus Access Roads," and said access shall be paved with graded asphalt, concrete or other approved driving surface any of which shall be capable of supporting the imposed load of fire apparatus weighing at least seventy-five thousand (75,000) pounds. 
F.  The owner or manager of the premises shall enact and follow a fire prevention program which includes the following elements: 
1.  Establishing controls over factors that lead to spontaneous heating, including the monitoring of internal conditions of the pile by thermocouple, or other approved means which shall be installed with the piles, regularly monitored, and provide for regular reports upon request of the fire marshal; 
2.  Placement of piles which provides access to within one hundred fifty (150) feet of all sides of a pile; 
3.  Electrical equipment and installations shall conform to the provisions of the National Electrical Code and National Fire Prevention Association Standard 70; 
4.  Freeze protected yard hydrants shall be installed on the site at maximum spacing intervals of not more than two hundred fifty (250) feet. Yard hydrants shall be available for emergency use and for the day-to-day compost, chip and for other related fire prevention irrigation purposes. These yard hydrants shall be protected by barricades, posts, or necessary devices and spaced so that all portions of the yard hydrant has a minimum three-foot clearance around the hydrant. Hydrants shall be accessible at all times for emergency use; and 
5.  Portable fire extinguishers suitable for all weather conditions shall be mounted and within a maximum travel distance not to exceed seventy-five (75) feet from any pile. 
G.  Piles shall comply with the following regulations at all times: 
1.  Pile heights shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height, one hundred fifty (150) feet in width and one hundred seventy (170) feet in length, with a pile-to-pile clearance of not less than thirty (30) feet. 
2.  Piles shall be wetted regularly to keep materials from drying out and to maintain the moisture content of the surface layer of the pile; 
3.  No portion of any pile shall be located within seventy-six (76) feet of a property line; and 
4.  No temporary conveyors or motors shall be placed or used on the surface or immediately adjacent to the piles. 
H.  The premises shall not contain more than the amount of product identified in the operating plan, which may be modified annually by the fire marshal prior to the issuance or renewal of the business's license. 
I.  Vehicles used on site shall be subject to the following regulations: 
1.  Power-operated, shovel-type or scoop-type vehicles, dozers, or similar equipment shall be available for use in moving stored material for firefighting purposes; 
2.  Portable fire extinguishers suitable for Class A fires shall be provided in accordance with NFPA 10, Standard for Portable Fire Extinguishers, on all vehicles operating on or near a pile in addition to the normal Class B units for the vehicle; and 
3.  Physical protection shall be provided to prevent heat sources, such as steam lines, airlines, electrical motors, and mechanical drive equipment from becoming buried or heavily coated with combustible material. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, 7-16-2014)  
Title 9 - PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE 
Chapters:  
Chapter 9.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
9.04.010 - State statutes adopted by reference. 
A.  Title 76 of the Utah Code Annotated is adopted by reference as follows: 
1.  Chapters 1 through 4 of Title 76 of the Utah Code Annotated, together with all future amendments and revisions, are adopted by reference in their entirety; 
2.  Chapters 5 through 10 of Title 76 of the Utah Code Annotated, together with all future amendments and revisions, are adopted by reference to the extent that those chapters describe criminal violations which are classified therein as an infraction, a Class C misdemeanor, or a Class B misdemeanor. 
B.  Chapters 37, 37a, 37b, 37c of Title 58 of the Utah Code Annotated, together with all future amendments and revisions, are adopted by reference to the extent that those chapters describe criminal violations which are classified as an infraction, a Class C misdemeanor, or a Class B misdemeanor. 
C.  Chapter 12 of Title 32A of the Utah Code Annotated, together with all future amendments and revisions, is adopted by reference to the extent that the chapter describes criminal violations which are classified as an infraction, a Class C misdemeanor, or a Class B misdemeanor. 
D.  Section 78-3a-19 of the Utah Code Annotated, pertaining to contributing to the delinquency of minors and defining and classifying offenses and providing a penalty therefor, together with all future amendments and revisions, is adopted by reference. 
(Ord. 96-14 § 2—5)  
9.04.020 - Failure to appear or comply. 
Any person who willfully fails to appear before a court or fails to satisfy court ordered punishment, including, but not limited to, fines, community service, or imprisonment, is deemed to be in contempt and guilty of a Class C misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he was originally cited. 
(Ord. 96-14 § 7)  
9.04.030 - Victim impact fees. 
A.  In addition to any surcharge imposed by city ordinance or state law, a victim impact fee shall be paid on all criminal fines, penalties and forfeitures imposed by the city of South Salt Lake Justice Court for any offense described in subsection (B) of this section. 
B.  A victim impact fee in an amount to be established in the consolidated fee schedule shall be imposed upon conviction of any crime against person or property as described under state law or municipal ordinance. Only one fee shall be assessed for multiple charges arising out of one single criminal episode. 
C.  An impact fee shall not be assessed for conviction for traffic violations. 
D.  The impact fee shall be assessed in addition to fines, other surcharges or imposition of court costs and no reduction may be made in the fine charged due to the imposition of the victim impact fee. 
E.  The monies from the victim impact fees collected shall be used by the city to furnish a victim advocate program to victims of crime within the city's corporate limits. 
(Ord. 2005-05)  
Chapter 9.08 - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON 
Sections: 
 
9.08.010 - Combative conduct—Fighting. 
The following crime is to be incorporated into the Utah State criminal provisions adopted by reference in this title. 
Combative Conduct—Fighting. Any assaultive act committed in a fight or scuffle entered into by mutual consent of the participants and resulting in no serious bodily injury is an infraction. 
(Ord. 96-14 § 6)  
9.08.020 - Domestic violence. 
A.  The city council of the city of South Salt Lake adopts by reference into ordinance, the Cohabitant Abuse Procedures Act, as adopted by the Utah State Legislature in 1990 with an effective date of October 1, 1990, and any and all subsequent amendments as may be passed by the Legislature from time to time. 
B.  Penalty for Violation. Any violations of this section shall be a Class B misdemeanor as made and provided under Utah State Law. 
(Ord. 233 § 2, 1991)  
9.08.030 - Battery—Offensive touching. 
A.  A "battery" is the unlawful use of force or violence upon the person of another under circumstances not rising to the level of an assault, as defined in the Utah code. "Battery" includes spitting at or upon another person. It is unlawful for any person to intentionally or knowingly commit a battery within the limits of the city. 
B.  Penalty for Violation. A person who intentionally or knowingly commits a battery shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor as made and provided under Utah State Law. 
C.  Offensive Touching. If a person, under circumstances not amounting to a sexual battery, forcible sexual abuse or the other offenses enumerated in Utah's sexual battery statute, intentionally touches another person, whether or not through the clothing, with the intent to arouse or gratify the sexual desire of any person, and the actor's conduct is committed under circumstances that the actor knows or should know will likely cause affront or alarm to the person touched, then that person is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor as made and provided under Utah State Law. 
(Ord. No. 2009-14, 12-2-2009)  
Chapter 9.12 - OFFENSES RELATING TO PROPERTY 
Sections: 
 
9.12.010 - Manufacture or possession of instruments for burglary or theft, vandalism, or destruction of property. 
Any person who manufactures or possesses any instrument, tool, device, article, or other thing adapted, designed, or commonly used in advancing or facilitating the commission of any offense under circumstances manifesting an intent to use, or knowledge that some person intends to use, the same in the commission of a burglary or theft, vandalism, or destruction of property is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 96-6 § 2)  
9.12.020 - Graffiti removal. 
A.  The owner or tenant or any person in possession of or in control of real property who shall fail to remove any drawing, inscription or writing, commonly known as "graffiti," which was written or drawn so as to be seen by the public, within seven days after having been notified to do so, shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. 
B.  Each day that the offense continues after the notice has been given shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
C.  The seven-day period shall be computed as seven calendar days beginning the day after the date of the notice and continuing seven calendar days thereafter. 
D.  Nothing in this section shall supersede any other remedy provided by law, either civil, criminal or administrative. 
(Ord. 258 § 1, 1993)  
Chapter 9.16 - DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-20, adopted Sept. 3, 2014, amended Ch. 9.16 in its entirety, in effect repealing and reenacting said chapter to read as set out herein. The former Ch. 9.16, §§ 9.16.010—9.16.070, pertained to weapons and explosives and derived from Ord. No. 282, §§ 1—5, adopted in 1993; Ord. No. 97-16, § 2; and Ord. No. 2006-03. 
 
9.16.010 - Definitions. 
"Firearm" means a pistol, revolver, shotgun, short-barreled shotgun, rifle or short-barreled rifle, or a device that could be used as a dangerous weapon from which is expelled a projectile by action of an explosion, whether produced by gunpowder, black powder or other fuels. 
"Sworn law enforcement officer" means a United States marshal, a federal official authorized to carry a firearm, or a peace officer of this or any other jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2014-20, 9-3-2014)  
9.16.020 - Discharge of firearms prohibited within city limits—Exceptions. 
A.  In cases not amounting to a violation of state law, it is unlawful to discharge any firearm within the city limits of the city of South Salt Lake, except: 
1.  In self-defense, or defense of personal property as defined in Utah Code; 
2.  In the case of any sworn law enforcement officer, in the performance of that officer's duty; or 
3.  At a duly licensed shooting gallery or range. 
B.  A violation of this section is a Class B misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2014-20, 9-3-2014)  
Chapter 9.20 - OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS 
Sections: 
 
9.20.010 - Distribution, promotion or public display of sex paraphernalia to a minor. 
A.  Definitions. 
"Display publicly" means the exposing, placing, posting, exhibiting or in any fashion displaying in any location, whether public or private, an item in a manner that it may be readily seen and its contents or character distinguished by normal unaided vision viewing it from a public thoroughfare, place or vehicle. 
"Distribute" means to transfer possession of, with or without consideration. 
"Knowingly" means to have actual or constructive knowledge of the contents of the subject matter. A person has constructive knowledge if a reasonable inspection under the circumstances would have disclosed the nature of the subject matter or if the failure to inspect is for the purpose of avoiding such disclosure. 
"Minor" means any unmarried person less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
"Person" is not limited to individuals only but shall include public and private corporations, firms, joint associations, partnerships and the like. The word "person" as used in this section shall apply to a natural person and shall apply equally to the male and female genders. 
"Promote" means to manufacture, issue, transmit, publish, circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit or advertise, or to offer to agree to do the same. 
"Sex paraphernalia" means any inedible lubricant which is manufactured, promoted or designed to be used primarily for sexual stimulation, sexual arousal or the enhancing or prolonging of sexual activity. 
"Sexual device" means any item, device or product, including but not limited to, a dildo, vibrator, artificial vagina, spanish fly, ben wa balls, pillow or other product shaped or made to resemble male or female genitals, buttocks or developed female breasts, edible underwear, flavored or unflavored edible body lotion or other substance designed for internal consumption, sado-masochistic device, or any other items, device or product manufactured, promoted or designed to be used primarily for sexual stimulation, sexual arousal or the enhancing or prolonging of sexual activity. "Sexual device" shall not mean "sex paraphernalia" as defined in this section and shall not mean any device, appliance or pill designed to be used primarily for contraception purposes and shall not mean movies, books, magazines or other communicative material protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution. 
"Wilfully" means a purpose or willingness to commit the act or to omit the act required in this section. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to knowingly and wilfully distribute or furnish any sex paraphernalia to any minor. Each distribution to a minor shall constitute a separate offense. A person convicted under this section shall be fined not to exceed two hundred ninety-nine dollars ($299.00) or imprisoned in the county jail not to exceed six months, or both. 
C.  It is unlawful for any person to knowingly and wilfully promote, display publicly, distribute or furnish any sexual device to any minor. Each promotion or distribution or each day during which any sexual device is displayed publicly to a minor shall constitute a separate offense. A person convicted under this section shall be fined not to exceed two hundred ninety-nine dollars ($299.00) or imprisoned in the county jail not to exceed six months, or both. 
D.  This section does not prohibit any parent or legal guardian from distributing, promoting or displaying sex paraphernalia or a sexual device to his minor child or ward. 
E.  In the event that any provision of this section is declared invalid for any reason, the remaining provisions shall remain in effect. 
(Ord. 152 § 1, 1984)  
9.20.020 - Curfew. 
A.  Purpose of Section. The city council of the city of South Salt Lake finds, due to a seemingly ever-increasing incidence of violence and other crime among juveniles in the city of South Salt Lake, being both drug-related and gang-related, that such crimes may be significantly inhibited and reduced by the enactment and enforcement of local laws establishing a curfew prohibiting juveniles from remaining idly and purposelessly on the public streets late at night. 
B.  Definitions. 
"Care and custody" means the legal authority of a parent or guardian to supervise or otherwise be responsible for a minor, or the express authority given from such parent or legal guardian of a minor to a responsible adult to supervise or otherwise be responsible for the activities and care of the minor. 
"Emergency errand" means any errand or travel undertaken to directly and immediately seek to prevent or reduce the consequences of an illness or injury, criminal or potential criminal activity, or fire or other accident and shall include the seeking of aid and assistance from medical or emergency response personnel or the purchase of medications. 
"Minor" means any unmarried, unemancipated person who is not a member of the armed forces of the United States and who is under the age of sixteen (16) years for the purposes of subsection C of this section or who is under the age of eighteen (18) years for the purpose of subsection D of this section. 
"Public places" means any place open to the public, whether publicly or privately owned, including, but not limited to, parking lots and the interiors and exteriors of commercial establishments such as restaurants, stores or places of entertainment. 
C.  Sixteen-Year-Old Curfew. 
It is unlawful for any minor under the age of sixteen (16) years to remain or loiter upon any of the sidewalks, streets, alleys or public places in the city of South Salt Lake between the hours of eleven p.m. and five a.m. the following morning. 
D.  Eighteen-Year-Old Curfew. 
It is unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years to remain or loiter upon any of the sidewalks, streets, alleys or public places in the city of South Salt Lake between the hours of one a.m. and five a.m. 
E.  Parental Liability. 
It is unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having care and custody of any minor to knowingly allow or permit the minor to violate the provisions of this section. 
F.  Business Liability. 
No person owning or operating a business shall knowingly permit any minor to remain on the premises of such business in violation of the provisions of this section. This section, however, shall not apply to any minor who is lawfully employed on the premises. 
G.  Exceptions. 
The provision of this section shall not apply to any circumstances in which the minor is: 
1.  Accompanied by a parent, guardian or other responsible adult having care and custody of such minor; 
2.  Engaged in a legitimate trade, employment or occupation which requires the minor's presence in or on the sidewalks, streets, alleys or public places while working at or traveling to or from such employment; 
3.  Engaged on an emergency errand directed by the minor's parent, guardian or other responsible person having care and custody; 
4.  In a motor vehicle engaged in normal interstate travel beginning in, traveling through or ending in the city of South Salt Lake; 
5.  Attending or engaged in traveling between the minor's home or place of residence and a place where any religious, municipal, social, entertainment, sporting, political, library or school function is occurring; or 
6.  Within the immediate vicinity of the minor's place of residence. 
H.  Enforcement. 
1.  Any minor who is in violation of the provisions of this section is subject to arrest and citation. 
2.  Upon arrest, the minor shall be returned to the custody of the parent, guardian or other person charged with the care and custody of the minor. 
3.  It is unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person charged with the care and custody of a minor who is in violation of this section to knowingly refuse to appear and take custody of said minor within a reasonable time after being ordered to do so by a peace officer. 
(Amended during 1994 codification; Ord. 259 § 2, 1993)  
Chapter 9.24 - CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL IN PUBLIC PLACES 
Sections: 
 
9.24.010 - Definitions. 
"Alcoholic Beverage" shall have the same meaning as "beer" and "liquor" as defined by Title 32B, Chapter 1, Section 102, Utah Code Annotated, as amended, or its successor. 
"Open Bottle, Can, or Other Receptacle" means a container having within it an Alcoholic Beverage, which container has been opened, its seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially consumed. 
"Public Place" means: 
1.  Any park, playground, street, right-of-way, sidewalk, alley, publicly owned property, or state or county road within the City limits of South Salt Lake and which abuts upon: 
a.  Any county or City property, or 
b.  Any business required to have a license under this Code, except those businesses identified in a license issued by the City as authorizing the possession or consumption of alcohol, when there is conformance with the applicable license or permit restrictions or apartment houses as defined and licensed in accord with Title 5 of this Code; 
2.  Boarded or abandoned commercial buildings; 
3.  Vacant lots in areas zoned for commercial or manufacturing uses; or 
4.  Any publicly owned building or publicly owned real property. 
(Ord. 97-9 § 1 (part); Ord. 96-5 § 1 (part): prior code § 8B-3-8 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § I, 1-8-2020)  
9.24.020 - Possession and Consumption in a Public Place. 
A.  Alcoholic Beverages are prohibited in all parks and playgrounds in the City of South Salt Lake. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to consume, or have in his possession any Open Bottle, Can, or Other Receptacle containing an Alcoholic Beverage within any Public Place in the City. 
C.  Possession or consumption of an Alcoholic Beverage in a Public Place is not an offense under this Chapter if done in conjunction with a City-sponsored event when the appropriate City Special Event Permit and City single event alcoholic beverage license have been issued and all other applicable laws are complied with. 
(Ord. 97-9 § 1 (part); Ord. 96-5 § 1 (part): prior code § 8B-3-8 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § I, 1-8-2020)  
9.24.030 - Offense—Misdemeanor. 
An offense under this Chapter is a Class C misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 97-9 § 1 (part); Ord. 96-5 § 1 (part): prior code § 8B-3-8 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § I, 1-8-2020)  
Chapter 9.28 - CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES 
Sections: 
 
9.28.010 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter: 
"Commencement of prosecution" means an arrest, issuance of a complaint, or indictment, whichever occurs first. 
"Controlled substance precursor" means any substance or material defined as a controlled substance precursor by Utah Code Ann. 58-37c-3(2) or its successor. 
"Controlled substances" means a drug, substance or immediate precursor as defined by Utah Code Ann. 58-37-2(1)(e) or its successor. 
"Instrument" means any device, object, tool or equipment, including, but not limited to, cellular telephones, pagers, or address books, which are found by the trier of fact to be used in the distribution of controlled substances. 
"Record" means any written or electronic listing, accounting, data storage, or assembly of information, including, but not limited to, telephone numbers, addresses, names or accounts, which are found by the trier of fact to be used in the distribution of controlled substances. 
(Ord. 97-17 § 1 (part))  
9.28.020 - Unlawful possession of instrument, record or money. 
It is unlawful for any person to possess any instrument, record, money or other representation of value used in advancing or facilitating the commission of any offense under circumstances manifesting an intent to use, or knowledge that some person intends to use, the same for the distribution of controlled substances, or in commission of any act prohibited by the Utah Controlled Substances Act, Utah Code Ann. Section 58-37-8, or its successor. 
(Ord. 97-17 § 1 (part))  
9.28.030 - Determination of prohibited instruments, records or money. 
In determining whether an object is an instrument, record, money or representation of value used in the distribution of controlled substances, the trier of fact should consider the totality of the circumstances and evidence, as well as: 
A.  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use; 
B.  Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or anyone in control of the object, under any state or federal law relating to a controlled substance; 
C.  The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of the Utah Controlled Substance Act; 
D.  The proximity of the object to a controlled substance; 
E.  The existence of any residue of a controlled substance on the object; 
F.  Instructions or descriptive materials, whether oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use; 
G.  Telephone numbers, addresses, or any otherwise relevant data written on, contained in, or otherwise accompanying the object; 
H.  The manner in which the object is used; 
I.  The existence and scope of legitimate uses of the object in the community; and 
J.  Expert testimony concerning its use. 
(Ord. 97-17 § 1 (part))  
9.28.040 - Penalty. 
Violation of this chapter is a Class B misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 97-17 § 1 (part))  
9.28.050 - Seizure, sale and disposition of instruments, records and money. 
A.  At the commencement of any prosecution for a violation of this chapter, any instrument, record, money or representation of value reasonably identifiable as having been used or intended for use in a violation of this chapter may be seized and shall be held pending the disposition of the proceedings. At the conclusion of the proceedings, any person who is found guilty of a violation of this chapter shall forfeit any instruments, records, money or other object held by the court. If the individual is found not guilty, or the instrument, record or money is found not to be related to a violation of this chapter, the property shall be returned to its lawful owner. 
B.  All sums forfeited under this section shall be paid into the treasury of this city. 
C.  All other items of value forfeited under this chapter may be sold for the best price obtainable. The proceeds from the sale shall be paid into the treasury of this city. 
(Ord. 97-17 § 1 (part))  
Title 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Chapters: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, adopted Apr. 3, 2019, repealed the former Tit. 10, Chs. 10.04, 10.08, 10.10, 10.12, 10.12, 10.18, and enacted a new Tit. 10 as set out herein. The former Tit. 10 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table and Disposition List for complete derivation. 
 
Chapter 10.01 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
10.01.010 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this title, the following terms are defined: 
"Driveway" means any path used primarily for vehicles, leading from a street or road to a garage or house. 
"Enforcement official" has the same definition as that in Section 8.14.100 of this code. 
"Impound" means the towing and/or storing of a vehicle by a wrecker service as authorized by the city, or other lawful transport of a vehicle by the police department for temporary storage. 
"Impoundment charges" includes costs for both towing and storing of the inoperable vehicle, and administrative impound fees. 
"Inoperable vehicle" means a vehicle to which any of the following apply: 
1.  For a period of at least thirty (30) consecutive days: 
a.  The engine, wheels, tires, or other parts are removed; 
b.  The engine, wheels, tires or other parts have been altered, damaged or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor power; or 
c.  The vehicle has one or more flat tires, has one or more missing windshield or window, or has one or more windshield or window broken to the extent that visibility is limited so as to make driving the vehicle unsafe; 
2.  The vehicle is currently incapable of being registered, and for a period of one year either registration has not been obtained by the owner, or registration has been expired for longer than one year; or 
3.  The vehicle is a junked, wrecked, or salvaged vehicle. 
"Large vehicle" means a motor vehicle or other equipment that exceeds thirty-five (35) feet in total length or has more than nine wheels which touch the ground or exceeds a gross vehicle weight of thirty thousand (30,000) pounds. 
"Owner" means the registered owner or owners of a vehicle as recorded with the Utah Department of Motor Vehicles or a similar agency outside the state of Utah. Where written notice is required under this chapter, notice shall be given to each registered owner. 
"Public property" means any real property owned or managed by any governmental entity within the municipal limits of the city, such as highways, alleys, rights-of-way, and streets, or any property open to the public for use. 
"Recreational vehicle" means a vehicular unit primarily designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation use, which is either self-propelled or is mounted on or pulled by another vehicle. 
"Residential street, highway or road" means all roads or portions of roads within residential zoning districts but shall not include the following: 
1.  300 East and 500 East north of 2700 South; 
2.  West Temple; 
3.  1100 West; 
4.  2100 South; 
5.  2700 South; 
6.  3300 South; 
7.  400 East between 2100 South and Haven Avenue; 
8.  Wentworth Avenue between 400 East and 500 East; and 
9.  I-80; 
10.  3900 South. 
"Trailer" means any object designed to be towed or pulled behind a vehicle, and designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners, or slides. "Trailer" includes semi-trailers. 
"Vehicle" means any device, in, upon, or by which any person or property may be transported or drawn upon a street or highway, propelled by a power other than human power, and designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides. "Vehicle" includes, without limitation, automobiles, trucks, recreational vehicles, buses, motorcycles, tractors, all-terrain vehicles and snowmobiles. "Vehicle" includes any of the above devices regardless of its source of power, including but not limited to, electric, gas or fuel-powered engines. 
"Vehicle parts" means any component of a vehicle, including a vehicle frame, or any component which would normally be affixed, glued, or otherwise attached to or a part of a vehicle or its frame. It also includes pieces of any such component. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 4-3-2019)  
Chapter 10.02 - PARKING AND TRAVEL REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
10.02.010 - Parking restrictions—Time limitations. 
A.  All Night Parking Prohibited. No person shall park a vehicle on any street for a period longer than one hour between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. of any night when removal of snow from the streets may be necessary. The fact that snow fell during such hours shall be prima facie evidence of the need for its removal. 
B.  Parking Limited to Seventy-two Consecutive Hours. No person shall park a vehicle upon any street or alley for more than seventy-two (72) consecutive hours except as stated below. 
1.  Recreational Vehicles may be parked up to two hundred forty (240) consecutive hours if they meet the conditions outlined in 10.02.030 and 10.02.040. 
C.  Parking Time Limited on Streets. 
1.  When appropriate signs or traffic markings are erected and put in place by proper authority, no person shall park a vehicle or permit said vehicle to remain parked for a period longer than specified. 
2.  No person shall park a vehicle or permit said vehicle to remain parked in front of or within ten feet of a mailbox between the hours of seven a.m. and seven p.m. on Mondays through Saturdays. 
D.  Whenever any vehicle shall have been parked in violation of any ordinance prohibiting or restricting parking, the person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be per se responsible for such violation and subject to the penalty therefor. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 4-3-2019; Ord. No. 2019-17, § I, 12-4-2019)  
10.02.020 - Restricted travel for large vehicles. 
A.  No large vehicle or similar apparatus may travel on any residential street, highway or road within the corporate limits of the city of South Salt Lake. 
B.  The prohibition contained in 10.02.020(A) shall not apply to any of the following: 
1.  Commercial vehicles making pickups or delivery of goods, wares or merchandise, or while providing services to a residence, including but not limited to maintenance, construction, or repair services. 
2.  Construction vehicles for an active construction site in conformance with city approved building permit. 
3.  Emergency or city-owned vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 4-3-2019)  
10.02.030 - Parking for recreational vehicles. 
A.  No person shall park a recreational vehicle on any street, highway, or road within the corporate limits of the City of South Salt Lake except as provided in this chapter. 
B.  The prohibition contained in 10.02.030(A) shall not apply to any of the following: 
1.  Recreational vehicles left standing as a result of a mechanical breakdown so as to allow the performance of emergency repairs on the vehicle for a period not to exceed twelve (12) hours; and 
2.  Recreational vehicles with a validly displayed recreational vehicle parking permit. 
C.  No person shall run electrical cords, extension cords, hoses, cables, or other items across, above or on the park strip or sidewalk from a residential or commercial property to a recreational vehicle. 
D.  Any enforcement official may move or cause to be moved and impounded a recreational vehicle found to be in violation of this chapter, at the expense of the owner 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 4-3-2019)  
10.02.040 - Parking and travel permits. 
A.  To park a recreational vehicle on a street, highway, or road within the corporate limits of the City of South Salt Lake, said vehicle must obtain a recreational vehicle parking permit through the South Salt Lake Police Department. All permits must be prominently displayed on the lower portion of the front windshield on the driver's side so that it is clearly visible from the exterior of the vehicle. 
B.  Application for a recreational vehicle parking permit shall be made to the chief of police or his designee on a form provided by the police department. Incomplete applications will not be accepted or considered. Proof of a valid driver's license, registration, and insurance must be provided prior to issuance of a recreational vehicle parking permit. The applicant must sign the application under penalty of perjury. 
C.  To be eligible to apply for a recreational vehicle parking permit the applicant must be a bona fide city property owner or tenant or be a guest of a bona fide city property owner or tenant. 
D.  Permits granted shall not exceed a period of ten consecutive days. No permit shall be granted to an applicant or for a recreational vehicle if that applicant or recreational vehicle has received a permit in the last thirty (30) days. 
E.  Recreational vehicle parking permits are non-transferable. 
F.  A recreational vehicle parking permit does not relieve any person from the obligation to comply with federal, state, or local laws. Violations of state, federal, or local laws will deem the recreational vehicle permit void. 
G.  Recreational vehicle parking permits are subject to a fee as set forth in the consolidated fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 4-3-2019)  
Chapter 10.03 - INOPERABLE VEHICLES 
Sections: 
 
10.03.010 - Purpose. 
Sections 10.03.010 et seq. are intended to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the people of the city by preventing inoperable vehicles from littering property and creating health hazards. They are also intended to protect and improve the integrity and aesthetic qualities in the city by preventing the use of private and public property as a disposal or storage area for inoperable vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 4-3-2019)  
10.03.020 - Storage of inoperable vehicles, scrap metal and vehicle parts prohibited—Exceptions. 
A.  Inoperable vehicles, scrap metal and vehicle parts which remain on property and premises are unsightly and deleterious objects. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for a person to cause or permit any inoperable vehicle to remain on property or premises within the corporate limits of the City of South Salt Lake unless in connection with a licensed and lawfully situated business, or as otherwise excepted or permitted by the provisions of this section. 
C.  Scrap metal and vehicle parts: 
1.  It shall be unlawful for a person to cause or permit any scrap metal or vehicle parts to remain on any property or premises within the city for more than seven days, unless in connection with a licensed and lawfully situated business, or as otherwise excepted or permitted by the provisions of this section. 
2.  It is not a defense that different parts or scrap are present than the parts which were observed seven days previous to the date of citation. 
3.  The presence of vehicle parts or scrap metal on both the first and seventh day of a period is prima facie evidence of the violation. 
4.  The removal of vehicle parts or scrap metal for a period of less than four consecutive days during the seven-day period is not a defense to a violation of this section. 
D.  It shall be unlawful to leave an inoperable vehicle, trailer, or any part thereof, on any public property or on any private property, without the property owner's, tenant's, or occupant's consent. 
E.  Proof that the vehicle's odometer shows movement of no more than two-tenths of one mile during any specified period of time shall be prima facie evidence of lack of movement, but lack of movement may also be established by other evidence. 
F.  Inoperable vehicles or vehicle parts may be kept within an enclosed accessory structure, such as a garage or barn, provided that such building does not impose a threat to life safety or a nuisance or health hazard, and complies with all municipal and state ordinances, building codes, and zoning codes at the time of the building's original construction. Carports are not considered "enclosed" for the purpose of this chapter. 
G.  Notwithstanding any other provision, it shall be permissible for any person to keep one inoperable vehicle on his or her property, so long as: (1) the vehicle is kept behind at least a four-foot opaque fence or structure which has the effect of blocking the view of the vehicles from public or private property; (2) the vehicle is covered during periods of rain or snowfall such that precipitation does not enter the vehicle's interior; and (3) the vehicle's placement does not constitute a health or environmental hazard. Vehicles stored pursuant to this subsection must be parked on a hard surface, as required by Title 17 of this code. 
H.  Notwithstanding subsection G of this section, no inoperable vehicles shall be permitted to be kept in apartment complex or condominium parking lots unless the owner meets the requirements of subsection F of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 4-3-2019)  
Chapter 10.04 - ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 
 
10.04.010 - Enforcement—Authority to remove—Administrative impound fees. 
(A)  Enforcement officials have discretion to enforce the provisions of this Title under the authority of the code enforcement program, Section 8.14.010 et seq. of this code. 
(B)  An order of abatement entered by a court or administrative law judge relating to an inoperable vehicle shall require the impounding of any inoperable vehicle or trailer found in violation of this chapter, and such an order shall require the owner to pay impoundment charges, regardless of whether the owner retrieves his or her vehicle from impound. For orders relating to the abatement of vehicle parts, the administrative law judge shall require the payment of all costs of abatement The order shall assess fees equal to the city's actual costs, plus an administrative nuisance abatement fee in the amount established in the consolidated fee schedule. 
(C)  Vehicles ordered removed shall be towed and impounded according to procedures established under state law. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 4-3-2019)  
Chapter 10.05 - MISCELLANEOUS RULES 
Sections: 
 
10.05.010 - Avoiding designated intersections. 
A.  Avoiding Intersection or Highway. It is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to avoid designated intersections or highways, or the traffic regulations set forth herein, by cutting through any service station lot, parking lot, or other public or private lot. 
B.  Violation and Penalty. Any person who violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as defined in state law for such misdemeanors. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 4-3-2019)  
10.05.020 - Vehicle trespass. 
A.  The owner or lessee of commercial property that invites the public to park or drive motor vehicles upon the property during business hours may close the property to the public during non-business hours by posting on the property a sign, clearly visible, stating the time(s) the public is prohibited to park or drive a motor vehicle upon it. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or drive a motor vehicle upon a property that has been posted closed to the public at any time when the property is so closed. 
B.  The owner or lessee of commercial property may restrict access to the property during business hours by posting a sign, clearly visible, limiting access to patrons of the business. The owner or lessee may revoke a patron's permission to be on the property. 
C.  It shall be a defense that: (1) the owner or lessee of the property has granted express permission to the person to park or drive upon the property; (2) the person is operating a police or other emergency vehicle; or (3) the vehicle being operated or parked upon the property is devoted to commercial or industrial purposes in connection with the property and permission for such operation is impliedly or expressly given by the property owner. 
D.  Vehicle trespass is a strict liability offense. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 4-3-2019)  
Chapter 10.06 - NEGLIGENT DRIVING 
Sections: 
 
10.06.010 - Negligent collision. 
It is unlawful to operate a vehicle with such lack of due care and in such negligent manner as to cause the same to collide with any vehicle, person or object.  
Chapter 10.07 - STREET USE RESTRICTIONS 
Sections: 
 
10.07.010 - Restricted parking for large vehicles. 
On all streets in the city, parking of large vehicles shall not be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 4-3-2019)  
10.07.020 - Restricted parking for trailers. 
On all streets in the city, no parking shall be allowed at any time for any trailer not attached to a licensed, registered, insured, and operable vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 4-3-2019)  
10.07.020 - Violations and penalties. 
Unless otherwise prescribed, Moving violations shall be a Class C misdemeanor and parking violations shall be an infraction. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 4-3-2019)  
10.07.030 - Low profile motorized vehicles. 
A.  Definitions. For purposes of this section: 
1.  "Low profile motorized vehicle" shall mean any motorized vehicle that: 
a.  Is not regulated by the state or by any other city code provision; 
b.  Is not otherwise permitted upon the highways or sidewalks; and, 
c.  Is less than thirty-six (36) inches in height when in its normal operating position, notwithstanding any flag, antenna, or other device attached, or modifications made thereto. This definition includes, but is not limited to, "pocket bikes" or miniature motorcycles, and "go-carts." 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to operate a low profile motorized vehicle upon any public property within the city, including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, public parking lots, or parks. It is unlawful for an owner, parent or guardian to allow a minor to operate such a vehicle on public property within the city. 
C.  Penalty. A violation of this section is a Class C misdemeanor and is punishable as such. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 4-3-2019)  
Chapter 10.08 - IDLING OF VEHICLES 
Sections: 
 
10.08.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to educate owners and operators of vehicles of the adverse effects of vehicle idling, to protect the public health and improve the environment by reducing emissions while conserving fuel, and to enforce the provisions of this chapter after the appropriate notification has been provided to vehicle owners and operators. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 4-3-2019)  
10.08.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, these definitions shall apply: 
"Driver" means any person who drives, operates, or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
"Idle" means the operation of a vehicle engine while the vehicle is stationary or not in the act of performing work or its normal function. 
"Owner" means the person or persons listed on the vehicle's registration. 
"Vehicle" means any self-propelled vehicle that is required to be registered and have a license plate by the Utah department of motor vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 4-3-2019)  
10.08.030 - Property subject to this chapter; enforcement. 
A.  This chapter shall be enforceable on all public property and on private property that is open to the general public, unless the private property owner: 
1.  Has a private business that has a drive-through service as a component of the private property owner's business operations, and posts a sign provided by or acceptable to the city informing its customers and the public of the city's time limit for idling vehicle engines; or 
2.  Adopts an idle reduction education policy approved by the city. 
B.  Law enforcement personnel shall exercise reasonable caution and utilize customary safety procedures in their enforcement of this chapter. 
C.  A citation may be issued by any official designated by the city. 
D.  Citations and warnings shall be given to the vehicle's driver or owner, or if the vehicle is left unattended, left in a prominent place on the vehicle such as the window or windshield. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 4-3-2019)  
10.08.040 - Idling restriction within city limits. 
No driver, while operating a vehicle within city limits, nor any vehicle owner, who is allowing another to operate a vehicle, shall cause or permit a vehicle's engine to idle for more than two minutes, except in the following circumstances: 
A.  Idling while stopped: 
1.  At the direction of an official traffic control device or traffic control signal; or 
2.  At the direction of a peace officer or emergency responder; 
B.  Idling as needed to operate heaters or air conditioners where the temperature is below thirty-two (32) degrees Fahrenheit or above ninety (90) degrees Fahrenheit, as measured at the Salt Lake City Airport and determined by the National Weather Service, for the health or safety of a driver or passenger, including service animals; 
C.  Idling for the minimum amount of time required for the operation of defrosters or other equipment to clear the windshield and windows to provide unobstructed views and ensure visibility while driving; 
D.  Idling as needed for emergency vehicles to operate equipment; 
E.  Idling as needed to ascertain that a vehicle is in safe operating condition and equipped as required by all provisions of law, and that all equipment is in good working order, either as part of the daily vehicle inspection, or as otherwise needed; 
F.  Idling as needed for testing, servicing, repairing, installation, maintenance or diagnostic purposes; 
G.  Idling for the period recommended by the manufacturer to warm up or cool down a turbocharged heavy duty vehicle; 
H.  Idling as needed to operate auxiliary equipment for which the vehicle was primarily designed or equipped, other than transporting goods, such as: operating a transportation refrigeration unit (TRU), lift, crane, pump, drill, hoist, ready mixed equipment, except a heater or air conditioner; 
I.  Idling as needed to operate a lift or other piece of equipment designed to ensure safe loading and uploading of goods or people; 
J.  Idling to recharge a battery or other energy storage unit of a hybrid electric vehicle; 
K.  Idling as needed for vehicles that house K-9 or other service animals; or 
L.  Idling by on duty police officers as necessary for the performance of their official duties. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 4-3-2019)  
10.08.050 - Penalties. 
Violation of this chapter is a civil offense and shall be penalized as follows: 
1.  First offense: A warning but no fine. 
2.  Subsequent offenses: A civil fine in an amount determined by the consolidated fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2019-04, § I, 4-3-2019)  
Title 12 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES 
Chapters: 
Chapters: 
Chapters: 
Chapters: 
Chapters: 
Chapters: 
Chapters:  
Division I. - Sidewalks  
Chapter 12.04 - SIDEWALK ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 
 
12.04.010 - Supervision—City engineering department. 
All sidewalks on public property shall be constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications of the city engineering department, which work shall be inspected and approved by the city engineering department. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 10-1-1)  
12.04.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
If any person, firm or corporation violates any of the provisions of this title, either by doing any act prohibited or by failing to do any act required to be done, the same shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and may be fined two hundred ninety-nine dollars ($299.00) or sentenced to ninety (90) days in jail. Each day that any act continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Prior code § 10-1-30)  
Chapter 12.08 - SIDEWALK USE REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
12.08.010 - Projection of gates and doors. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning or having the control or management of any alley, road or passageway to construct or hang gates or doors to said alley, road or passageway so that the gates or doors thereto when open shall project outwardly over and upon the sidewalk beyond the property line. 
(Prior code § 10-1-19)  
12.08.040 - Obstruction of sidewalks. 
It is unlawful for any person owning, occupying or having control of any premises, to place or permit upon the sidewalk or protruding over the half of the street next to such premises: 
A.  Any broken ware, glass, filth, rubbish, refuse matter, ice, water, mud, garbage, ashes, tin cans or any other like substances; 
B.  Any wagons, lumber, wood, boxes, fencing, building material, dead trees, tree stumps, merchandise, or other thing which shall obstruct such public street or sidewalk or any part thereof, or the free use and enjoyment thereof, or the free passage over and upon the same, or any part thereof, without the permission of the city engineering department. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 10-1-22)  
12.08.050 - Discharge of water on sidewalks. 
It is unlawful for any person owning, occupying or having control of any premises to suffer or permit water from the roof or eaves of any house, building or other structure, or from any other source under the control of such person to be discharged and spread upon the surface of any sidewalk. 
(Prior code § 10-1-23)  
12.08.060 - Receiving goods. 
It is unlawful for any person to place or keep, or suffer to be placed or kept upon any sidewalk, any goods, wares or merchandise which he may be receiving or delivering, without leaving a passageway clear upon such sidewalk; and it is unlawful for any person receiving or delivering such goods, wares or merchandise to suffer the same to be or remain on such sidewalk for a longer period than one hour. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 10-1-24)  
12.08.070 - Driving, riding or parking on sidewalks. 
It is unlawful for any person to drive or park a self-propelled vehicle or ride a bicycle; or lead, drive or ride any animal upon any sidewalk, except at established crossings. 
(Prior code § 10-1-25)  
12.08.080 - Games on sidewalks. 
It is unlawful for any person to obstruct any sidewalk or street by playing games thereon, such as the game of ball, quoits, marbles, jumping, rolling of hoops, flying of kites, coasting or to annoy or obstruct the free travel of any foot passenger, team or vehicle. 
(Prior code § 10-1-26)  
12.08.090 - Snow removal. 
It is unlawful for the owner, occupant, lessor or agent of any property to fail to remove or cause to be removed from such paved sidewalk all hail, snow or sleet falling thereon within a reasonable time after such snow, hail or sleet has fallen; in any event to be removed not later than the same day in which said snow, sleet or hail has fallen; provided, in case the said snow, sleet, hail has fallen after the hours of six p.m., the same may be removed the following day by ten a.m. 
(Prior code § 10-1-27)  
12.08.100 - Clogging gutter unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person removing snow from a sidewalk, as provided in Section 12.08.090, or for any person by any means whatsoever, to deposit snow, dirt or any other material in a gutter so as to clog the same, or prevent the free flow of water therein. 
(Prior code § 10-1-28)  
12.08.110 - Sweeping required. 
It is unlawful for the owners or occupants of places of business within the city of South Salt Lake to fail to cause the sidewalks abutting thereon to be swept or cleaned each morning before the hour of nine a.m. 
(Prior code § 10-1-29)  
Chapter 12.12 - SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION 
Sections: 
 
12.12.010 - Individual construction—Requirements. 
It is unlawful for any person, either as owner, agent, servant, contractor or employee, to construct any sidewalk in the city of South Salt Lake unless such sidewalk be constructed to lines and grades as given and established by the city engineering department or an authorized representative, unless special permission to deviate from such lines and grades is first obtained from the mayor or designee. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 10-1-2)  
12.12.020 - Permits. 
It is unlawful for any person, either as owner, agent, servant, contractor or employee, to construct any permanent sidewalk on public property in the city of South Salt Lake without first having obtained from the appropriate public works personnel a permit to do so. The acceptance of such permit shall be deemed as an agreement upon the part of such person to construct said sidewalk in accordance with the specifications furnished by the city as to the character and quality of the work; and if the sidewalk be constructed of cement, the character and quality of the cement, the constituent parts of the mixture and the thickness of the walk. It is unlawful to construct any such sidewalk in violation of the specifications given by the appropriate public works personnel. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 10-1-3)  
12.12.030 - Permit required for driveways. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to construct any driveway across a sidewalk space or cut or change the construction of sidewalk, curb or gutter, for the purpose of making a driveway, without first making written application and obtaining from the appropriate public works personnel a permit to do so. The acceptance of such permit shall be deemed an agreement on the part of such person to construct said driveway in accordance with specifications furnished by the city. No person shall be granted by any authorized city employee for any driveway exceeding thirty (30) feet in width. No driveway, including sidewalk, shall be less than six inches thick. 
B.  Where more than one driveway is required for any one parcel of land, a sidewalk island of at least ten feet shall be provided between driveways, unless special permission is granted otherwise, and in no case shall a permit be granted for a driveway which will be within twelve (12) feet from any street corner measured along the curb from the property line produced, to the nearest side of the driveway. When in the opinion of the appropriate public works personnel it would constitute a traffic hazard or where a driveway conflicts with any permanent improvement, the appropriate public works personnel may refuse to issue a permit. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 10-1-8)  
12.12.040 - Application and issuance of permits. 
Application for permit shall be in writing to be filed with the city recorder who shall be authorized to issue a permit after approval of the appropriate public works personnel upon compliance with the provisions set forth in this chapter. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 10-1-4)  
12.12.050 - Engineering fees. 
The city engineering department will be allowed to charge and demand in advance for the benefit of the city the following fees from the owners of property, ordering work to be done by the city engineering department or against whom work done in said office is properly chargeable: 
A.  The charges for establishing sidewalk grades and/or curb and gutter grades for frontage in areas which do not have curb and gutter and in areas where curb and gutter exists and the grades are satisfactory are to be set by the city engineering department. The preliminary survey and design will be paid for by the city. 
B.  For establishing all other grades not specifically provided for by this section an amount estimated to cover the actual cost; any excess over actual cost shall be refunded to the party ordering the survey after the work has been done, and the actual cost ascertained. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 10-1-6)  
12.12.060 - Inspection fees. 
A.  Where property owners construct sidewalks, driveway and curb and gutters at their own expense, in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the cost of indicating grades and lines and inspection shall be paid for by the property owner before issuance of the required permit. 
B.  The charges for inspection of sidewalks and/or curb and gutters shall be as follows: 
1.  The cost of preliminary survey and design shall be borne by the city to establish grade, flow and uniformity. The final stake out and inspection of the curb and gutter will be charged to the property owner. The fee for such charge shall be determined by the city engineering department. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; Ord. 23 § 1, 1977; prior code § 10-1-5)  
12.12.070 - Bringing streets to grade. 
Whenever any portion of any street, avenue, alley, sidewalk or part thereof shall not conform to the established grade as shown by the profiles on file in the office of the city recorder, and it is proposed to pave, repair or macadamize any of the above or part thereof, one half of the expense of bringing such streets, avenues, alleys, sidewalks or part thereof to the established grade shall be paid out of the general fund of the city. 
(Prior code § 10-1-7)  
Chapter 12.16 - SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE REPAIR AND CONSTRUCTION 
Sections: 
 
12.16.010 - Definitions. 
"Deteriorated sidewalk" means any sidewalk that is heaved, cracked, spalled or broken as described in this section. The following conditions constitute deteriorated sidewalk: 
1.  Vertical separations equal to three-fourths inch (¾?) or more; 
2.  Horizontal separations equal to three-fourths inch (¾?) or more; 
3.  Holes or depressions equal to three-fourths inch (¾?) or more; 
4.  Spalling over fifty (50) percent of a single square or panel of sidewalk with one or more depressions equal to one-half inch (½?) or more; 
5.  A single square or panel of sidewalk in such a manner that no part of it has a piece greater than one square foot, or is cracked in such a manner that it constitutes danger or potential danger to the public; 
6.  A sidewalk with any part of it missing to the full depth; 
7.  A deviation from the staked or constructed grade equal to three-fourths inch (¾?) or more; 
8.  A sidewalk covered in whole or in part with weeds or other plants, tree branches, garbage, junk, rubbish, debris, solid waste, bird or animal droppings or any nuisances, obstructions or hazards that make or tend to make pedestrian travel either dangerous or impractical. 
"Extraordinary repairs" means sidewalk construction the cost of which exceeds ten (10) percent but is less than or equal to fifty (50) percent of the cost of laying a new concrete sidewalk over the same frontage in order to replace deteriorated sidewalk. 
"Front or frontage" means the portion of a property which is adjacent to or traversed by a public way. For purposes of this chapter, each front or frontage of a corner lot is a separate frontage. 
"New work" means sidewalk construction the cost of which exceeds fifty (50) percent of the cost of laying a new concrete sidewalk over the same frontage either to replace deteriorated sidewalk or to construct sidewalk at a location where none has existed before. 
"Ordinary repairs" means sidewalk construction the cost of which is less than or equal to ten (10) percent of the cost of laying a new concrete sidewalk over the same frontage in order to replace deteriorated sidewalk. 
"SID" means "Special Improvement District," as defined by applicable state law. 
"Spalling" consists of breakup, crumbling, deterioration, etc. upon the surface of a sidewalk which creates an uneven surface and depression. 
(Ord. 2005-03 (part): Ord. 2003-01(part))  
12.16.020 - Nuisance. 
Deteriorated sidewalk and sidewalk covered in whole or in part with weeds or other plants, tree branches, garbage, junk, rubbish, debris, solid waste, bird or animal droppings or any nuisances, obstructions or hazards that make or tend to make pedestrian travel either dangerous or impractical are declared a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 2005-03 (part): Ord. 2003-01(part))  
12.16.030 - Duty to maintain and repair sidewalk. 
A.  It shall be the duty of all persons to keep the sidewalks in front of the premises owned, occupied or controlled by them, as well as the land that lies between the back of the curb and the right-of-way on the side of the street on which their premises are located, in good repair, to repair any deteriorated sidewalk and to keep the public right-of-way free and clear of all weeds or other plants, tree branches, garbage, junk, rubbish, debris, solid waste, bird or animal droppings or any nuisances, obstructions or hazards that make or tend to make pedestrian travel either dangerous or impractical. 
B.  The person shall notify the public works department of any deteriorated sidewalk on the front of the premises; the person shall take such temporary steps as needed to protect the public from any dangerous condition until the condition is repaired; and the person shall correct the problem utilizing any of the options provided in this section. 
C.  Where deteriorated sidewalk is caused by a tree root or roots, the owner of the premises shall have the duty to repair the sidewalk, to remove the tree as provided in Section 12.52.060 or, if it can be safely done, and after consultation with the city's supervisor of trees, to cut the root. 
(Ord. 2005-03 (part); Ord. 2003-01(part))  
12.16.040 - Public works inspection. 
It is the duty of the public works department to receive and act upon reports made by owners or others of deteriorated sidewalks or other dangerous conditions by performing an inspection, notifying property owners of repair options and causing necessary abatement or repairs to be made. In addition, the public works department shall be responsible to conduct a regular inspection of the condition of sidewalks throughout the city and to cause all deteriorated sidewalks and other dangerous sidewalk conditions to be abated or repaired in accordance with this chapter subject to the availability of funds. 
(Ord. 2005-03 (part): Ord. 2003-01(part))  
12.16.050 - Notice of extraordinary repairs. 
When after inspection by the public works department, the public works director or designee determines that sidewalk requires extraordinary repairs, the property owner shall be notified that repairs are needed. The notice shall specify that the repairs have been determined to be extraordinary, as defined in this chapter, will set forth the owner's options to repair, in accordance with this chapter, and will provide the owner with an estimate of the costs of repair. The notice shall be served upon the owner of record as listed upon the tax records of Salt Lake County. Notice may be served by delivering the notice personally to the owner or by mailing the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(Ord. 2005-03 (part); Ord. 2003-01(part))  
12.16.060 - Extraordinary repairs, options and costs. 
After notice is given to the property owner as required in Section 12.16.050, repair of the deteriorated sidewalk at the front of the premises, constituting extraordinary repairs, shall be accomplished as follows: 
A.  If the property is an owner-occupied residence, the owner may employ a contractor or act as a contractor to make the required repair. The repair must be done according to city specifications, to the satisfaction of the city engineer. The owner shall first obtain a permit for the work. The work shall be completed within sixty (60) days of receiving notice from the city. Election by the owner to proceed under this subsection shall be voluntary and the repair costs shall not be deemed an assessment by the city. 
B.  If the adjacent property is a single-family residence, the city may agree with the owner in a contract approved by the city, to share the cost of repair with the owner by way of a formula in which the city provides the labor needed to make the repair and the owner pays only for the cost of all materials needed. This formula is equivalent to the resulting benefit to the property. The city may either perform the labor or hire a contractor to perform the labor. 
C.  When the property is a multiple-family dwelling, business or any use of property other than a single-family residence, the owner shall pay one hundred (100) percent of the cost of repair of the deteriorated sidewalk. This formula is equivalent to the resulting benefit to the property. At the option of the owner, the repair may be performed by a contractor hired by the owner or may be performed by the city. If done by a contractor, the work will be done to city specifications, to the satisfaction of the city engineer, after first obtaining the necessary permit and shall be completed within sixty (60) days of receiving notice from the city. If done by the city, payment for one hundred (100) percent of the work will be made before work commences. 
D.  The owner of the property, regardless of the use of the property, may give a written consent to have the property included in a special improvement district. 
E.  An owner's share of the costs of repair of deteriorated sidewalk shall be uniform and based upon the amount of the benefit conferred upon the property by the improvement. However, when the owner of a single-family residence has a combined family income at or below the levels established by the Department of Housing and Urban Development in its "Income Limits for Housing and Community Development, Section 8 Program for Salt Lake City and Ogden, Utah SMSA," as amended from time to time, the cost of the entire repair may be paid by the city, subject to the availability of funds budgeted by the city for this purpose. To participate in this option, the owner must make the proper application to the city 
F.  The owner shall notify the public works department of the option selected within ten calendar days of receipt of the notice of the need for extraordinary repairs. 
G.  This section shall not preclude payment being made by the city for repair of deteriorated sidewalk adjacent to the property of a single-family residence under special conditions, such as the city receiving a federal grant for repair or a low income abatement, as provided in subsection (D) of this section. Before making an agreement with a property owner or owners for the city to pay in excess of the cost of labor for the repair, the city shall, by executive order of the Mayor, first establish a policy concerning the percentage it will pay. 
(Ord. 2005-03 (part): Ord. 2003-01(part))  
12.16.070 - Refusal or failure to select a repair option—Creation of SID. 
If the owner fails or refuses to notify the public works director of a repair option, or if the owner gives a written consent to have the property included in an SID, the city may then create an SID for the purpose of making the required repair. The SID created may be combined with properties requiring new work or other kinds of improvements. After creation of an SID, in accordance with applicable state law, the city may perform the repair and levy an assessment on the property. The owner's portion of the total repair cost shall be equal to the benefit conferred upon the property by the improvement, consistent with the provisions of Section 12.16.060(B) and (C). The assessment shall be designated by the ordinance creating the SID and will be paid by the owner of the assessed property over a period of five years from the date of the ordinance. 
(Ord. 2005-03 (part): Ord. 2003-01(part))  
12.16.080 - Ordinary repairs. 
When after inspection by the public works department, the public works director or designee determines that the sidewalk on the frontage of a premises requires ordinary repairs, the director shall cause the repairs to be completed by the city at no cost to the owner. 
(Ord. 2005-03 (part); Ord. 2003-01(part))  
12.16.090 - New work. 
When after inspection by the public works department, the public works director determines that the sidewalk on the frontage of a premises requires new work, or that it is desirable to construct sidealk at a location where none currently exists, the city may then create an SID for the purpose of performing the new work. The SID created may be combined with properties requiring extraordinary repairs or other kinds of improvements. After creation of an SID, in accordance with applicable state law, the city may perform the new work and levy an assessment on the property. The value of the benefit conferred upon the property by the performance of "new work", regardless of the type of property, is equivalent to one hundred (100) percent of the cost of the new work. The city may assess one hundred (100) percent of the cost of the new work to the property owner, or the city, subject to the availability of funds, may subsidize all or a portion of the cost by provision of labor, the use of federal grants or funds or other available sources of funding. The amount of assessment shall be designated by the ordinance creating the SID and will be paid by the owner of the assessed property over the period of time established in the SID ordinance. When a property with more than one frontage requires new work, the benefit conferred upon that property is equivalent only to fifty (50) percent of the cost of the new work. 
(Ord. 2005-03 (part): Ord. 2003-01(part))  
Chapter 12.20 - FINANCE OF SIDEWALK, MAINTENANCE, CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR* 
Sections: 
 
12.20.010 - Creation of special improvement district (SID). 
The city council may take such steps as shall be necessary to create an SID under the following circumstances: 
A.  Two-thirds of the owners of real property abutting a city street in any contiguous area within the city petition the city council for the creation of an SID for the purpose of constructing sidewalk; 
B.  By the report of the director of public works, creation of an SID is necessary or desirable to finance the cost of extraordinary repairs to existing sidewalks in regard to any specific property or list of properties within the city; 
C.  By the report of the director of public works, creation of an SID is necessary or desirable to finance the cost of sidewalk construction constituting "new works" in regard to any specific property or list of properties within the city; or 
D.  Under any combination of the circumstances described in subsections (A)—(C) of this section. 
(Ord. 2005-04 (part))  
12.20.020 - SID procedures. 
In order to create an SID, the city council shall follow the procedures set forth in Utah Code Annotated Section 17A-3-301, et seq. as the same may from time to time be amended, in order to levy and collect an assessment for the cost of sidewalk construction. 
(Ord. 2005-04 (part))  
Division II. - Streets  
Chapter 12.24 - STREET USE REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
12.24.010 - Permit to use street. 
It is unlawful for any person to occupy or use any portion of a public street for the remodeling, painting, cleaning, erection or repair of any building abutting thereon, without first making application to and receiving from the city council a permit for the occupation or use for building purposes, of such portion of streets, and for such periods of time and under such limitations and restrictions as may be required by ordinance or by the public convenience; provided, that no permit shall be granted to occupy more than ten feet from the curb line, without special permission, and any such permit may be revoked by the city council at any time, when the holder thereof fails to comply with any rule or regulation under which it is granted, or when, in the opinion of the city council, the public good requires such revocation. No such permit shall be granted until the applicant therefor shall have given a bond in a sum to be determined by the city council at the time the permit is granted. Such bond shall run to the city of South Salt Lake and to any person injured by reason of the failure of the principal therein to comply with the provisions of this chapter; and shall be conditioned for the payment of all damages that may be adjudged against such principal or surety and shall save the city harmless from any and all claims resulting therefrom and any damage to or destruction of property arising in any manner out of the operations being performed under the permit. No part of a street other than that so allotted shall be used for depositing materials for work to be done or for receiving rubbish arising from such work, and all such rubbish shall be carried away by the person to whom the permit is granted, and in case of the neglect or refusal of such persons so to remove such rubbish, it shall be removed, at his expense, by the street superintendent. 
(Prior code § 12-2-1)  
12.24.020 - Fence around street required for building purposes. 
It is unlawful for any person to occupy any portion of any street while erecting or repairing a building, or making an excavation, or for any other purpose, even with the permit provided for in Section 12.24.010, unless he shall first build around the portion of the street to be occupied a tight, clean, board fence, at least six feet high, surrounded by a good substantial board walk at least four feet in width. All openings in the fence must be provided with gates opening inward. When the time designated in the permit has expired, the fence shall be at once removed and the sidewalk restored to the use of pedestrians and the street to traffic, and any damages which may have been caused to the sidewalk or street shall be restored to its original condition by the person to whom the permit was issued. 
(Prior code § 12-2-2)  
12.24.030 - Obstructions and encroachments. 
Except as authorized by the provisions of this code or other applicable local, state, or federal law, it is unlawful for any person to place, erect, leave, or cause to be left any encroachment or obstruction of any kind in the city streets, alleys, sidewalks, parking strips or crosswalks, and such may be removed by the city at the expense of the person responsible therefor. 
(Ord. 95-14 § 1: prior code § 12-2-3)  
12.24.040 - Moving houses and heavy equipment—Permit—Bond. 
It is unlawful for any person to move any house, building, tractor, equipment or circus or carnival equipment, or any other structure or foundation of a street, upon, over, across or along any public street, alley or highway in the city of South Salt Lake without first obtaining a permit from the street department so to do, which permit must be displayed to any police officer or street department inspector upon demand. Such permit shall be issued only on approval of a written application therefor. Such application shall designate the nature and location of such structure or equipment, the place to which the applicant intends to move the same, the time it is desired to move such equipment, and the public streets, sidewalks, alleys or highways upon, over, across or along which such structure or equipment is to be moved. An indemnity bond, to cover any damages whatsoever resulting from such moving, in a sum to be determined by the appropriate public works personnel at the time the permit is approved, must be filed before such permit becomes valid. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 12-2-4)  
12.24.050 - Sale of drugs on streets prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to sell, barter or offer for sale or to dispose of by public outcry or otherwise, any drug, medicine or other substance for the cure of any disease or ailment on any of the streets, alleys or highways within the limits of the city of South Salt Lake. 
(Prior code § 12-2-5)  
12.24.060 - Doing business on streets unlawful unless licensed. 
It is unlawful for any person to engage in or carry on any business, profession, trade, vocation or avocation on any street or sidewalk or in or from any automobile, vehicle, stand or structure located in or upon the streets or sidewalks of the city of South Salt Lake unless such business or occupation is specifically licensed to operate upon the streets or sidewalks. 
(Prior code § 12-2-6)  
12.24.070 - Soliciting patronage on streets prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to solicit patronage for any hotel, lodging house, apartment house, restaurant or cafe, or to solicit patronage for any purpose whatever in front of any regularly established place of business or in or upon any public street or alley or other public place in the city of South Salt Lake; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit any person duly licensed from soliciting such patronage at terminals of public transportation carriers in the manner provided by law. 
(Prior code § 12-2-7)  
12.24.080 - Licensed businesses prohibited from doing business in streets. 
It is unlawful for any licensed business to do business upon the streets of South Salt Lake or to display any merchandise on the streets or sidewalks within South Salt Lake or to display any merchandise being offered for sale in front of the business building of the licensee, unless the particular business is of such a nature that, in the opinion of the city building department, it would not be detrimental to the appearance or the health or welfare of the residents of South Salt Lake to permit an outside display contrary to the terms of this section. In no event, however, shall the licensees be permitted to use the property being a part of the state, city or county highway or included in, attached to, or owned by the city, county or state, which is adjacent to the city, county or state highways. The city building department may, in its discretion, for special occasions, make an exception to the above rule where it would seem fitting and proper to do so, provided that portable or fixed newspaper stands or racks may be permitted to occupy space within a business district at positions to be designated by the city building department for the sale of newspapers only. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 12-2-8)  
12.24.090 - Public display of merchandise. 
The display of merchandise outside of a store building in which it is kept during the evening, is strictly discouraged, and insofar as such display shall annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose or safety of three or more persons, or in any manner offend public decency, the same shall be illegal, prohibited and subject to prosecution as a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 12-2-9)  
12.24.100 - Littering of streets prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to throw, cast, put into, drop or permit to fall from a vehicle and remain in any street, gutter, sidewalk or public place any stones, gravel, sand, coal, dirt, manure, garbage, bottles, cans, leaves, lawn or hedge clippings or rubbish of any kind or any other substance which shall render such highway unsafe or unsightly or shall interfere with travel or drainage therefrom. 
(Prior code § 12-2-10)  
12.24.120 - Unnecessary noises prohibited—Sound trucks—Permit. 
It is unlawful for any person to make or cause to be made any loud noise or unnecessary noises for the purpose of business, amusement or otherwise; nor shall they, without permission from the mayor, operate any device or give any performance tending to the collection of persons on the streets or sidewalks of the city of South Salt Lake; nor shall any sound truck or other vehicle equipped for sound broadcasting operate and broadcast on the city streets without permission or license from the mayor. The mayor shall grant such permission only after considering the nature, content, time, place and circumstances surrounding such sounds or broadcast. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 12-2-12)  
12.24.130 - Surface waters—Disposal. 
It shall be the duty of all persons using water for irrigation or other purposes to conduct the surplus or wastewater into a public water ditch, and it is unlawful for any person to permit such water to flood the streets, sidewalks or private property to the damage thereof, or to run to unnecessary waste. 
(Prior code § 12-2-13)  
Chapter 12.28 - EXCAVATIONS 
Sections: 
 
12.28.010 - Excavations. 
It is unlawful for any person not in the employ of the city of South Salt Lake to make any excavation in any street, lane or alley, or remove any pavement or other materials forming any improvement thereon without a permit from the city of South Salt Lake. It is unlawful for any employee of the city of South Salt Lake to make any such excavations unless duly authorized by the city engineering department. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 12-1-4)  
12.28.020 - Bonds and permit fees for excavations. 
A.  No permits for street excavations shall be issued until written application therefor has been made and signed by the party making the excavation or by the party at whose instance it is to be made; nor until the applicant has filed with the city a bond of indemnity signed by sureties acceptable to the public works supervisor or city engineering department and in an amount to be determined by said public works supervisor or city engineering department at the time such permit is issued; and conditioned that the person making the excavation will erect and maintain about said excavation, and until the street is restored to its normal condition, sufficient guards or signals or barricades and/or lights, to give warning to approaching traffic, and will immediately upon the completion of said work, restore said street to the same condition in which it existed prior to said excavation, with ninety-five (95) percent compaction, and will remove rocks, dirt and rubbish from the street, and will save the city harmless from any and all claims, liabilities, demands or damages for any and all injuries to person or property arising in any manner out of or by reason of any such excavation. The repair and inspection of such excavations shall be made under the direction of the public works supervisor or city engineering department or his authorized representative and shall meet the requirements and specifications set forth by him. If any of the provisions of this chapter are violated, the public works supervisor or city engineering department may fill any such excavation or do anything else necessary or proper to repair said street at the expense of the person making the same. No permit shall remain valid for a longer period than ten days, unless by permission of the public works supervisor or city engineering department. 
B.  Fees and Charges. 
1.  For excavating in any public sidewalk, street, alleyway, thoroughfare or avenue, the permit fee and asphalt cutting fee are to be set by the city engineering department. 
2.  Resurfacing fees shall be set by the city engineering department. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 12-1-5)  
12.28.030 - Enclosure around excavation required. 
It is unlawful for any person by or for whom any excavation is made in a public street for any purpose, to fail to cause a barricade or other sufficient enclosure to be placed around such excavation, together with the dirt, gravel or other material thrown therefrom, and to maintain such enclosure during the whole time for which such excavation continues. Such barricade or enclosure shall have lighted lanterns or some other proper and sufficient lights attached thereto and kept burning from the beginning of twilight through the whole of every night during all the time such excavation exists. It is unlawful for any person maliciously or wantonly, and without legal cause, to extinguish, remove or diminish said lights or to tear down or remove any barricade or enclosure fixed in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(Prior code § 12-1-6)  
12.28.040 - Failure to restore street to normal condition. 
It is unlawful for any person having made an excavation in any street, whether under a permit or otherwise, to fail, neglect or refuse for a period of five days after notice from the public works supervisor or city engineering department, to restore said street to its normal condition. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 12-1-7)  
Division III. - Special Districts  
Chapter 12.32 - SPECIAL DISTRICTS 
Sections: 
 
12.32.010 - State statutes adopted. 
Title 17A of the Utah Code Annotated is adopted by reference as the governing law pertaining to special districts in the city of South Salt Lake. All future amendments and revisions to Title 17A are adopted as well. The city of South Salt Lake shall employ Title 17A as needed for all procedures and regulations of special districts within the city. 
(Ord. 96-19 § 2)  
Division IV. - Parks  
Chapter 12.38 - DESIGNATION OF PARKS 
Sections: 
 
12.38.010 - Definitions. 
Terms used in this title shall have the following meanings: 
"Park" shall mean real property owned by the city or other government entity and officially designated for public use and enjoyment for recreation purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, 9-2-2009)  
12.38.020 - Designation of parks. 
The following described city-owned properties are designated for public use and enjoyment for recreation purposes, subject to regulations and restrictions on use as contained in applicable rules and law: 
A.  Fitts Park. 
B.  Lion's Park. 
C.  Jordan River Parkway. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, 9-2-2009)  
Chapter 12.40 - PARK USE REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
12.40.010 - Parks—Time of closing. 
All city parks and playgrounds shall be closed to the public between the hours of eleven p.m. and six a.m. of the following morning. No person or persons shall be permitted in said parks during said hours. 
(Ord. 99 § 1 (part), 1982: prior code § 17-2-1) 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, 4-4-2013)  
12.40.020 - Reservations. 
The pavilions may be reserved by applying at City Hall. Reservations shall be taken on a first-come, first-served basis. A reasonable fee and cleaning deposit may be charged in an amount to be determined by the city council. 
(Ord. 99 § 1 (part), 1982: prior code § 17-2-2)  
Chapter 12.44 - PROHIBITED CONDUCT IN PARKS* 
Sections: 
 
12.44.030 - Littering. 
No person shall throw or deposit any bottles, tin or tin cans, broken glass, nails, tacks, crockery, wire, paper, clothes, scrap or sheet iron, boxes, boards, lumber or stone or any rubbish or garbage. 
(Ord. 2004-17 (part))  
12.44.040 - Vehicles prohibited. 
No person shall ride, drive or propel any vehicle, cycle (including bicycles) or automobile within said park except bicycles may be ridden on paths or trails specifically designated for use by bicycles. 
(Ord. 2004-17 (part))  
12.44.050 - Fires. 
No person shall make, kindle or maintain a fire for any purpose. 
(Ord. 2004-17 (part))  
12.44.060 - Camping. 
No person shall camp, lodge or pitch a tent, fly, lean-to, tarpaulin or any other type of camping equipment in any park or playground except in conjunction with a city-sponsored camp or except in cases of local emergency as declared by the mayor of South Salt Lake City. 
(Ord. 2004-17 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, 9-2-2009)  
12.44.090 - Firearms and explosives. 
No person shall carry, possess or discharge any firearms, firecrackers, rockets, torpedoes, powder or any other fireworks or explosive. 
(Ord. 2004-17 (part))  
12.44.100 - Defacing property. 
No person shall cut, break, injure, deface or disturb any trees, shrub, plant, rock, building, cage, pen, monument, fence, bench or other structure, apparatus or property; or pluck, pull up, cut, take or remove any shrub, bush, plant, flower or mark, or write upon any building, monument, fence, bench or other structure. 
(Ord. 2004-17 (part))  
12.44.110 - Removal or destruction of property. 
No person shall cut, remove, injure or destroy any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand or gravel. 
(Ord. 2004-17 (part))  
12.44.120 - Pollution of waters. 
No person shall, in any manner whatsoever, pollute or contaminate the waters of any fountain, pond, lake or stream. 
(Ord. 2004-17 (part))  
12.44.130 - Animals. 
Dogs on a leash are permitted within Fitts Park; otherwise, no person shall bring, lead, keep, possess or let loose any animal of any kind where prohibited by posted sign. 
(Ord. 2004-17 (part))  
12.44.140 - Interference with animals or fowl. 
No person shall annoy, injure, release from confinement or in any manner interfere with swan, duck, goose, bird or animal. 
(Ord. 2004-17 (part))  
12.44.150 - Hunting. 
No person shall hunt at any park or public grounds. 
(Ord. 2004-17 (part))  
12.44.160 - Sale of merchandise. 
No person shall sell or offer for sale any merchandise, article or thing whatsoever, without the written consent of the mayor within any park or playground or within a distance of sixty (60) feet of any boundary line of any public park or playground. 
(Ord. 2004-17 (part))  
12.44.170 - Distribution of advertising material. 
No person shall distribute any handbills or circulars or post, place or erect any bills, notice, paper or advertising device or matter of any kind. 
(Ord. 2004-17 (part))  
12.44.180 - Business activities. 
No person shall practice, carry on or conduct or solicit any trade, occupation, business or profession, without written permission of the mayor. 
(Ord. 2004-17 (part))  
12.44.200 - Boisterous conduct. 
No person shall engage in fighting or indulge in riotous, boisterous, threatening or indecent conduct which constitutes a breach of the peace or any obscene and/or fighting words. 
(Ord. 2004-17 (part))  
12.44.210 - Disobeying signs. 
No person shall within the park facilities violate the provisions and instructions on any sign or rule of the park. 
(Ord. 2004-17 (part))  
12.44.220 - Penalty. 
Violation of any provision of any part of this chapter is a class C misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 2004-17 (part))  
Chapter 12.48 - ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 
 
12.48.010 - Scope. 
It is unlawful for any person to do or to allow or permit any of the acts prohibited by this division in any public park or playground in South Salt Lake City or in any place now, or which may hereafter be, set aside or used as a public park or playground under the jurisdiction of the city whether within or without the city limits. 
(Ord. 99 § 1 (part), 1982: prior code § 17-1-1)  
12.48.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
All offenses as set forth in this division shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred ninety-nine dollars ($299.00), or a jail sentence not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 99 § 1 (part), 1982: prior code § 17-4-1)  
Division V. - Trees  
Chapter 12.52 - TREES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-15, adopted June 10, 2015, amended Ch. 12.52 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 12.52, §§ 12.52.010—12.52.100, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. 02-13, § 1(part). 
 
12.52.010 - Definitions. 
As used within this chapter: 
"Major pruning" means the removal of large portions of a tree, as determined by the urban forester. 
"Nuisance tree" (including shrubs) means: 
1.  Any tree that is host to a communicable disease, destructive disease or other pestilence; or 
2.  The roots of any tree or shrub or portion thereof which causes the surface of a public street, curb, gutter, or sidewalk to be up-heaved, damaged or otherwise disturbed, or which impedes construction or maintenance of public infrastructure; or 
3.  Any tree or shrub or portion thereof, which by reason of location or condition, constitutes an imminent danger to the health, safety, or well being of the public; or 
4.  Any tree or shrub or portion thereof which intrudes into public space or causes impediment to movement for either pedestrians or vehicles; 
5.  Any tree which drops seeds or other debris, but not including leaves, into the property of another and which unreasonably interferes with that person's quiet enjoyment of the property; or 
6.  Any tree declared by the state of Utah or the United States Department of Agriculture to be subject to quarantine or an order of destruction. 
"Park trees" means all trees located within city-owned parks. 
"Planter strip" means the area (if any) located between the outside edge of the curb on a given side of the street and the outside border of the city right-of-way on the same side of the street. Planter strip shall also include tree-well sites located within the city right-of-way. 
"Privately-owned trees" means all trees located on private property. 
"Street trees" means all trees located in a planter strip or on publicly-owned right-of-way. 
"Tree stewardship" means the ongoing and shared responsibility between public and private entities for the protection, care and renewal of trees. 
"Urban forester" means the person designated as urban forester by the city, and who may be an employee or an independent contractor. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, 6-10-2015)  
12.52.020 - Urban forester. 
A.  The mayor may designate an employee or other person as an urban forester. Such person may have as a sole duty, the supervision of trees, or may combine such duty with any other duty which the mayor shall so direct. Multiple foresters may be appointed, as necessary, to fulfill the varying responsibilities established in this chapter. 
B.  The urban forester shall supervise the urban forestry program and administer the provisions of this article. The urban forester shall: 
1.  Be responsible for the long-term management of street and park trees; 
2.  Maintain a certified arborist credential from the International Society of Arboriculture, or possess equivalent credentials or experience; 
3.  Foster and maintain partnerships between public and private entities for the benefit of trees; 
4.  Facilitate communications, coordination, cooperation, and education for the stewardship of city and non-city trees; 
5.  Keep abreast of new information and research in arboriculture; and 
6.  Supervise the urban forest and any tree master plan and make recommendations for improvement. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, 6-10-2015)  
12.52.030 - Power to regulate. 
A.  The urban forester may regulate the planting, removal, upkeep and trimming of trees, shrubs, bushes, vines and plants, upon public property, or on private property abutting public property, in accordance with this chapter. 
B.  The urban forester may declare nuisance conditions for any tree located within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, 6-10-2015)  
12.52.040 - Protection of trees. 
A.  No person shall willfully injure or destroy any park tree or street tree. This includes: 
1.  Constructing a concrete, asphalt, brick or gravel sidewalk that damages any part (roots, crown, trunk) of the tree so as to cause injury or death; 
2.  Filling up the ground area around the tree so as to shut off air, light, or water from the roots; 
3.  Piling building material, equipment, or other substances on or near the tree so as to cause injury; 
4.  Pouring any injurious matter on or around the tree; 
5.  Injuring the tree, tree-stake, or guard with any vehicle or animal, or in any other manner causing injury to the tree or lawn on public property; 
6.  Posting any sign on the tree, tree-stake, or guard, or by fastening any guy wire, cable, or rope to the tree, tree-stake, or guard. 
B.  All construction work and associated activities occurring within a distance of one and one-half times the height of an adjoining street tree shall be coordinated with the urban forester to mitigate damage to the tree and danger to the public. 
C.  No person shall use a street tree or park tree for any unauthorized purpose. If damage or unauthorized use has compromised the safety of a street or park tree, the city may recover compensation from the party responsible, up to and including removal and replacement, employee time, plus value lost, as specified by the urban forester. 
D.  It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with city personnel or contractors under the supervision of the urban forester in the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, 6-10-2015)  
12.52.050 - Citizen responsibilities. 
Citizens shall have the following responsibilities for the care of planter strips and any street trees, shrubs or vegetation therein which abuts their real property, and for trees and shrubs on private property: 
A.  Protecting street trees from damage caused by lawn mowers, weed trimmers, snow blowers, and similar equipment; 
B.  Protecting street trees from wounds caused by attachment of any items such as signs, nails, wires, ropes, and chains; 
C.  Purchasing and planting street trees. The species must be approved by the urban forester, and they then must be planted using the guideline established by the urban forester. A tree permit will be required; 
D.  Removing private trees or limbs from any trees that have fallen across a city street sidewalk, or upon city property, except in the case of park trees; 
E.  Maintaining (including watering, mowing, weeding, fertilizing, minor pruning, etc.) all plantings; and 
F.  Removing nuisance trees (including shrubs). 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, 6-10-2015)  
12.52.060 - City responsibilities. 
The city has responsibility for: 
A.  All care of park trees; 
B.  Major pruning of street trees, as determined by the urban forester; 
C.  Removal of diseased or dying street trees which, in the opinion of the urban forester, are beyond reclamation; and 
D.  Removal of street trees that are nuisance trees, and removal of street trees or their limbs, if the urban forester determines that they are a hazard or are likely to fall. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, 6-10-2015)  
12.52.070 - Planting restrictions. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to plant on any public street, avenue or way in the city of South Salt Lake, any bush, tree or plant which is not in accordance with the regulations and specifications found herein and as established in the South Salt Lake Landscape Handbook and Chapter 17.25 of this Code. 
B.  No person shall plant a tree any closer than fifteen (15) feet from the extended property line of the adjacent property without the consent of the owner of said adjacent property, and no tree shall be planted closer than six feet to any fire hydrant, water meter or any other service unit. 
C.  It shall be the responsibility of all abutting property owners to keep all trees, bushes. shrubs, vines and plants trimmed so that pedestrian and motor traffic shall be able to clear the sidewalks and streets without any impediment from said trees or plants. 
D.  The urban forester may restrict the planting on any street, avenue or way to a single species by securing the consent of a two-thirds majority of the residents or property owners on the street concerned by a written petition requesting such action, and the filing of said petition with the city council at its usual place of business and by holding a public hearing wherein the residents or property owners have a right to object to such action, provided, however, that the property owners are apprised of such public hearing by due and proper notice in a paper authorized by law to publish legal notices for the city of South Salt Lake. The urban forester shall have authority to restrict in a like manner future planting on any partially planted street. 
E.  Notwithstanding any provision of city code, if a city tree has been destroyed or removed for any reason, the city may replace that tree with one tree of any species. If multiple city trees are destroyed or removed, then those trees may be replaced in any configuration, up to the number which were destroyed or removed. Nothing in this subsection requires the city to replace a tree. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, 6-10-2015)  
12.52.080 - Nuisance trees. 
A.  Where a nuisance tree exists upon property, the property owner, landlord, tenant, or his or her agent, and all other persons having control of the property on which such nuisance exists, shall be deemed to be the cause thereof, and shall be liable therefor. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person, either as owner, agent, or occupant, to create, aid in creating, or maintaining a nuisance tree. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, 6-10-2015)  
12.52.100 - Penalties. 
A.  Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as a class C misdemeanor, either: 
1.  As a class C misdemeanor; or 
2.  By imposing civil penalties as established by the city. 
B.  In addition to the penalties and abatement procedures outlined in this chapter, the city may initiate any or all of the following actions: injunctions; mandamus; proceeding to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove, or other such court actions. 
C.  Administrative citations and notices of violation may be appealed as provided in Chapters 8.16 and 2.22 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, 6-10-2015)  
12.52.110 - Tree abatement grant fund. 
A.  The city council may establish a fund from which low-income residents may apply for assistance in abating a tree on owner-occupied property which has been deemed a nuisance, up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per property in a fiscal year. 
B.  The mayor or a designee shall establish qualifications and procedures for disbursements from this fund, but in no case shall grant funds be expended on property which is being used for commercial purposes. 
C.  For purposes of this section, "low-income" means a person whose income is eighty (80) percent or less of the median income for the city, as determined by the most recent census conducted by the United States Census Bureau. 
D.  Nothing in this section requires the city to allocate budget to this fund. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, 6-10-2015)  
Chapter 12.54 - PICKETING OF A PRIVATE RESIDENCE IN A RESIDENTIAL ZONE 
Sections: 
 
12.54.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the terms set forth below shall mean the following: 
"Directed, focused, or targeted at" means that a particular private residence or any of its occupants has been made the sole object of picketing and that the picketing takes place directly in front of the particular private residence or the private residence on either side of the targeted residence. 
"Picket" means to station or post one or more persons, with or without a sign, before or about a particular residence. 
"Private residence" means a single-family, duplex, or multifamily dwelling. 
"Public meeting" means a gathering announced in advance to the public, or a portion of the public, which is held to discuss matters of public interest and which is attended by at least three people who do not reside where the assembly is held. 
"Residential zone" means a section of the city which has been designated for residential use pursuant to the city's zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. 2008-18 (part))  
12.54.020 - Picketing of private residence prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in picketing which is directed, focused, or targeted solely at a particular private residence located in a residential zone and which takes place directly in front of the particular private residence or the private residence on either side of the targeted residence. 
(Ord. 2008-18 (part))  
12.54.030 - Exemptions. 
Nothing herein shall prohibit: 
A.  The picketing of a residence which is used as the occupant's sole place of business; 
B.  The picketing of a residence used as a place of public meeting; 
C.  A person or group of persons from marching in a residential zoned area without stopping at a particular private residence; or 
D.  A person or group of persons from marching in a residential zoned area on a defined route without stopping at any particular private residence or residences. 
(Ord. 2008-18 (part))  
12.54.040 - Time restrictions. 
Picketing in residential zoned areas is permitted only during the following hours: 
A.  Monday through Friday. 
Nine a.m. to twelve noon 
One p.m. to four p.m. 
Seven p.m. to eight p.m.; 
B.  Saturday. 
Nine a.m. to five p.m.; and 
C.  Sunday. 
One p.m. to five p.m. 
(Ord. 2008-18 (part))  
12.54.050 - Warning. 
Before a person may be arrested for violating Section 12.54.020, the person must have been ordered to move, disperse, or otherwise remedy the violation by: 
A.  A police officer; 
B.  A member of the fire department; or 
C.  A person with authority to control the use of the residence which is the "focus" or "target" of the picketing. 
(Ord. 2008-18 (part))  
12.54.060 - Defense to prosecution. 
It is a defense to prosecution under this section that a person: 
A.  Was not given a warning as provided in Section 12.54.050; or 
B.  Promptly obeyed a warning as provided in Section 12.54.050. 
(Ord. 2008-18 (part))  
12.54.070 - Penalty for violation. 
Violation of this chapter shall be a class C misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 2008-18 (part))  
12.54.080 - Severability. 
If any provision in this chapter is determined to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall not effect any of the remaining provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2008-18 (part))  
Division VI. - Public Places  
Chapter 12.56 - MEETINGS, ASSEMBLIES AND PARADES IN PUBLIC PLACES 
Sections: 
 
12.56.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Activity" means a parade or public meeting or assembly. 
"Funeral procession" means a single direct movement from a mortuary or church to the place of burial of a human body, under direction of an authorized funeral director. 
"Parade" means a march or procession of any kind. 
"Public meeting or assembly" means a planned or organized gathering of a group of persons, or any ceremony, show, exhibition or pageant which may reasonably be expected to result in the gathering of a group of persons upon any public street, park or other public grounds. 
"Spontaneous demonstration" means a public meeting or assembly that is neither planned nor organized in advance but occurs as a spontaneous reaction to an event and, in regard to which, the requirement to await the issuance of a permit would result in a substantial dilution of the impact of the message which the demonstrators wish to convey. 
(Ord. 2003-04 (part): Ord. 96-17 § 2 (part))  
12.56.020 - Permit required. 
It is unlawful for any person to hold, manage, conduct, aid, participate in, form, start or carry on any parade or public meeting or assembly, as defined in this chapter, in or upon any public street, park or other public grounds in the city of South Salt Lake unless and until a permit to conduct such meeting, assembly or parade has been obtained in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, except as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2003-04 (part): Ord. 96-17 § 2 (part))  
12.56.030 - Exceptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to any of the following: 
A.  Funeral processions; 
B.  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions; 
C.  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, provided such activity is authorized by the school district and is under the immediate direction and supervision of the school authorities authorized by the school district to approve and supervise such activity. 
D.  A spontaneous demonstration; however, participants in a spontaneous demonstration shall refrain from any disorderly conduct as defined in Utah Code Ann. § 76-9-102, shall not stop or hinder vehicle or pedestrian traffic, shall not interfere with police or emergency services, shall not knowingly harass or annoy any nonparticipant in the spontaneous demonstration with any threatening gesture or sudden body movement directed at a nonparticipant and occurring within a five foot radius of the nonparticipant and shall comply with all other applicable laws and ordinances. 
(Ord. 2003-04 (part): Ord. 96-17 § 2 (part))  
12.56.040 - Application. 
Application for permits under this chapter must be filed with the chief of police or designee not less than thirty-six (36) hours in advance of the proposed activity. Late applications may be accepted if filed sufficiently in advance of the date of the proposed activity to enable the chief of police to determine that said activity will meet the requirements set forth in Section 12.56.050. 
The application shall be in writing and shall give the following information: 
A.  The name, address and telephone number of the person requesting the permit. If the activity is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by any organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and the authorized head of such organization shall be stated; 
B.  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be directly in charge of and responsible for the activity; 
C.  The purpose of the activity; 
D.  The date, time and location or route of the proposed activity; 
E.  The approximate number of persons who will participate in the activity and the number and kind of vehicles, equipment and animals which will be used; 
F.  Plans for the assembly and dispersal of the parade, including times and locations thereof; 
G.  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the streets proposed to be traversed; 
H.  A statement as to whether a permit has been requested or obtained from any other city within which said activity shall commence, terminate or occur in part; 
I.  Any additional information which the chief of police or designee shall find reasonably necessary to a determination of the findings required by Section 12.56.050. 
(Ord. 2003-04 (part): Ord. 96-17 § 2 (part))  
12.56.050 - Findings required. 
The chief of police or designee shall issue a permit as provided for in this chapter when from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained he finds that: 
A.  The conduct of such activity will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of vehicle or pedestrian traffic; 
B.  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas where the activity will take place or areas contiguous to such area; 
C.  The conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire, or the movement of other emergency equipment; 
D.  The conduct of such activity is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property; 
E.  The participants of the activity will not knowingly harass or annoy any nonparticipant in the activity with any threatening gesture or sudden body movement directed at a nonparticipant and occurring within a five foot radius of the nonparticipant; and 
F.  Such activity is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising the goods, wares or merchandise of a particular business establishment or vendor. 
(Ord. 2003-04 (part): Ord. 96-17 § 2 (part))  
12.56.060 - Conditions to permit. 
The chief of police or designee shall have authority to impose such conditions as are necessary to insure that all of the findings mentioned in Section 12.56.050 shall exist during the continuation of the activity. 
(Ord. 2003-04 (part): Ord. 96-17 § 2 (part))  
12.56.070 - Prior application. 
If a prior permit application shall have been made for an activity proposed to be held at the same time or place, the chief of police or designee may refuse approval of the later application. In case of such refusal, he or she shall notify the applicant within twenty-four (24) hours that the applicant may apply for an alternate time and place. 
(Ord. 2003-04 (part): Ord. 96-17 § 2 (part))  
12.56.080 - Notice of issuance or denial. 
The chief of police or designee shall notify the applicant in writing of his or her decision within twenty-four (24) hours of the filing thereof. If the police chief or designee denies the application, he or she shall set forth the reasons consistent with Section 12.56.050. 
(Ord. 2003-04 (part): Ord. 96-17 § 2 (part))  
12.56.090 - Appeal procedure. 
The applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial of a permit to the mayor. A notice of appeal shall be filed with the city recorder within two days after receipt of notice of the denial. The mayor shall act upon the appeal within twenty-four (24) hours following receipt of the notice of appeal. 
(Ord. 2003-04 (part): Ord. 96-17 § 2 (part))  
12.56.100 - Contents of permit. 
Conditions to the issuance of any permit shall be set forth in the permit. 
(Ord. 2003-04 (part): Ord. 96-17 § 2 (part))  
12.56.110 - Duties of permittee. 
A.  A permittee hereunder shall comply with all terms and conditions of said permit and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
B.  The written permit obtained pursuant to this chapter shall be carried by the person heading or leading the activity for which the permit was issued. 
(Ord. 2003-04 (part): Ord. 96-17 § 2 (part))  
12.56.120 - Unlawful assembly. 
Upon the failure of the permittee to comply with the terms and conditions of said permit or if the activity or spontaneous demonstration, because of the manner in which it is being conducted, or for any other reason, is jeopardizing those elements of the public safety or welfare set forth in Section 12.56.050, the activity or spontaneous demonstration shall be deemed to be an unlawful assembly, the chief of police or designee shall so notify the participants, shall order them to disburse and, if they fail or refuse to do so, may take such measures as are reasonably necessary to protect the peace, safety and order of the community. 
(Ord. 2003-04 (part): Ord. 96-17 § 2 (part))  
12.56.130 - Public conduct during a meeting, assembly or parade. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to unreasonably obstruct, impede, harass or annoy with any threatening gesture or sudden body movement directed at a participant in the activity or spontaneous demonstration and occurring within a five foot radius of the participant or interfere with any parade or public meeting or assembly or spontaneous demonstration or with any person, vehicle or animal participating in such a parade, meeting or assembly for which a permit has been granted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or spontaneous demonstration. 
B.  The chief of police or designee shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting part of the route of a parade. The chief of police or designee shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. 
(Ord. 2003-04 (part): Ord. 96-17 § 2 (part))  
12.56.140 - Smoking prohibited in city parks, recreational areas, and near mass gatherings. 
A.  Smoking is prohibited in all city parks, recreational facilities, and within fifty (50) feet of mass gatherings. A violation of this section is an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Police officers shall have discretion to issue a "warning" if deemed in the best interest of the city for a first offense. 
B.  City parks and recreational areas are defined as city owned parks, ball diamonds, soccer fields, pocket parks, and trails, with the exception of city streets, sidewalks, and designated smoking areas. 
C.  Mass gathering means an outdoor assembly of fifty (50) or more people on city-owned property or at city-sponsored events (not on city property) that reasonably can be expected to continue for one or more hours. 
(Ord. 2007-02)  
Chapter 12.58 - BUS BENCHES OR SHELTERS 
Sections: 
 
12.58.010 - Placement. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place any bus bench or shelter anywhere within the city without approval from the city. 
B.  Placement of any bus bench or shelter in any residential zone shall require the express approval of the city council. 
C.  Placement of any bus bench or shelter in business or industrial zones shall be through contractual agreement with the city, as approved by the city council. 
(Ord. 97-12 § 1 (part))  
12.58.020 - Removal. 
A.  The city may remove any bus bench or shelter placed wholly or partly within the public right-of-way or on any public property contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The city may require the removal, within ten (10) days of notice by the city, of any bus bench or shelter placed wholly upon private property contrary to the provisions of this chapter provided that written notice is given either in person or sent by registered mail to the property owner. 
C.  If the property owner fails to remove the bus bench or shelter upon receipt of notice, the same shall be considered a nuisance and the city shall have recourse to law to abate such nuisance. 
(Ord. 97-12 § 1 (part))  
12.58.030 - Maintenance. 
A.  All bus benches or shelters shall be maintained by the owner on a routine basis and in a manner that will result in an attractive, safe and fully usable facility. 
B.  The owner shall be responsible for maintaining the area, within a ten (10) foot radius (other than street surfaces) of the bench or shelter, free of debris and obstructions and shall provide a trash receptacle adjacent to the bench or shelter. 
C.  The owner shall, an average of once every week: 
1.  Clean (which may include high pressure washing) each bench or shelter, trash receptacle, and those portions of the sidewalk and curb and gutter within a ten (10) foot radius of the bench or shelter; 
2.  Pick up and remove all trash and loose leaves, and clear snow within a ten (10) foot radius of the bench or shelter; 
3.  Empty the trash receptacle adjacent to the bench or shelter; 
4.  Remove all graffiti. 
D.  The owner shall respond within twenty-four (24) hours of any request from the city to clean or service any bench, shelter or trash receptacle. 
E.  The owner shall respond within two hours of notification by the city of any unsafe, emergency situation. 
F.  Each bench or shelter shall display owner's name and phone number to facilitate service requests. 
(Ord. 97-12 § 1 (part))  
12.58.040 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any violations of the requirements of this chapter shall be punishable as a Class C misdemeanor. Each day shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 97-12 § 1 (part))  
Division VII. - Rights-of-Way  
Chapter 12.60 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE* 
* Prior ordinance history: Ord. 97-26. 
Sections:  
Article I. - Declaration of Findings and Intent—Scope of Chapter 
 
12.60.010 - Declaration of findings and intent. 
A.  Findings Regarding Rights-of-Way. The city of South Salt Lake finds that the rights-of-way within the city: 
1.  Are critical to the travel and transport of persons and property in the business and social life of the city; 
2.  Are intended for public uses and must be managed and controlled consistent with that intent; 
3.  Can be partially occupied by the facilities of utilities and other public service entities delivering utility and public services rendered for profit, to the enhancement of the health, welfare, and general economic well-being of the city and its citizens; 
4.  Are a unique and physically limited resource requiring proper management to maximize the efficiency and to minimize the costs to the taxpayers of the foregoing uses and to minimize the inconvenience to and negative effects upon the public from such facilities' construction, placement, relocation, and maintenance in the rights-of-way. 
B.  Finding Regarding Compensation. The city finds that the city should receive fair and reasonable compensation for use of the rights-of-way. 
C.  Finding Regarding Local Concern. The city finds that while telecommunications systems are in part an extension of interstate commerce, their operations also involve rights-of-way, municipal franchising, and vital business and community service, which are of local concern. 
D.  Finding Regarding Promotion of Telecommunications Services. The city finds that it is in the best interests of its taxpayers and citizens to promote the rapid development of telecommunications services, on a nondiscriminatory basis, responsive to community and public interest, and to assure availability for municipal, educational and community services. 
E.  Findings Regarding Franchise Standards. The city finds that it is in the interests of the public to franchise and to establish standards for franchising providers in a manner that: 
1.  Fairly and reasonably compensates the city on a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory basis as provided herein; 
2.  Encourages competition by establishing terms and conditions under which providers may use the rights-of-way to serve the public; 
3.  Fully protects the public interests and the city from any harm that may flow from such commercial use of rights-of-way; 
4.  Protects the police powers and rights-of-way management authority of the city, in a manner consistent with federal and state law; 
5.  Otherwise protects the public interests in the development and use of the city infrastructure; 
6.  Protects the public's investment in improvements in the rights-of-way; 
7.  Ensures that no barriers to entry of telecommunications providers are created and that such franchising is accomplished in a manner that does not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting telecommunication services, within the meaning of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 ("Act") (P.L. No. 96-104). 
F.  Power To Manage Rights-of-Way. The city adopts this telecommunications ordinance pursuant to its power to manage the rights-of-way, pursuant to common law, the Utah Constitution and statutory authority, and receive fair and reasonable, compensation for the use of rights-of-way by providers as expressly set forth by Section 253 of the Act. 
(Ord. 2000-19 §§ 1.1—1.1.6)  
12.60.020 - Scope of chapter. 
This chapter shall provide the basic local scheme for providers of telecommunications services and systems that require the use of the rights-of-way, including providers of both the system and service, those providers of the system only, and those providers who do not build the system but who only provide services. This chapter shall apply to all future providers and to all providers in the city prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, whether operating with or without a franchise as set forth in Section 12.60.540. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 1.2)  
12.60.030 - Excluded activity. 
A.  Cable TV. This chapter shall not apply to cable television operators or systems. 
B.  Wireless Services. This chapter shall not apply to personal wireless service facilities. 
C.  Provisions Applicable to Excluded Providers. Providers excused by other law that prohibits the city from requiring a franchise shall not be required to obtain a franchise, but all of the requirements imposed by this chapter through the exercise of the city's police power and not preempted by other law shall be applicable. 
(Ord. 2000-19 §§ 1.3—1.3.3)  
Article II. - Defined Terms 
 
12.60.040 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. Words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the single number include the plural number, words in the plural number include the singular. The word "shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
"Application" means the process by which a provider submits a request and indicates a desire to be granted a franchise to utilize the rights-of-way of all, or a part, of the city. An application includes all written documentation, verbal statements and representations, in whatever form or forum, made by a provider to the city concerning: the construction of a telecommunications system over, under, on or through the rights-of-way; the telecommunications services proposed to be provided in the city by a provider; and any other matter pertaining to a proposed system or service. 
"City" means South Salt Lake City, Utah. 
"Completion date" means the date that a provider begins providing services to customers in the city. 
"Construction costs" means all costs of constructing a system, including make ready costs, other than engineering fees, attorneys or accountants fees, or other consulting fees. 
"Control" or "controlling interest" means actual working control in whatever manner exercised, including, without limitation, working control through ownership, management, debt instruments or negative control, as the case may be, of the system or of a provider. A rebuttable presumption of the existence of control or a controlling interest shall arise from the beneficial ownership, directly or indirectly, by any person, or group of persons acting in concert, of more than thirty-five (35) percent of any provider (which person or group of persons is hereinafter referred to as "controlling person"). "Control" or "controlling interest" as used in this chapter may be held simultaneously by more than one person or group of persons. 
"FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission, or any successor thereto. 
"Franchise" means the rights and obligation extended by the city to a provider to own, lease, construct, maintain, use or operate a system in the rights-of-way within the boundaries of the city. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean or include: (1) any other permit or authorization required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the city required by the ordinances and laws of the city; (2) any other permit, agreement or authorization required in connection with operations on rights-of-way or public property including, without limitation, permits and agreements for placing devices on or in poles, conduits or other structures, whether owned by the city or a private entity, or for excavating or performing other work in or along the rights-of-way. 
"Franchise agreement" means a contract entered into in accordance with the provisions of this chapter between the city and a franchisee that sets forth, subject to this chapter, the terms and conditions under which a franchise will be exercised. In the case of any provider not covered within the scope of Chapter 26, Title 11, Utah Code Annotated, the definition of "gross revenue" shall be that set forth in the franchise agreement. 
"Gross revenue" means and includes all revenues of a provider that may be included as gross revenue within the meaning of Chapter 26, Title 11 Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended. 
"Infrastructure provider" means a person providing to another, for the purpose of providing telecommunication services to customers, all or part of the necessary system which uses the rights-of-way. 
"Open video service" means any video programming services provided to any person through the use of rights-of-way, by a provider that is certified by the fcc to operate an open video system pursuant to sections 651, et seq., of the Telecommunications Act (to be codified at 47 U.S.C. Title VI, Part V), regardless of the system used. 
"Open video system" means the system of cables, wires, lines, towers, wave guides, optic fiber, microwave, laser beams, and any associated converters, equipment, or facilities designed and constructed for the purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying or distributing open video services to or from subscribers or locations within the city. 
"Operator" means any person who provides service over a telecommunications system and directly or through one or more persons owns a controlling interest in such system, or who otherwise controls or is responsible for the operation of such a system. 
"Ordinance" or "telecommunications ordinance" means this telecommunications ordinance concerning the granting of franchises in and by the city for the construction, ownership, operation, use or maintenance of a telecommunications system. 
"Person" means and includes any individual, corporation, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, or any other legal entity, but not the city. 
"Personal wireless services facilities" has the same meaning as provided in Section 704 of the Act (47 U.S.C. 332(c)(7)(c)), which includes what is commonly known as cellular and PCS services that do not install any system or portion of a system in the rights-of-way. 
"Provider" means an operator, infrastructure provider, resaler, or system lessee. 
"PSC" means the public service commission, or any successor thereto. 
"Resaler" refers to any person that provides local exchange service over a system for which a separate charge is made, where that person does not own or lease the underlying system used for the transmission. 
"Rights-of-way" means the surface of and the space above and below any public street, sidewalk, alley, or other public way of any type whatsoever, now or hereafter existing as such within the city. 
"Signal" means any transmission or reception of electronic, electrical, light or laser or radio frequency energy or optical information in either analog or digital format. 
"System lessee" refers to any person that leases a system or a specific portion of a system to provide services. 
"Telecommunications" means the transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing (e.g., data, video, and voice), without change in the form or content of the information sent and received. 
"Telecommunications system" or "system" means all conduits, manholes, poles, antennas, transceivers, amplifiers and all other electronic devices, equipment, wire and appurtenances owned, leased, or used by a provider, located in the rights-of-way and utilized in the provision of services, including fully digital or analog, voice, data and video imaging and other enhanced telecommunications services. Telecommunications system or systems also includes an open video system. 
"Telecommunications service(s)" or "services" means any communications services provided by a provider within the city that the provider is authorized to provide under federal, state and local law, and any equipment and/or facilities required for and integrated with the services provided within the city, except that these terms do not include "cable service" as defined in the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 (47 U.S.C. § 521, et seq.), and the Telecommunications Act of 1996. Telecommunications system or systems also includes an open video system. 
"Wire" means fiber optic telecommunications cable, wire, coaxial cable, or other transmission medium that may be used in lieu thereof for similar purposes. 
(Ord. 2000-19 §§ 2.1—2.1.26)  
Article III. - Franchise Required 
 
12.60.050 - Non-exclusive franchise. 
The city is empowered and authorized to issue nonexclusive franchises governing the installation, construction, and maintenance of systems in the city's rights-of-way, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The franchise is granted through a franchise agreement entered into between the city and provider. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 3.1)  
12.60.060 - Every provider must obtain a franchise. 
Except to the extent preempted by federal or state law, as ultimately interpreted by a court of competent jurisdiction, including any appeals, every provider must obtain a franchise prior to constructing a telecommunications system or providing telecommunications services installed and located within the rights-of-way, and every provider must obtain a franchise before constructing an open video system or providing open video services via an open video system. Any open video system or service shall be subject to the customer service and consumer protection provisions applicable to the cable TV companies to the extent the city is not preempted as ultimately interpreted by a court of competent jurisdiction, including any appeals. The fact that particular telecommunications systems may be used for multiple purposes does not obviate the need to obtain a franchise for other purposes. By way of illustration and not limitation, a cable operator of a cable system must obtain a cable franchise, and, should it intend to provide telecommunications services over the same system, must also obtain a telecommunications franchise. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 3.2)  
12.60.070 - Nature of grant. 
A franchise shall not convey title, equitable or legal, in the rights-of-way. A franchise is only the right to occupy rights-of-way on a non-exclusive basis for the limited purposes and for the limited period stated in the franchise; the right may not be subdivided, assigned, or subleased; except as may be expressly provided in a franchise agreement. A franchise does not excuse a provider from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before collocating its system on the property of others, including the city's property. This section shall not be construed to prohibit a provider from leasing conduit to another provider, so long as the lessee has obtained a franchise. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 3.3)  
12.60.080 - Current providers. 
Except to the extent exempted by federal or state law, any provider acting without a franchise on the effective date of this ordinance shall request issuance of a franchise from the city within ninety (90) days of the effective date of said ordinance. If such request is made, the provider may continue providing service during the course of negotiations. If a timely request is not made, or if negotiations cease and a franchise is not granted, the provider shall comply with the provisions of Section 12.60.460. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 3.4)  
12.60.090 - Nature of franchise. 
The franchise granted by the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be a nonexclusive franchise providing the right and consent to install, repair, maintain, remove and replace its system on, over and under the rights-of-way in order to provide services. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 3.5)  
12.60.100 - Regulatory approval needed. 
Before offering or providing any services pursuant to the franchise, a provider shall obtain any and all regulatory approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses for the offering or provision of such services from the appropriate federal, state and local authorities, if required, and shall submit to the city upon the written request of the city evidence of all such approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 3.6)  
12.60.110 - Term. 
No franchise issued pursuant to this chapter shall have a term of less than five years or greater than fifteen (15) years. Each franchise shall be granted in a nondiscriminatory manner. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 3.7)  
Article IV. - Compensation and Other Payments 
 
12.60.120 - Compensation. 
As fair and reasonable compensation for any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, a provider shall have the following obligations: 
A.  Application Fee. In order to offset the cost to the city to review an application for a franchise and in addition to all other fees, permits or charges, a provider shall pay to the city, at the time of application, five hundred dollars ($500.00) as a nonrefundable application fee. 
B.  Franchise Fees. The franchise fee, if any, shall be set forth in the franchise agreement. The obligation to pay a franchise fee shall commence on the completion date. The franchise fee is offset by any business license fee or business license tax enacted by the city. A business license fee not based on gross receipts shall not serve as an off set. 
C.  Excavation Permits. The provider shall also pay fees required for an excavation permit as provided in Chapter 12.28 of this code. 
(Ord. 2000-19 §§ 4.1—4.1.3)  
12.60.130 - Timing. 
Unless otherwise agreed to in the franchise agreement, all franchise fees shall be paid on a monthly basis within forty-five (45) days of the close of each calendar month. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 4.2)  
12.60.140 - Fee statement and certification. 
Unless a franchise agreement provides otherwise, each fee payment shall be accompanied by a statement showing the manner in which the fee was calculated and shall be certified as to its accuracy. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 4.3)  
12.60.150 - Future costs. 
A provider shall pay to the city or to third parties, at the direction of the city, an amount equal to the reasonable costs and reasonable expenses that the city incurs for the services of third parties (including but not limited to attorneys and other consultants) in connection with any renewal or provider-initiated renegotiation, or amendment of this chapter or a franchise, provided, however, that the parties shall agree upon a reasonable financial cap at the outset of negotiations. Any costs associated with any work to be done by the power and public works department to provide space on city owned poles shall be borne by the provider. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 4.4)  
12.60.160 - Taxes and assessments. 
To the extent taxes or other assessments are imposed by taxing authorities, other than the city on the use of the city property as a result of a provider's use or occupation of the rights-of-way, the provider shall be responsible for payment of its pro rata share of such taxes, payable annually unless otherwise required by the taxing authority. Such payments shall be in addition to any other fees payable pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 4.5)  
12.60.170 - Interest on late payments. 
In the event that any payment is not actually received by the city on or before the applicable date fixed in the franchise, interest thereon shall accrue from such date until received at the rate charged for delinquent state taxes. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 4.6)  
12.60.180 - No accord and satisfaction. 
No acceptance by the city of any fee shall be construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of such fee payment be construed as a release of any claim the city may have for additional sums payable. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 4.7)  
12.60.190 - Not in lieu of other taxes or fees. 
The fee payment is not a payment in lieu of any tax, fee or other assessment except as specifically provided in this chapter, or as required by applicable law. By way of example, and not limitation, excavation permit fees and fees to obtain space on the city-owned poles are not waived and remain applicable. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 4.8)  
12.60.200 - Continuing obligation and holdover. 
In the event a provider continues to operate all or any part of the system after the term of the franchise, such operator shall continue to comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter and the franchise, including, without limitation, all compensation and other payment provisions throughout the period of such continued operation, provided that any such continued operation shall in no way be construed as a renewal or other extension of the franchise, nor as a limitation on the remedies, if any, available to the city as a result of such continued operation after the term, including, but not limited to, damages and restitution. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 4.9)  
12.60.210 - Costs of publication. 
A provider shall assume any publication costs associated with its franchise that may be required by law. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 4.10)  
Article V. - Franchise Applications 
 
12.60.220 - Franchise application. 
To obtain a franchise to construct, own, maintain or provide services through any system within the city, to obtain a renewal of a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter or to obtain the city approval of a transfer of a franchise, as provided in Section 12.60.350B granted pursuant to this chapter, an application must be filed with city on the form attached to this ordinance as Exhibit A, which is incorporated by reference. The application form may be changed by the mayor or designee so long as such changes request information that is consistent with this chapter. Such application form, as amended, is incorporated by reference. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 5.1)  
12.60.230 - Application criteria. 
In making a determination as to an application filed pursuant to this chapter, the city may, but shall not be limited to, request or consider the following: 
A.  Obtaining an order from the PSC granting a certificate of convenience and necessity, if any is necessary for provider's offering of services within the state of Utah. 
B.  Certification of the provider's financial ability to compensate the city for provider's intrusion, maintenance and use of the rights-of-way during the franchise term proposed by the provider. 
C.  Providers agreement to comply with the requirements of Article VI of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 5.2)  
12.60.240 - Franchise determination. 
The city, in its discretion, shall determine the award of any franchise on the basis of these and other considerations relevant to the use of the rights-of-way, without competitive bidding. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 5.3)  
Article VI. - Construction and Technical Requirements 
 
12.60.250 - General requirement. 
No provider shall receive a franchise unless it agrees to comply with each of the terms set forth in this article governing construction and technical requirements for its system, in addition to any other reasonable requirements or procedures specified by the city or the franchise, including requirements regarding locating and sharing in the cost of locating portions of the system with other systems or with city utilities. A provider shall obtain an excavation permit, pursuant to the excavation ordinance, before commencing any work in the rights-of-way. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 6.1)  
12.60.260 - Quality. 
All work involved in the construction, maintenance, repair, upgrade and removal of the system shall be performed in a safe, thorough and reliable manner using materials of good and durable quality. If, at any time, it is determined by the FCC or any other agency granted authority by federal law or the FCC to make such determination, that any part of the system, including, without limitation, any means used to distribute signals over or within the system, is harmful to the public health, safety or welfare, or quality of service or reliability, then a provider shall, at its own cost and expense, promptly correct all such conditions. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 6.2)  
12.60.270 - Licenses and permits. 
A provider shall have the sole responsibility for diligently obtaining, at its own cost and expense, all permits, licenses or other forms of approval or authorization necessary to construct, maintain, upgrade or repair the system, including but not limited to any necessary approvals from persons and/or the city to use private property, easements, poles and conduits. A provider shall obtain any required permit, license, approval or authorization, including but not limited to excavation permits, pole attachment agreements, etc., prior to the commencement of the activity for which the permit, license, approval or authorization is required. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 6.3)  
12.60.280 - Relocation of the system. 
A.  New Grades or Lines. If the grades or lines of any rights-of-way are changed at any time in a manner affecting the system, then a provider shall comply with the requirements of the excavation ordinance. 
B.  The City Authority to Move System in Case of an Emergency. The city may, at any time, in case of fire, disaster or other emergency, as determined by the city in its reasonable discretion, cut or move any parts of the system and appurtenances on, over or under the rights-of-way of the city, in which event the city shall not be liable therefor to a provider. The city shall notify a provider in writing prior to, if practicable, but in any event as soon as possible and in no case later than the next business day following any action taken under this article. Notice shall be given as provided in Section 12.60.510. 
C.  A Provider Required to Temporarily Move System for Third Party. A provider shall, upon prior reasonable written notice by the city or any person holding a permit to move any structure, and within the time that is reasonable under the circumstances, temporarily move any part of its system to permit the moving of said structure. A provider may impose a reasonable charge on any person other than the city for any such movement of its systems. 
D.  Rights-of-Way Change—Obligation to Move System. When the city is changing a rights-of-way and makes a written request, a provider is required to move or remove its system from the rights-of-way, without cost to the city. This obligation does not apply to systems originally located on private property pursuant to a private easement, which property was later incorporated into the rights-of-way, if that private easement grants a superior vested right. This obligation exists whether or not the provider has obtained an excavation permit. 
(Ord. 2000-19 §§ 6.4—6.4.4)  
12.60.290 - Protect structures. 
In connection with the construction, maintenance, repair, upgrade or removal of the system, a provider shall, at its own cost and expense, protect any and all existing structures belonging to the city and all designated landmarks, as well as all other structures within any designated landmark district. A provider shall obtain the prior written consent of the city to alter any water main, power facility, sewerage or drainage system, or any other municipal structure on, over or under the rights-of-way of the city required because of the presence of the system. Any such alteration shall be made by the city or its designee on a reimbursable basis. A provider agrees that it shall be liable for the costs incurred by the city to replace or repair and restore to its prior condition in a manner as may be reasonably specified by the city, any municipal structure or any other rights-of-way of the city involved in the construction, maintenance, repair, upgrade or removal of the system that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of any work thereon by or on behalf of a provider pursuant to the franchise. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 6.5)  
12.60.300 - No obstruction. 
In connection with the construction, maintenance, upgrade, repair or removal of the system, a provider shall not unreasonably obstruct the rights-of-way of fixed guide way systems, railways, passenger travel, or other traffic to, from or within the city without the prior consent of the appropriate authorities. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 6.6)  
12.60.310 - Safety precautions. 
A provider shall, at its own cost and expense, undertake all necessary and appropriate efforts to prevent accidents at its work sites, including the placing and maintenance of proper guards, fences, barricades, security personnel and suitable and sufficient lighting, and such other requirements prescribed by OSHA and Utah OSHA. A provider shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local requirements including but not limited to the National Electric Safety Code. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 6.7)  
12.60.320 - Repair. 
After written reasonable notice to the provider, unless, in the sole determination of the city, an eminent danger exists, any rights-of-way within the city which are disturbed or damaged during the construction, maintenance or reconstruction by a provider of its system may be repaired by the city at the provider's expense, to a condition as good as that prevailing before such work was commenced. Upon doing so, the city shall submit to such a provider an itemized statement of the cost for repairing and restoring the rights-of-ways intruded upon. The provider shall, within thirty (30) days after receipt of the statement, pay to the city the entire amount thereof. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 6.8)  
12.60.330 - System maintenance. 
A provider shall: 
A.  Install and maintain all parts of its system in a nondangerous condition throughout the entire period of its franchise. 
B.  Install and maintain its system in accordance with standard prudent engineering practices and shall conform, when applicable, with the National Electrical Safety Code and all applicable other federal, state and local laws or regulations. 
C.  At all reasonable times, permit examination by any duly authorized representative of the city of the system and its effect on the rights-of-way. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 6.9)  
12.60.340 - Trimming of trees. 
A provider shall have the authority to trim trees, in accordance with all applicable utility restrictions, ordinance and easement restrictions, upon and hanging over rights-of-way so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with its system. No tree owned and maintained by the city shall be trimmed, removed or otherwise modified without first notifying the forestry department of the South Salt Lake City power department of the intended work. Bona fide emergencies are not subject to this requirement. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 6.10)  
Article VII. - Franchise and License Nontransferable 
 
12.60.350 - Notification of sale. 
A.  Notification and Election. When a provider is the subject of a sale, transfer, lease, assignment, sublease or disposed of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale, consolidation or otherwise, such that it or its successor entity is obligated to inform or seek the approval of the PSC, the provider or its successor entity shall promptly notify the city of the nature of the transaction. The notification shall include either: 
1.  The successor entity's certification that the successor entity unequivocally agrees to all of the terms of the original provider's franchise agreement; or 
2.  The successor entity's application in compliance with Article V of this chapter. 
B.  Transfer of Franchise. Upon receipt of a request to transfer a franchise, the city designee, as provided in Section 12.60.430A may send notice approving the transfer of the franchise to the successor entity. Such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. If the city has reason to believe that the successor entity may not comply with this chapter or the franchise agreement, it may require an application for the transfer. The application shall comply with Article V of this chapter. 
C.  If PSC Approval is No Longer Required. If the PSC no longer exists, or if its regulations or state law no longer require approval of transactions described in this section, and the city has good cause to believe that the successor entity may not comply with this chapter or the franchise agreement, it may require an application. The application shall comply with Article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2000-19 §§ 7.1—7.1.3)  
12.60.360 - Events of sale. 
The following events shall be deemed to be a sale, assignment or other transfer of the franchise requiring compliance with Section 12.60.340: (1) the sale, assignment or other transfer of all or a majority of a provider's assets to another person; (2) the sale, assignment or other transfer of capital stock or partnership, membership or other equity interests in a provider by one or more of its existing shareholders, partners, members or other equity owners so as to create a new controlling interest in a provider; (3) the issuance of additional capital stock or partnership, membership or other equity interest by a provider so as to create a new controlling interest in such a provider; or (4) the entry by a provider into an agreement with respect to the management or operation of such provider or its system. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 7.2)  
Article VIII. - Oversight and Regulation 
 
12.60.370 - Insurance, indemnity, and security. 
Prior to the execution of a franchise, a provider will deposit with the city an irrevocable, unconditional letter of credit or surety bond as required by the terms of the franchise, and shall obtain and provide proof of the insurance coverage required by the franchise. A provider shall also indemnify the city as set forth in the franchise. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 8.1)  
12.60.380 - Oversight. 
The city shall have the right to oversee, regulate and inspect periodically the construction, maintenance, and upgrade of the system, and any part thereof, in accordance with the provisions of the franchise and applicable law. A provider shall establish and maintain managerial and operational records, standards, procedures and controls to enable a provider to prove, in reasonable detail, to the satisfaction of the city at all times throughout the term, that a provider is in compliance with the franchise. A provider shall retain such records for not less than the applicable statute of limitations. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 8.2)  
12.60.390 - Maintain records. 
A provider shall at all times maintain: 
A.  On file with the city, a full and complete set of plans, records and "as-built" hard copy maps and, to the extent the maps are placed in an electronic format, they shall be made in electronic format compatible with the city's existing GIS system, of all existing and proposed installations and the types of equipment and systems installed or constructed in the rights-of-way, properly identified and described as to the types of equipment and facility by appropriate symbols and marks which shall include annotations of all rights-of-ways where work will be undertaken. As used in this chapter, "as-built" maps includes file construction prints. Maps shall be drawn to scale. "As-built" maps, including the compatible electronic format, as provided above, shall be submitted within thirty (30) days of completion of work or within thirty (30) days after completion of modification and repairs. "As-built" maps are not required of the provider who is the incumbent local exchange carrier for the existing system to the extent they do not exist. 
B.  Throughout the term of the franchise, a provider shall maintain complete and accurate books of account and records of the business, ownership, and operations of a provider with respect to the system in a manner that allows the city at all times to determine whether a provider is in compliance with the Article 2 of the franchise agreement pertaining to finances. Should the city reasonably determine that the records are not being maintained in such a manner, a provider shall alter the manner in which the books and/or records are maintained so that a provider comes into compliance with this section. All financial books and records which are maintained in accordance with the regulations of the FCC and any governmental entity that regulates utilities in the state of Utah, and generally accepted accounting principles shall be deemed to be acceptable under this section. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 8.3)  
12.60.400 - Confidentiality. 
If the information required to be submitted is proprietary in nature or must be kept confidential by federal, state or local law, upon proper request by a provider, such information shall be classified as a protected record within the meaning of the Utah Government Records Access and Management Act (GRAMA), making it available only to those who must have access to perform their duties on behalf of the city, provided that a provider notifies the city of, and clearly labels the information which a provider deems to be confidential, proprietary information. Such notification and labeling shall be the sole responsibility of the provider. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 8.4)  
12.60.410 - Provider's expense. 
All reports and records required under this chapter shall be furnished at the sole expense of a provider, except as otherwise provided in this chapter or a franchise. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 8.5)  
12.60.420 - Right of inspection. 
For the purpose of verifying the correct amount of the franchise fee, the books and records of the provider pertaining thereto shall be open to inspection or audit by duly authorized representatives of the city at all reasonable times, upon giving reasonable notice of the intention to inspect or audit the books and records. The provider agrees to reimburse the city the reasonable costs of an audit if the audit discloses that the provider has paid ninety-five (95) percent or less of the compensation due the city for the period of such audit. In the event the accounting rendered to the city by the provider in this chapter is found to be incorrect, then payment shall be made on the corrected amount within thirty (30) calendar days of written notice, it being agreed that the city may accept any amount offered by the provider, but the acceptance thereof by the city shall not be deemed a settlement of such item if the amount is in dispute or is later found to be incorrect. 
(Ord. 2000-19 §§ 8.6)  
Article IX - Rights of City 
 
12.60.430 - Enforcement and remedies. 
A.  Enforcement—City Designee. The city is responsible for enforcing and administering this chapter, and the city or its designee, as appointed by the mayor, is authorized to give any notice required by law or under any franchise agreement. 
B.  Enforcement Provision. Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall contain appropriate provisions for enforcement, compensation, and protection of the public, consistent with the other provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, defining events of default, procedures for accessing the bond/security fund, and rights of termination or revocation. 
(Ord. 2000-19 §§ 9.1—9.1.2)  
12.60.440 - Force majeure. 
In the event a provider's performance of any of the terms, conditions or obligations required by this chapter or a franchise is prevented by a cause or event not within a provider's control, such inability to perform shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof. For the purpose of this section, causes or events not within the control of a provider shall include, without limitation, acts of God, strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances, failure or loss of utilities, explosions, acts of public enemies, and natural disasters such as floods, earthquakes, landslides, and fires. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 9.2)  
12.60.450 - Extended operation and continuity of services. 
A.  Continuation After Expiration. Upon either expiration or revocation of a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, the city shall have discretion to permit a provider to continue to operate its system or provide services for an extended period of time not to exceed six months from the date of such expiration or revocation. A provider shall continue to operate its system under the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise granted pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  Continuation by Incumbent Local Exchange Carrier. If the provider is the incumbent local exchange carrier, it shall be permitted to continue to operate its system and provide services without regard to revocation or expiration, but shall be obligated to negotiate a renewal in good faith. 
(Ord. 2000-19 §§ 9.3—9.3.2)  
12.60.460 - Removal or abandonment of franchise property. 
A.  Abandoned System. In the event that (1) the use of any portion of the system is discontinued for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, and thirty (30) days after no response to written notice from the city to the last known address of provider; (2) any system has been installed in the rights-of-way without complying with the requirements of this chapter or franchise; or (3) the provisions of Section 12.60.090 are applicable and no franchise is granted, a provider, except the provider who is an incumbent local exchange carrier, shall be deemed to have abandoned such system. 
B.  Removal of Abandoned System. The city, upon such terms as it may impose, may give a provider written permission to abandon, without removing, any system, or portion thereof, directly constructed, operated or maintained under a franchise. Unless such permission is granted or unless otherwise provided in this chapter, a provider shall remove within a reasonable time the abandoned system and shall restore, using prudent construction standards, any affected rights-of-way to their former state at the time such system was installed, so as not to impair their usefulness. In removing its plant, structures and equipment, a provider shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation necessarily made by it and shall leave all rights-of-way in as good condition as that prevailing prior to such removal without materially interfering with any electrical or telephone cable or other utility wires, poles or attachments. The city shall have the right to inspect and approve the condition of the rights-of-way cables, wires, attachments and poles prior to and after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of this chapter and any security fund provided in a franchise shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by a provider with the terms and conditions of this section. 
C.  Transfer of Abandoned System to City. Upon abandonment of any system in place, a provider, if required by the city, shall submit to the city a written instrument, satisfactory in form to the city, transferring to the city the ownership of the abandoned system. 
D.  Removal of Above-Ground System. At the expiration of the term for which a franchise is granted, or upon its revocation or earlier expiration, as provided for by this chapter, in any such case without renewal, extension or transfer, the city shall have the right to require a provider to remove, at its expense, all aboveground portions of a system from the rights-of-way within a reasonable period of time, which shall not be less than one hundred eighty (180) days. If the provider is the incumbent local exchange carrier, it shall not be required to remove its system, but shall negotiate a renewal in good faith. 
E.  Leaving Underground System. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this chapter, a provider may abandon any underground system in place so long as it does not materially interfere with the use of the rights-of-way or with the use thereof by any public utility, cable operator or other person. 
(Ord. 2000-19 §§ 9.4—9.4.5)  
Article X - Obligation to Notify 
 
12.60.470 - Publicizing work. 
Before entering onto any private property, a provider shall make a good faith attempt to contact the property owners in advance, and describe the work to be performed. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 10.1)  
Article XI. - General Provisions 
 
12.60.480 - Conflicts. 
In the event of a conflict between any provision of this chapter and a franchise entered pursuant to it, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. 2000-19 §§ 11.1)  
12.60.490 - Severability. 
If any provision of this chapter is held by any federal, state or local court of competent jurisdiction, to be invalid as conflicting with any federal or state statute, or is ordered by a court to be modified in any way in order to conform to the requirements of any such law and all appellate remedies with regard to the validity of the chapter provisions in question are exhausted, such provision shall be considered a separate, distinct, and independent part of this chapter, and such holding shall not affect the validity and enforceability of all other provisions hereof. In the event that such law is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed, so that the provision which had been held invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with such law the provision in question shall return to full force and effect and shall again be binding on the city and the provider, provided that the city shall give the provider thirty (30) days, or a longer period of time as may be reasonably required for a provider to comply with such a rejuvenated provision, written notice of the change before requiring compliance with such provision. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 11.2)  
12.60.500 - New developments. 
It shall be the policy of the city to liberally amend this chapter, upon application of a provider, when necessary to enable the provider to take advantage of any developments in the field of telecommunications which will afford the provider an opportunity to more effectively, efficiently, or economically serve itself or the public. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 11.3)  
12.60.510 - Notices. 
All notices from a provider to the city required under this chapter or pursuant to a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be directed to the officer as designated by the mayor. A provider shall provide in any application for a franchise the identity, address and phone number to receive notices from the city. A provider shall immediately notify the city of any change in its name, address, or telephone number. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 11.4)  
12.60.520 - Exercise of police power. 
To the full extent permitted by applicable law either now or in the future, the city reserves the right to adopt or issue such rules, regulations, orders, or other directives that it finds necessary or appropriate in the lawful exercise of its police powers. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 11.5)  
Article XII. - Federal, State and City Jurisdiction 
 
12.60.530 - Construction. 
This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable federal and state statutes. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 12.1)  
12.60.540 - Ordinance applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to all franchises granted or renewed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. This chapter shall further apply, to the extent permitted by applicable federal or state law to all existing franchises granted prior to the effective date of said ordinance and to a provider providing services, without a franchise, prior to the effective date of said ordinance. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 12.2)  
12.60.550 - Other applicable ordinances. 
A provider's rights are subject to the police powers of the city to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to the health, safety and welfare of the public. A provider shall comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the city pursuant to its police powers. In particular, all providers shall comply with the city zoning and other land use requirements. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 12.3)  
12.60.560 - City failure to enforce. 
A provider shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter by reason of any failure of the city to enforce prompt compliance. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 12.4)  
12.60.570 - Construed according to Utah law. 
This chapter and any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be construed and enforced in accordance with the substantive laws of the state of Utah. 
(Ord. 2000-19 § 12.5)  
Title 13 - PUBLIC SERVICES 
Chapters:  
Division I. - Sewer System  
Chapter 13.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
13.04.010 - Adoption by reference. 
The "Wastewater Rules and Regulations" of the city of South Salt Lake and the Central Valley Water Reclamation Facility, dated December 2, 1986, and a copy of which is available in the office of the city recorder, be and the same is adopted in its entirety; the same includes certain minor textual changes and the adoption of a new section, to wit: Chapter 7.16, and entitled "Owner Reports and Liabilities." 
(Amended during 1994 codification; Ord. 196 § 2, 1986)  
13.04.020 - Amendment. 
The provisions of this division may be amended or revised from time to time by a majority vote of the POTW governing authority. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (Ch. 12), 1985)  
13.04.030 - Short title. 
The rules and regulations codified in this division shall be known as the "Wastewater Control Rules and Regulations" of the city of South Salt Lake. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 1.1), 1985)  
13.04.040 - Purpose. 
A.  It is necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the POTW to regulate the collection of wastewater and treatment thereof to provide for maximum public benefit. The provisions of this division set forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for the POTW, and enables the POTW to comply with all applicable local, state and federal laws. 
B.  The objectives are: 
1.  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge; 
2.  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
3.  To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludges from the system; 
4.  To provide for equitable distribution among users of the cost of the POTW wastewater system; and 
5.  To provide for and promote the general health, safety and welfare of the employees of the treatment plant, the member entities of Central Valley and the citizens within the jurisdiction of the member entities of Central Valley. 
C.  The provisions of this division provide for the regulation of direct and indirect contributors to the POTW wastewater system through the issuance of permits and through enforcement of general requirements for all users, authorize monitoring and enforcement activities, require user reporting, assume that existing user's capability will not be preempted, and provide for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established in this division. 
D.  The provisions of this division shall apply to the POTW and to persons outside the POTW who are, by contract or agreement with the POTW, users of the POTW. The provisions of this division shall provide for enforcement and penalties for violations. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 1.2), 1985)  
13.04.050 - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in these rules and regulations, shall have the meanings designated in this section: 
"Act" or "The Act" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, P.L. 92-500 also known as the Clean Water Act, including the amendments made by the Clean Water Act of 1977, P.L. 95-217, and any subsequent amendments. 
"Approval authority" means the director in an NPDES state with an approved state pretreatment program and the Administrator of the EPA in a nonNPDES state or NPDES state without an approved state pretreatment program. 
"Authorized representative of industrial user" means and includes: 
1.  A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice president, if the industrial user is a corporation; 
2.  A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively; and 
3.  A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates. 
"Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)" means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)). Laboratory determinations shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods. 
"Building or lateral sewer" means a sewer conveying the wastewater of a user from a residence building or other structure to a POTW sewer, including direct connections to a POTW sewer where permitted by the POTW. A lateral sewer is a building sewer. 
"Business classification code (BCC)" means a classification of dischargers based on the 1972 Standards Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget of the United States of America. 
"Categorical standards" means National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or Pretreatment Standard. 
"Chemical oxygen demand (COD)" means the oxygen equivalent of that portion of organic matter in a wastewater sample that is susceptible to oxidation by a strong chemical oxidant. 
"Chlorine demand" means the amount of chlorine required to produce a free chlorine residual of 0.1 mg/l after a contact time of fifteen (15) minutes as measured by the DPD (N, N, Diethylp-Phenylene - Diamine) method on a sample at a temperature of twenty (20) degrees centigrade in conformance with Standard Methods. 
"Compatible pollutant" means biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria; plus any additional pollutants identified in the publicly owned treatment work's NPDES permit, where the publicly owned treatment work is designed to treat such pollutants and, in fact, does treat such pollutants to the degree required by the POTW's NPDES permit. 
"Construction standards" means the general construction requirements adopted by the POTW for installation of sewerage facilities. 
"Contamination" means an impairment of the quality of the waters of the state by waste to a degree which creates a hazard to the environmental and/or public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease, as described in Standard Methods. 
"Control authority" refers to the approval authority defined in this section; or the manager, if the POTW has an approved pretreatment program under provisions of 40 CFR, 403.11. 
"Cooling water" means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
"Direct discharge" means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the state of Utah. 
"Discharger" means any person who discharges or causes the discharge of wastewater to a POTW sewer system. 
"Environmental Protection Agency or EPA" means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
"Garbage" means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
"Grab sample" means a sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time. 
"Holding tank sewage" means any wastewater from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, sealed vaults and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
"Incompatible pollutant" means all pollutants other than compatible pollutants as defined in this section. 
"Indirect discharge" means the discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under Section 307(b) or (c) of the Act, (33, U.S.C. 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the system). 
"Industrial user" means any industrial user of the wastewater disposal system who: 
1.  Has a discharge flow of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons or more within a twenty-four (24) hour period; 
2.  Has a flow greater than five percent of the flow in the POTW wastewater treatment system; 
3.  Has in his wastes, toxic pollutants as defined in this section, or pursuant to Section 307 of the Act or Utah Statutes and Rules; or 
4.  Is found by the POTW, Utah State Water Pollution Committee or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the wastewater treatment system, the quality of a sludge, the system's effluent quality or air emissions generated by the system. 
"Interference" means the inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment processes or operations or which contributes to a violation of any requirement of the POTW NPDES permit. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with 405 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. 1345) or any criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA) applicable to the method of treatment and disposal or use employed by the POTW. 
"Manager" means the chief executive officer of the POTW or his designated representative. 
"National Categorical Pretreatment Standard" or "Pretreatment Standard" means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1347) which applies to a specific category of industrial user. 
"National Pollution Discharge Elimination System or NPDES permit" means a permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342). 
"National Prohibitive Discharge Standard" or "Prohibitive Discharge Standard" means any regulation developed under the authority of 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR, Section 403.5. 
"New source" means any wastewater source commenced after the publication of proposed regulations prescribing a section 307(c) (33 U.S.C. 1317) categorical pretreatment standard which will be applicable to such source, if such standard is thereafter promulgated within one hundred twenty (120) days of proposal in the Federal Register. Where the standard is promulgated later than one hundred twenty (120) days after proposal, a new source means any source, the construction of which is commenced after the date of promulgation of the standard. 
"Person" means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicated by context. 
"pH" means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of the solution. 
"Pollution" or "pollutant" means the manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of water. Including, but not limited to, any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, stand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water. 
"POTW" refers to the sanitary sewer collection system physically connected to each user and to all lines and treatment works connected to the sewer system and to the treatment works as defined in this section. 
"POTW governing authority" refers to the governing authority of each political subdivision operating all or a portion of a POTW. 
"POTW treatment plant" means that portion of the publicly owned treatment works designed to provide treatment for wastewater. 
"Pretreatment" or "treatment" means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes or process changes by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR Section 403.6(d). 
"Pretreatment requirements" means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a National Pretreatment Standard imposed on an industrial user. 
"Publicly owned treatment works (POTW)" means a treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. 1291) which is owned by the state of Utah or one or more political subdivisions having statutory authority to collect and treat sewage. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, except building or lateral sewers. For the purpose of this division, POTW shall also include any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW from persons outside the POTW boundaries who are by contract or agreement with the POTW actually users of the POTW. 
"Receiving water quality requirements" means requirements for the POTW's treatment plant effluent established by the POTW or by applicable state or federal regulatory agencies for the protection of receiving water quality. Such requirements shall include effluent limitations and waste discharge standards, requirements, limitations or prohibitions which may be established or adopted from time to time by state or federal laws or regulatory agencies. 
"Sanitary sewer" means the pipe or conduit system and appurtenances, for the collection, transportation, pumping and treatment of sewage. This definition shall also include the terms "public sewer," "sewer system," "POTW sewer" and "sewer." 
"Sewage" means the water-borne wastes discharged to the sanitary sewer from buildings for residential, business, institutional and industrial purposes. Wastewater and sewage are synonymous; thus, they are interchangeable. 
"Shall" and "will" are mandatory; "may" is permissive. 
"Slug" means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any one period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five times the average twenty-four (24)-hour concentration or flows during the normal operation of the user. 
"Standard industrial classification (SIC)" means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972. 
"Standard Methods" means procedures described in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" as published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation or such other procedures as may be adopted by the POTW. 
"State" means the state of Utah. 
"Storm sewer" means a sewer that carries only storm, surface and groundwater drainage. 
"Stormwater" means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
"Subdivision" means the division of a tract, or lot or parcel of land into three or more lots, plots, sites or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or of building development or redevelopment; provided, however, that divisions of land for agricultural purposes or for commercial, manufacturing or industrial purposes shall be exempt. Further, the above definition shall not apply to the sale or conveyance of any parcel of land which may be shown as one of the lots of a subdivision of which a plat has theretofor been recorded in the office of the county recorder. The word subdivide and any derivative thereof shall have references to the term subdivision as herein defined. 
"Suspended solids" means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Procedures. 
"Toxic pollutant" means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed in Schedule 1, a copy of which is available in the office of the city recorder, as toxic or in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under Section 307(a) of the Act. 
"User" means any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into a POTW. 
"Wastewater" means the liquid- and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions, together with any infiltrating groundwater, surface water and Stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which enters the POTW. 
"Wastewater discharge permit." As set forth in Chapter 13.12 of this code. 
"Wastewater strength" means the quality of wastewater discharged as measured by its elements, including its constituents and characteristics. 
"Waters of the state" means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, water courses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifiers, irrigation systems, drainage system and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or groundwater, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
"Viscosity" means the property of a fluid that resists internal flow by releasing counteracting forces. 
(Amended during 1994 codification; Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 1.3), 1985)  
13.04.060 - Abbreviations. 
The following abbreviations have the designated meanings as set out in this section: 
BOD ..... 	Biochemical oxygen demand; 
CFR ..... 	Code of Federal Regulations; 
cp ..... 	Centipoise = 0.01 poise = c.g.s; unit of absolute viscosity gm sec x cm; 
COD ..... 	Chemical oxygen demand 
EPA ..... 	United States Environmental Protection Agency or its successor; 
l ..... 	Liter; 
mg ..... 	Milligrams; 
mg/l ..... 	Milligrams per liter; 
NPDES ..... 	National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System; 
POTW ..... 	Publicly owned treatment works; 
SIC ..... 	Standard Industrial Classification; 
SWDA ..... 	Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 USC 6901, et seq; 
USC ..... 	United States Code; 
TSS ..... 	Total suspended solids. 
 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 1.4), 1985)  
Chapter 13.08 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Sections:  
Article I. - Supervision 
 
13.08.010 - Supervision. 
The POTW shall be supervised and directed by the mayor/city administrator. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 2.1), 1985)  
Article II. - Special Agreements and Contracts 
 
13.08.020 - Special user agreement. 
No statement contained in this division shall be construed as prohibiting special written agreements between the POTW and any other person allowing industrial waste or wastewater of unusual strength or character to be admitted to the POTW, provided said person compensates the POTW for any additional costs of treatment. Such agreement, however, may not violate any of the specific prohibitions provided in this article. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 2.13.1), 1985)  
13.08.030 - Contracts with other POTWs. 
Whenever the existing sewage treatment capacity is adequate therefor, the POTW may contract with any other organized and established POTW or with any other governmental agency or with private enterprise, for the discharge into the POTW from any part or parts of such POTW, or person or persons living outside the boundaries of the POTW, upon such terms and conditions and for such periods of time as may be deemed reasonable. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 2.13.2), 1985)  
Article III. - Discontinuance of Service 
 
13.08.040 - Discontinuance of service. 
Any user desiring to discontinue service shall notify the POTW in writing of such fact at least thirty (30) days before the date when such service shall be discontinued. Upon giving such written notice, said user shall not be responsible for bills incurred after the date specified in said notice. Any credit balance in favor of the customer as a result of an advance payment of bills or a deposit will be refunded upon discontinuance of service promptly thereafter. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 2.18), 1985)  
Article IV. - Enforcement and Penalties 
 
13.08.050 - Enforcement authority. 
The POTW may adopt procedures and rules for the implementation and administration of and shall enforce the provisions contained in this division. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 7.1), 1985)  
13.08.060 - Notification of violation. 
Whenever the POTW finds that any user has violated or is violating its wastewater discharge permit, or any prohibition, limitation or requirement contained in this division, the POTW shall serve upon such user a written notice stating the nature of the violation, which may include a cease and desist order. Also, within the time specified therein, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the POTW by the user. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 7.2), 1985)  
13.08.070 - Methods of notification. 
Any notification required in this division shall be served either personally or by registered or certified mail. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 7.3), 1985)  
13.08.080 - Suspension of service. 
A.  The POTW may, without notice or hearing, suspend wastewater treatment service and/or a wastewater discharge permit when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the POTW, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to the environment, causes interference to the POTW, or causes the POTW to violate any condition of its NPDES permit. 
B.  Any person notified of suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the discharge. In the event of a failure of the user to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the POTW shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. The POTW shall reinstate the wastewater discharge permit and/or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. User shall pay all POTW costs and expenses for any such suspension and restoration of service. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the POTW within fifteen (15) days of the date of occurrence. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 7.4), 1985)  
13.08.090 - Permit revocation. 
Any user who violates the following conditions or applicable state or federal regulations is subject to having the permit revoked: 
A.  Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
B.  Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
C.  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; 
D.  Violation of conditions of the permit; 
E.  Failure to pay any fees or charges; 
F.  Encouraging, permitting or committing damage or interference to flow measuring or monitoring equipment, personnel acting under the provisions of this division, surveillance equipment and facilities used to fulfill the enforcement of these rules and regulations, codified in this division. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 7.5), 1985)  
13.08.100 - Referral for prosecution. 
All violations of this division shall be referred to the Salt Lake County deputy county attorney assigned to the prosecution of pretreatment standards violations for consultation and the commencement of criminal prosecution under the provisions of the Utah Water Pollution Control Act which incorporates the provisions of this division by reference. Prosecution may be deferred when the purpose of prosecution is achieved without the commencement of a criminal complaint. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 7.6), 1985)  
13.08.110 - Civil liability for expenses. 
Any person violating the provisions of this division shall be liable for any expense, loss or damage caused by the POTW by reason of such violation, including the increased costs, if any, for managing effluent or sludge, when such increases are the result of the user's discharge of toxic pollutants. The POTW manager shall add such charge to the discharger's treatment charge. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 7.7), 1985)  
13.08.120 - Show cause hearing. 
The POTW may order any user to show cause before the POTW governing authority why its enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the POTW governing authority regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be or was taken, the enforcement action and directing the user to show cause before the POTW governing authority why the enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail at least ten days before the hearing. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 7.8.1), 1985)  
13.08.130 - Designation of hearing entity. 
The POTW governing authority may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may designate any of its members or any officer or employee of the POTW, or contract with others to: 
A.  Issue in the name of the POTW notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings; 
B.  Take the evidence; 
C.  Prepare a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts where requested and other evidence, together with recommendations for action thereon. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 7.8.2), 1985)  
13.08.140 - Testimony. 
At any hearing held pursuant to this article, testimony may be recorded. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 7.8.3), 1985)  
13.08.150 - Cease and desist orders. 
After the POTW governing authority has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order of cease and desist to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances shall have been installed or existing treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 7.8.4), 1985)  
13.08.160 - Appeal procedure. 
Any appeals from a notice of violation and summons or a citation must follow the appeals process outlined in Chapter 2.22 of this code. An appeal request shall be in writing and must be received no later than ten days following such notice or citation. 
(Ord. 2008-21 (part): Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 7.9), 1985)  
13.08.170 - Legal action authorized. 
If any user discharges into the POTW contrary to the provisions of this division, federal or state pretreatment requirements or any order of the POTW, the POTW attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 7.10), 1985)  
13.08.180 - Criminal penalty and fines. 
A violation of the pretreatment and discharge standards, which are defined in this division, is a felony subject to prosecution under the Water Quality Act, UCA Title 19, Chapter 5, Section 115. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 7.11), 1985)  
13.08.190 - Termination of service. 
The POTW may terminate or cause to be terminated sewage treatment service to any user for a violation of any provision of this division. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 7.12), 1985)  
13.08.200 - User liability. 
In the event that a user discharges such pollutants which cause the POTW to violate any condition of its NPDES permit and the POTW is fined by EPA or the state for such violation, then such user shall be fully liable for the total amount of the fine assessed against the POTW by EPA or the state. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 7.13), 1985)  
13.08.210 - Falsifying information. 
In any POTW where authorized by law, any user who knowingly makes false statements, representations or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this division, or wastewater discharge permit, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required in this division shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than two hundred ninety-nine dollars ($299.00) or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 7.14), 1985)  
13.08.220 - Additional penalties. 
In addition to the penalties provided in this article, the POTW may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate legal action against the user found to have violated any provision of this division, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued under this division. The attorney for the POTW, upon request of the POTW governing authority, shall petition the district court to impose, assess and recover such sums. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 7.15), 1985)  
Chapter 13.12 - PERMITS FOR WASTEWATER DISCHARGE 
Sections: 
 
13.12.010 - Authorization required to discharge. 
No industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the public sewer system, the POTW or any private sewer system discharging into a public system without a valid discharge permit. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 5.1), 1985)  
13.12.020 - General permits. 
All users now connected or proposing to connect to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before connection to and/or discharging to the POTW. All existing industrial users connected to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit by June 30, 1982. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 5.2.1), 1985)  
13.12.030 - Permit application. 
Users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the POTW an application in the form prescribed by the POTW and accompanied by a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees for the POTW. The POTW may grant permit status to single residential users previously authorized to discharge into the POTW system. All existing significant industrial users shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit prior to June 30, 1982, and proposed new significant industrial users shall apply at least ninety (90) days prior to connecting to or contributing to the POTW. In support of the application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
A.  Name, address, and location of discharge (if different from the address); 
B.  SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended; 
C.  Wastewater quantity and quality. Quality characteristics include, but are not limited to, those set forth in Section 2.2 of these rules and regulations as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304(h) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, as amended; 
D.  Time(s) and duration of discharge; 
E.  Average daily and peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly, and seasonal variations, if any; 
F.  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances by size, location and elevation. If deemed necessary by the POTW, such plans shall provide for separate systems for handling sanitary and industrial wastewater; 
G.  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 5.2.2), 1985)  
13.12.040 - Permit modifications. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division, upon enactment of a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard and within the time prescribed thereby, the wastewater discharge permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance therewith. Where a user, subject to a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, has not previously submitted an application for a wastewater discharge permit, the user shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within thirty (30) days after notice of the enactment of the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standard. The user with an existing wastewater discharge permit shall submit to the POTW manager within thirty (30) days after such notice, the information required by subsections F and G of Section 13.12.030. In addition to the foregoing, the terms and conditions of the permit shall be subject to modification by the POTW during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements are modified or other just cause exists. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance, as determined by the POTW manager. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 5.2.3), 1985)  
13.12.050 - Permit conditions. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this division and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the POTW. Permits may contain, but are not limited to, the following requirements: 
A.  Payment for the then current unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a POTW sewer; 
B.  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
C.  Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization; 
D.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities; 
E.  Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule; 
F.  Compliance schedules; 
G.  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports; 
H.  Requirements for maintaining and retaining records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the POTW, and affording POTW access thereto; 
I.  Requirements for notification of the POTW of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system; 
J.  Requirements for notification of slug discharges; 
K.  Requirements for separate systems to handle sanitary and industrial wastewater, such that in the event that the user's industrial wastewater is or could cause an interference or a potential interference with the POTW, that the industrial wastewater could be severed, preventing discharge into the POTW and still allowing the user's sanitary wastewater to discharge into the POTW; 
L.  Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated in this division. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the industrial user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the POTW for review and shall be approved by the POTW before construction of the facility. All existing industrial users shall complete a such a plan by June 30, 1982. No industrial user who commences contribution to the POTW after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this division shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the POTW. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the industrial user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this division. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the industrial user to immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. 
1.  Written Notice. Within five days following an accidental discharge, the industrial user shall submit to the POTW manager a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the industrial user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the industrial user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the industrial user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this division or other applicable law. 
2.  Notice to Employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the industrial user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall insure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure; 
M.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the POTW. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 5.2.4), 1985)  
13.12.060 - Permit duration. 
A discharge permit may be issued for a period not to exceed three years. All discharge permits shall be deemed to expire if the conditions existing on the date of issuance of the permit materially change to increase the volume, nature or characteristics of the discharge. All permit holders shall apply for re-issuance of the discharge permit no less than one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the stated date of expiration on the permit. All permits may be revoked prior to the stated expiration date in the event of a violation of this division. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 5.2.5), 1985)  
13.12.070 - Permit transfer prohibited. 
A wastewater discharge permit shall not be assigned, transferred, traded or sold. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 5.2.6), 1985)  
13.12.080 - Compliance date—Report. 
Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the POTW manager a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards and requirements and the average, minimum and maximum daily flow and times for these process units in the user facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards or requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional O and M and/or pretreatment is necessary to being the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the significant industrial user and certified to by a qualified professional engineer. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 5.3.1), 1985)  
13.12.090 - Periodic compliance reports. 
A.  Every person required to obtain a discharge permit and every person to whom a discharge permit has been issued under the provisions of this division shall submit to the city of South Salt Lake a report in writing at the interval described in the discharge permit, or every month is no permit has been issued, describing in words and figures the substances and concentrations thereof discharged to the public sewer collection system and other required information as set forth in the discharge permit. 
B.  The report must describe the laboratory performing the analysis, the dates of sample collection, the daily average discharge volume and all information required by the discharge permit. Only the substances which are regulated by Federal Categorical Standards must be reported unless the discharger is notified in writing to report additional pollutants in the discharger's effluent. All sample collection and analysis is required to be in compliance with the procedures by U.S. EPA and the state of Utah. All data reported as provided above is reported without restriction and is not confidential. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 5.3.2), 1985)  
13.12.100 - Monitoring facilities. 
A.  The user shall provide and operate, at its expense, monitoring equipment and facilities approved by the POTW manager, sufficient to allow inspection, sampling and allow measurement of the building sewer systems. The monitoring equipment and facilities shall be situated on the user's premises or such other location as allowed by the POTW. 
B.  There shall be ample room in or near such monitoring manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. 
C.  Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring equipment and facilities shall be provided in accordance with the POTW's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within ninety (90) days following written notification by POTW. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 5.4), 1985)  
13.12.110 - Inspection. 
All users shall allow the POTW or its representatives ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purpose of inspection, sampling, records examination or in the performance of any of its duties. The POTW, approval authority, state and EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the POTW will be permitted to enter, without unreasonable delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 5.5), 1985)  
13.12.120 - Failure to permit inspection. 
In the event a duly authorized officer or agent of the POTW is refused admission for any purpose, the POTW manager may cause sewer service to the premises in question to be discontinued until the POTW agents have been afforded reasonable access to the premises and sewer system to accomplish the inspection and/or sampling. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 5.6), 1985)  
13.12.130 - Sampling. 
All measurements, tests, sample collection and analyses required for the submission of permit compliance reports shall be conducted by a laboratory certified for such analyses and collection by U.S. EPA and the state of Utah. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 5.7), 1985)  
13.12.140 - Pretreatment. 
A.  Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this division. Any monitoring equipment and facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the POTW shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. Such facilities required by the POTW may include the requirement for separate systems to handle sanitary and industrial wastewater so that both can be discharged into the POTW collection system independently of each other. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the POTW for review, and shall be approved in writing by the POTW manager before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the POTW under the provisions of this division. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the POTW prior to the user's initiation of the changes. 
B.  The POTW shall annually publish in a newspaper of general circulation within the boundaries of the POTW, a list of the users which were not in compliance with any pretreatment requirements or standards at least once during the twelve (12) previous months. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the user(s) during the same twelve (12) months. All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the EPA or approval authority upon request. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 5.8), 1985)  
13.12.150 - Confidential information. 
A.  Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the POTW manager that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. 
B.  When requested by the user furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related hereto, the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, and/or the pretreatment requirements; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the user furnishing the report. 
C.  Information accepted by the POTW as confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency by the POTW until and unless a ten-day written notification is given to the user by certified mail or personal service. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 5.9), 1985)  
13.12.160 - Pretreatment administrative option. 
Any POTW has the option to contract with any governmental or private entity to provide such administrative services as deemed necessary. Such governmental entity could provide the following services, but would not be limited to the following except by contract with each entity: 
A.  Permit processing; 
B.  Monitoring facilities; 
C.  Inspection and sampling; 
D.  Pretreatment processing; 
E.  Enforcement action; 
F.  Laboratory analysis. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 5.10), 1985)  
Chapter 13.16 - PERMITS FOR CONNECTION, CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIRS 
Sections: 
 
13.16.010 - Permit required. 
No person shall commence or carry on the work of laying, repairing, altering or connecting any building sewer, directly or indirectly, to the POTW sewer, without first having received a permit from the POTW manager as required in this division. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 4.1), 1985)  
13.16.020 - Application for permit. 
Application for permits for sewer connections must be made in writing by a licensed and bonded contractor or plumber, on an application blank furnished by the POTW. Any permit issued shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the POTW. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 4.2), 1985)  
13.16.030 - Additional fee for additional survey and/or inspection. 
In the event that the POTW manager finds the sewer connection at the building is not exposed when the inspector visits the site to determine the elevation, or if the permittee has not given sufficient information when making application for a permit so that the survey can be completed, or if the permittee requests a change in the survey, an additional fee shall be determined and charged by the POTW. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 4.3), 1985)  
13.16.040 - Fee for repairs and replacement. 
Application for permits for sewer repair or replacement of any sewer line must be made in writing by a licensed and bonded sewer contractor or plumber on an application furnished by the POTW manager. Repair or replacement of any sewer line shall be tested and inspected in accordance with standards set by the POTW. A fee shall be determined and collected by the POTW for each such inspection. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 4.4), 1985)  
13.16.050 - Permits must be procured before starting work. 
If any work requiring a permit is commenced without a permit first having been obtained therefore, the POTW may immediately issue a stop work order until the proper permits are obtained, and such an offender shall, in addition to any other penalties, be charged double the permit fee. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 4.5), 1985)  
13.16.060 - Trial sewer survey fee. 
In order to determine the feasibility of connecting a building to the POTW sewer, the property owner or licensed and bonded plumber or sewer contractor may make an application for a trial sewer survey, the cost of which shall be set by the POTW. Any payment made under this section does not constitute payment for a permit to the sewer. Such survey shall not be made until the fee is paid in full. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 4.6), 1985)  
13.16.070 - Failure to remedy defective work. 
No further permit shall be issued to any licensed and bonded sewer contractor or plumber who has failed to remedy defective work to the satisfaction of the POTW manager after he has been notified in writing. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 4.7), 1985)  
13.16.080 - Permit not transferable. 
No sewer contractor or plumber shall use or allow his license to be used in any way for the purpose of procuring a permit for any person other than himself or his duly authorized representative. The duly licensed and bonded sewer contractor or plumber shall be responsible for any and all work done pursuant to the issuance of any permit specified under this chapter, regardless of whether the work is actually done by said contractor or his duly authorized representative. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 4.8), 1985)  
13.16.090 - Work must be completed within sixty days. 
The work authorized by a permit under this chapter shall be done with all possible speed and in accordance with POTW rules and regulations. If the work is not completed within sixty (60) days (unless a special extension is granted in writing by the POTW) the permit shall be void, no refund made for such permit, and a new permit must be obtained to finish the work. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 4.9), 1985)  
13.16.100 - Revocation of permit. 
The POTW manager may, at any time, revoke a permit because of defective work which has not been corrected after written notice and within the time specified therein by the POTW manager. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 4.10), 1985)  
13.16.110 - Inspection required. 
The inspection of sewer lines between the POTW sewer main and a building foundation shall be under the direction of the POTW manager or by his duly authorized inspectors. The POTW shall be notified on a regular working day at least four hours in advance of the time the permittee requests inspection. The entire length of the building sewer, including the junction at the POTW sewer, shall be fully exposed. Any portion of the work not done in accordance with these requirements and the instruction of the POTW or its inspectors, shall be corrected promptly. There shall be no backfilling until the inspection is made and the work accepted. No certificate of inspection shall be issued until the work is satisfactorily performed and accepted. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 4.11), 1985)  
13.16.120 - Reinspection—Additional fee. 
In the event that the inspector finds the connection not in conformity with POTW standards, or if any changes are necessary requiring another inspection, a charge to be set by the POTW shall be collected for each such additional inspection. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 4.12), 1985)  
13.16.130 - Survey stakes not to be removed. 
Survey stakes set by the POTW for the sewer connection must not be disturbed, removed or covered. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 4.13), 1985)  
13.16.140 - Fee for resetting stakes. 
In the event that said stakes are not available for the inspector to check the pipeline when inspection is required, he may refuse to make an inspection of the work until stakes have been reset by the POTW and a fee to be set by the POTW has been paid by the permittee for restaking. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 4.14), 1985)  
13.16.150 - Permit not to be issued until special sewer assessment is paid—Record. 
A.  No permit for a sewer connection shall be issued until the POTW has been paid for any required assessment or surcharge in addition to the connection fee. 
B.  The POTW manager shall maintain a record of the payment of the said assessments and fees, together with survey plats indicating the real property within the POTW for which said sewer connection assessments and fees have been paid and these records shall be open to public inspection during regular hours of the POTW. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 4.15), 1985)  
13.16.160 - Assessment to be in addition to fees. 
The payment of any of the assessments or surcharges required by the POTW shall not relieve the owner of the payment of other fees required in this chapter. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 4.16), 1985)  
Chapter 13.20 - FEES AND CHARGES 
Sections: 
 
13.20.010 - Purpose. 
Each user shall pay all fees and charges required by the POTW. Appropriate surcharges will be imposed. It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the payment of all POTW costs, maintenance and operation costs and debt service costs from the users. The total annual cost of maintenance and operation include, but need not be limited to, labor, repairs, equipment replacement, maintenance, necessary modifications, power, sampling, laboratory tests and a reasonable contingency fund. The charges will be based upon the quality and quantity of user's wastewater, and also upon the POTW's debt service and operating costs to intercept, treat and dispose of the wastewater. The applicable charges shall be set forth in a schedule of rates for the POTW. The schedule of rates and charges shall be adjusted from time to time by the POTW to accurately apportion such costs, including energy costs, among the users of the POTW. 
(Ord. 95-1 § 2: amended during 1994 codification; Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 6.1), 1985)  
13.20.020 - Fees and charges. 
The POTW's fees and charges are set forth in Schedule 2, Controlled Admissible Pollutants, and Schedule 3, Rates, which may be amended from time to time and a copy of which is available in the office of the city recorder. (Amended during 1994 codification; Ord. 165 § 2 (§ 6.2), 1985)  
13.20.030 - Classification of users. 
The users of the POTW may be divided into various classifications, including, but not limited to, single dwelling units, duplexes, multiple dwelling units and nonresidential. Further classifications may be established by the POTW for each nonresidential user class. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 6.2.1), 1985)  
13.20.040 - Surcharges. 
Users shall be subject to a surcharge for excessive BOD, suspended solids, toxic pollutants and for service outside the POTW boundaries as provided in Schedule 2, Controlled Admissible Pollutants, a copy of which is available in the office of the city recorder. (Amended during 1994 codification; Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 6.2.2), 1985)  
13.20.050 - Fees. 
The POTW may adopt fees which may include, but not be limited to, the following: 
A.  Fees for all POTW costs, including maintenance and operation; 
B.  Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the POTW's pretreatment program; 
C.  Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures to include, but not be limited to, laboratory analysis; 
D.  Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
E.  Fees for permit applications; 
F.  Fees for filing appeals; 
G.  Fees for consistent removal (by the POTW) of pollutants otherwise subject to Federal Pretreatment Standards; 
H.  Fees for connection; 
I.  Fees for repairs and disconnection; 
J.  Fees for inspections and surveys; 
K.  Fees for development and expansion; 
L.  Other fees as the POTW may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained in this division. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 6.2.3), 1985)  
13.20.060 - Combination billings. 
Where POTW provides culinary water, the wastewater treatment charges may be combined for billing purposes with charges for water services rendered. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 6.2.4), 1985)  
13.20.070 - Charges for discontinuing or restoring services. 
In the event POTW service to any building or premises in the POTW is shut off, a fee to be set by the POTW shall be charged for restoring sewer service. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 6.2.5), 1985)  
13.20.080 - Damage to facilities—User shall pay. 
The user shall pay for the increased costs incurred when the user's discharge causes an obstruction or damage or when, because of the nature of the discharge, costs are increased as when toxic pollutants increase the costs for managing the effluent or the sludge of the POTW. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 6.2.6), 1985)  
13.20.090 - Review of each user's wastewater service charge. 
The POTW shall annually review the total cost of operation and maintenance, as well as each user's discharge, and will revise charges as necessary to assure equity and sufficient funds to adequately operate and maintain the POTW. If a significant industrial user has completed in-plant modifications which would change that user's discharge, the user can present at a regularly scheduled meeting of the governing body such factual information, and the POTW shall determine if the user's charge is to be changed. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 6.2.7), 1985)  
13.20.100 - Notification to user. 
Each user will be notified, at least annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user charges which are attributable to wastewater treatment services. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 6.2.8), 1985)  
13.20.110 - Charges—Responsibility of owner. 
All fees and charges made for sewer services shall be chargeable against and payable by the owner of the premises connected or to be connected with the sewer. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 6.3.1), 1985)  
13.20.120 - Periodic billing statements. 
The POTW shall cause billings for wastewater treatment charges and/or water to be rendered periodically at rates established per Schedule 2, Controlled Admissible Pollutants, and Schedule 3, Rates, as amended, and a copy of which is available in the office of the city recorder. (Amended during 1994 codification; Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 6.3.2), 1985)  
13.20.130 - Delinquency. 
Fees and charges levied in accordance with this chapter shall be a debt due to the POTW. If this debt is not paid within thirty (30) days after billing, it shall, at the POTW's option, be deemed delinquent and subject to penalties and may be recovered by civil action, and the POTW shall have the right to terminate sewer service and enter upon private property for accomplishing such purposes. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 6.3.3), 1985)  
13.20.140 - Collection. 
The POTW shall receive and collect the sewer fees and charges levied under the provisions of this chapter. In the event of partial payment, the POTW may apply said payment to any sums due for water and/or sewer fees or charges. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 6.3.4), 1985)  
13.20.160 - Restoration of service. 
Sewer service shall not be restored until all charges, including the expense of termination and restoration of service, shall have been paid. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 6.3.6), 1985)  
Chapter 13.24 - SEWER SERVICE FEES AND CHARGES* 
Sections: 
 
13.24.010 - Sewer service fee imposed. 
Effective September 1, 1991, there shall be imposed a fee for sewer service which shall be based upon the average water consumption for the months of November through March of the prior calendar year, provided that the initial billings shall be based upon the best information available. 
(Ord. 244 § 2 (part), 1991)  
13.24.020 - Sewer usage charge figured upon water consumption. 
The sewer usage charge shall be figured upon each one thousand (1,000) gallons of water consumed, pursuant to the formula set out in Section 13.24.010. 
(Ord. 244 § 2 (part), 1991)  
13.24.030 - Rates to be reviewed by city council. 
From and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the rates imposed shall be reviewed by the city council in conjunction with the budget process every year, and a new resolution shall be adopted as part of the fiscal budget. 
(Ord. 244 § 2 (part), 1991)  
13.24.040 - Terms and conditions. 
The following terms and conditions shall apply in this chapter: 
A.  The minimum monthly charge for each connection shall be for one thousand (1,000) gallons. 
B.  The minimum monthly charge for a new residential single family dwelling customer will be five thousand (5,000) gallons per dwelling unit until a winter average history can be obtained. 
C.  The minimum monthly charge for a new residential multi-family unit customer will be the previous winter average or five thousand (5,000) gallons per unit until a winter average history can be obtained, whichever is greater. Average winter water usage may be prospectively adjusted during the year if the customer provides proof of leakage, repair, and data supporting lower water usage. 
D.  If the average winter consumption for a residential connection is not available, for whatever reason, actual usage or a minimum of five thousand (5,000) gallons per dwelling unit will be used until an average winter consumption is available, whichever is greater. 
E.  For a new business customer, the average winter consumption for the previous business will be used, or the actual monthly consumption if the business type has changed, until a winter average history can be obtained. 
F.  For those sewer connections using a well, the following will apply. A residential connection will be charged the minimum of five thousand (5,000) gallons per dwelling unit. For business connections, the city may require a city-approved meter, at the owner's expense, on the well. The business owner must maintain said meter in a working condition approved by the city. The city reserves the right to use comparable business averages and samples in the event that the business owner fails to maintain a meter approved by the city. 
G.  Any sewer user can install, at their expense, a city-approved meter on their sewer. For any such connections, the monthly readings of these meters will be the basis for sewer charges, and such charges shall be the same per one thousand (1,000) gallons. The city reserves the right to require confirmation of readings. 
(Ord. 2003-14; Ord. 244 § 2 (part), 1991) 
(Ord. No. 2015-31, Exh. B, 12-2-2015)  
Chapter 13.28 - USE REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
13.28.010 - Connection required. 
The owner or his agent of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the POTW boundaries and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a POTW line, is required, at his expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the POTW in accordance with the provisions of this division within thirty (30) days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said POTW line is within three hundred (300) feet of the owner's property line. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 2.12.1), 1985)  
13.28.020 - Prohibited connections. 
No person, either in person or through an agent, employee or contractor, shall make, allow or cause to be made any sewer connection to the POTW to service, or for the purpose of servicing property outside the boundaries of the POTW, except upon recommendation of the POTW manager and the express approval of the POTW's governing board. Such connections to the POTW shall be made by a person who is either a bonded, state licensed sewer contractor (license classification A-8) or plumber (license classification C-18) who has obtained the necessary permits. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 2.15), 1985)  
13.28.030 - Discharge into POTW. 
All sewage shall be discharged into public sewers except as provided in this division. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 2.2.1), 1985)  
13.28.040 - Discharge of sewage. 
No person shall discharge any sewage from any premises within the POTW into and upon any public highway, stream, water course or public place, or into any drain, cesspool, storm or private sewer, except as provided for in this division. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 2.2.2), 1985)  
13.28.050 - Prohibited discharge—Sanitary sewer. 
No person shall cause to be discharged or make a connection which would allow any Stormwater, surface drainage, groundwater, roof runoff, cooling water or other water into any sanitary sewer. No person shall cause any of the above-mentioned waters to be mixed with that person's sewage in order to dilute said sewage. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 2.2.3), 1985)  
13.28.060 - Prohibited discharge—Storm sewers. 
Stormwater, surface drainage, subsurface drainage, groundwater, roof runoff, cooling water or unpolluted water may be admitted to specifically designated storm sewers which have adequate capacity for the accommodations of said waters. No person shall connect to and/or use sanitary sewers for the above purposes without having first obtained the written consent of the POTW manager. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 2.2.4), 1985)  
13.28.070 - Prohibited discharges—Specific categories. 
No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation or performance of the POTW. These general prohibitions apply to all such users of a POTW, whether or not the user is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or any other national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements. A user may not contribute the following substances to any POTW: 
A.  Explosives. Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time shall two successive readings on any explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be more than five percent nor any single reading over ten percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter; 
B.  Solids. Except as authorized in Schedule 1, Controlled Limited Pollutants, a copy of which is available in the office of the city recorder, solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to: grease, garbage with particles greater than one-quarter inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides, or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes; 
C.  Corrosion. Any wastewater having an acid pH less than 6.5 or more alkaline than 8.5 or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and/or personnel of the POTW; 
D.  Toxic. Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in excess of Schedule 1, Controlled Limited Pollutants, a copy of which is available in the office of the city recorder, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW, to contaminate the sludge of any POTW systems or to exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic pollutant shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to Section 307(l) of the Act; 
E.  Noxious. Any malodorous liquids, gases or solids which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance and repair; 
F.  Untreatable. Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW, such as residues, sludges or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process where the POTW is pursuing a reuse and reclamation program. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act, any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used; 
G.  NPDES Permit Violation. Any substances which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES and/or State Disposal System permit or the receiving water quality standards; 
H.  Objectionable Color. Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions; 
I.  Temperature. Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, or cause temperature at the headworks of the POTW treatment plant to exceed one hundred four (104) degrees fahrenheit; 
J.  Slug Loads. Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released at a flow and/or pollutant concentration which a user knows, should know upon reasonable inquiry or has reason to know will cause interference with the POTW. In no case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain concentration or qualities of pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five times the average twenty-four-hour concentration, quantities or flow during normal operation; 
K.  Radioactive. Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotope of such halflife or concentration as may exceed the limits established by the POTW manager in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
L.  Hazard. Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance. 
(Amended during 1994 codification; Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 2.2.5), 1985)  
13.28.080 - Grease, oil and sand interceptors. 
A.  Grease, oil and sand interceptors, as described by the Utah Plumbing Code, shall be required of any user when, in the opinion of the POTW manager, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for dwelling units. All interceptors be of a type and capacity approved by the POTW manager according to plans on file in the POTW's office and shall be located as to be readily accessible for cleaning by user and inspection by POTW employees. 
B.  All grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, water tight and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gas and water tight. 
C.  Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the user at his sole expense, in continuous efficient operation at all times. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 2.14), 1985)  
13.28.090 - Injuring sewer prohibited. 
No person shall injure, break, or remove any part or portion of any sewer system or any sewer appliance or appurtenance. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 2.10), 1985)  
13.28.100 - Dilution prohibited. 
No user shall ever dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate pretreatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards, or in any other pollutant specific limitation developed by the POTW or state. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 2.9), 1985)  
13.28.110 - Commercial garbage grinders. 
A.  Mechanically operated garbage grinders for producing properly ground garbage are permitted in establishments engaged in the preparation of food or drink to be consumed on the premises or to be sold, delivered or picked up for immediate consumption. Every mechanically operated grinder shall be so designed and installed: 
1.  That it shall discharge wastes at a reasonable uniform rate in fluid form, which shall flow readily through an approved trap, drain line or soil line in a manner which prevents clogging or stopping of the drain line; 
2.  That it shall be of such construction and have such operating characteristics that not more than five percent by weight of all material discharged from it shall have any dimension larger than one-fourth inch. Weights shall be determined on a dry basis; 
3.  That the entire installation shall comply in all particulars with the provisions of the Plumbing and Electrical Codes of Salt Lake County and the state of Utah; 
4.  Additionally, commercial garbage grinders will operate with cold water flowing into the grinder and through the sink drain line in such a manner as to congeal and aerate the solid and liquid greases within the grinding unit. 
B.  The final decision as to the sufficiency of the design to meet these requirements shall rest with the POTW manager. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 2.3), 1985)  
13.28.120 - Manhole covers. 
No person shall open any POTW sewer manhole without permission from the POTW manager. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 2.11), 1985)  
13.28.130 - Discontinuance of privy vaults, cesspools and septic tanks. 
A.  No owner, or his agent or other person having charge of occupying any property within three hundred (300) feet of a POTW sewer shall maintain or use or cause or permit to exist any privy vault, septic tank or cesspool upon said property. 
B.  In no case shall any plumbing in any house or building not complying with subsection A of this section remain unconnected to any public sewer for more than thirty (30) days after such sewer is available. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 2.12.2), 1985)  
13.28.140 - Outhouses prohibited. 
No person shall erect or maintain any outhouse or privy within the POTW boundaries. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 2.12.3), 1985)  
Chapter 13.32 - DISCHARGE AND TREATMENT STANDARDS 
Sections: 
 
13.32.010 - Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards. 
Upon the promulgation of the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard for a particular industrial category, developed pursuant to 40 CFR, Sec. 403.6, the Federal Standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed in this division for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed in this division. The POTW manager shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR, Sec. 403.12. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 2.4), 1985)  
13.32.020 - Modification of Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards. 
Where the POTW's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited by Federal Pretreatment Standards, the POTW may apply to the approval authority for modification of specific limits in the Federal Pretreatment Standards. "Consistent removal" means reduction in the amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the wastewater treatment system to a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent which is achieved by the system in ninety-five (95) percent of the samples taken when measured according to the procedures set forth in Section 403.7 (c) (2) of (Title 40 of the code of Federal Regulations, Part 403)—"General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution" promulgated pursuant to the Act. The POTW may modify pollutant discharge limits in the Federal Pretreatment Standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR, Part 403, Section 403.7, are fulfilled and prior approval from the approval authority is obtained. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 2.5), 1985)  
13.32.030 - Specific pollutant limitations. 
No person shall discharge wastewater in violation of the pretreatment and discharge standards set forth in the Controlled Limited and Controlled Admissible Pollutants, as established by the POTW from time to time and as set forth in Schedules 1 and 2, copies of which are available in the office of the city recorder. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 2.6), 1985)  
13.32.040 - State requirements. 
State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those contained in this division. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 2.7), 1985)  
13.32.050 - POTW's right of revision. 
The POTW reserves the right to establish more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in Section 13.04.040 of this code. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 2.8), 1985)  
13.32.060 - Discharge limitation calculation. 
A.  Chemicals contained in the incoming water supply will form the base from which the discharge limitation will be computed. 
1.  For example: The discharge limitation for copper is .01 mg/l. 
Incoming water supply: 	1.00 mg/l 
Waste discharge: 	.01 mg/l 
Total permitted discharge: 	1.01 mg/l 
 
B.  All limitations on discharge are the maximum concentration that may be discharged at any one time. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (part), 1985)  
13.32.070 - Discharge limitation change procedure. 
A.  Discharge limitations have been established for regulated chemicals for four distinct reasons: 
1.  To protect the collection system and treatment plant; 
2.  To protect workers who must maintain and operate the system and treatment works; 
3.  To insure that discharge permit requirements will be met at all times; 
4.  To prevent accumulation of hazardous materials in solid sludge and compost products. 
B.  The discharge limitations set forth in this chapter have been compiled from the best technical information available with a twenty-five (25) percent safety margin. 
C.  Any person, firm or corporation that wishes to discharge quantities greater than the limits set forth in this chapter may petition the governing authority of the collection and treatment system for a change in the discharge limits set forth in this chapter. 
D.  Every petition shall contain the name and address of the person or entity proposing the change, identification of the chemical and the proposed limits, and clear and convincing evidence that the proposed limit: 
1.  Will not harm the collection works and treatment works; 
2.  Will not present a hazard to workers who maintain and operate the collection and treatment system; 
3.  Will insure compliance with current and future discharge permit conditions; 
4.  Will not result in an accumulation of chemical material in solid sludges that will interfere with the disposal or re-use of the sludge materials; and 
5.  Will not result in higher costs to the entity which owns, operates and maintains the treatment and collection system. 
E.  No discharge at a proposed concentration is permitted until final action by the governing authority establishes the proposed limitations. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (part), 1985)  
Chapter 13.36 - CONNECTIONS, CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIRS 
Sections: 
 
13.36.010 - Cleaning of sewers—License and bond required.  
Article I. - Cleaning of Sewers 
 
13.36.010 - Cleaning of sewers—License and bond required. 
A.  No person not licensed as a plumber or licensed and bonded sewer contractor pursuant to the requirements of this division shall engage in the business of removing stoppage from a building drain or building sewer, without first obtaining a license or permit from the POTW and filing a corporate surety bond with the POTW in an amount to be specified by the POTW, such that the principal and surety shall hold POTW harmless from any and all injuries to persons or damage to property, and particularly to the sewer mains, caused by or through the cleaning or removal of any stoppage in any drain or sewer, and further conditioned that the principal will faithfully observe all ordinances, rules and regulations of said POTW pertaining to plumbing and sewers. 
B.  The fee for the license or permit required in this division shall be set by the POTW's governing board. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 2.16), 1985)  
Article II. - POTW Sewer Construction 
 
13.36.020 - Design and construction. 
The size, slope alignment, materials of construction of a POTW sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements set forth in the "Code of Waste Disposal Regulations" adopted pursuant to state law, and other specific requirements as set forth by the POTW. The WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9, "Design and Construction of Sanitary and Storm Sewers" (as revised), prepared by A Joint Committee of Water Pollution Control Federation and the American Society of Civil Engineers, is adopted as the general guideline for the planning, design and construction of all POTW sewers unless modified by construction standards adopted by the POTW. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 10.1), 1985)  
13.36.030 - Construction. 
The actual construction of the POTW sewer shall be conducted by a bonded sewer contractor licensed in the state of Utah. Prior to construction the contractor must be approved by the POTW. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 10.2), 1985)  
13.36.040 - Excavation safeguards for public. 
All excavations for POTW sewer installation shall be adequately guarded by contractor with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored by the contractor in a manner satisfactory to the POTW. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 10.3), 1985)  
13.36.050 - Maintenance expense. 
All POTW sewers, except building sewers, shall be maintained by the POTW. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 10.4), 1985)  
13.36.060 - Inspection and approval. 
All phases of the POTW sewer construction shall be inspected and approved by the POTW. Failure to obtain the necessary inspections and approvals will result in the work being redone. All work shall be completed in accordance with the construction, testing and acceptance standards of the POTW. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 10.5), 1985)  
Article III. - Building Sewers, Connections and Repairs 
 
13.36.070 - Separate connections required. 
Each separate building or premises shall have a separate connection to the main line sewer, except when deemed impracticable and so found by the POTW manager. Each owner will bear and pay for the maintenance and repair of this building or lateral sewer. Notwithstanding the above, where a dwelling is in the rear of another building and on the same building lot and owned by the same party, the POTW manager may issue a sewer permit for a multiple connection. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 3.1), 1985)  
13.36.080 - Old building sewers. 
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the POTW, to meet all requirements of this division; otherwise, old building sewers shall be plugged at the user's expense upon discontinuance of service. The plug in the old building sewer must be approved and an inspection fee will be charged by the POTW. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 3.2), 1985)  
13.36.090 - Design and construction. 
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling of the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable laws, rules and regulations of federal, state and local entities, and POTW construction standards. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 3.3), 1985)  
13.36.100 - Building sewer elevation. 
In all buildings where the elevation is too low to permit gravity flow to the POTW sewer, sanitary sewage discharge from such building shall be lifted by a POTW approved means and discharged to the sewer and operated and maintained by the user. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 3.4), 1985)  
13.36.110 - Installation expenses. 
All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the applicant. The applicant shall retain or employ a licensed and bonded sewer contractor or plumber to make connection to and install a sewer. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 3.5), 1985)  
13.36.120 - Connection requirement. 
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the POTW manager when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the POTW sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the said POTW manager or his representative. The connection of the building sewer to the POTW sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable laws, rules and regulations of federal, state and local entities. All such connections shall be made tight. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 3.6), 1985)  
13.36.130 - Excavation safeguards for the public. 
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded by the owner or his representative with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored by the owner or his representative in a manner satisfactory to the POTW and the street owner. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 3.7), 1985)  
13.36.140 - Separation from other utilities. 
All utility lines or conduits shall be separated from the building sewer as required by state law. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 3.8), 1985)  
13.36.150 - Maintenance expense. 
All building sewers, including the connection to the POTW sewer, shall be maintained by the property owner. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 3.9), 1985)  
13.36.160 - Connection of pipes of unlike materials. 
Any connection of pipes of unlike materials shall comply with the current edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code and the POTW construction standards. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 3.10), 1985)  
13.36.170 - Sewer specifications. 
The size of building sewers, type of pipe allowed, bed and grade of pipe changes in direction of pipe shall conform to the current edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code and POTW construction standards. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 3.11), 1985)  
13.36.180 - Pipe to be free of defects. 
All pipe shall be sound, free from holes or cracks, without traps, valves or other obstruction which might prevent or retard the free passage of air and sewage. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 3.12), 1985)  
13.36.190 - Cleanouts. 
A cleanout "wye" must be located immediately inside the property line. In all cases, the cleanout pipe from the "wye" to the surface of the finished grade must be iron or other material approved by the POTW manager, and on a slope of forty-five (45) degrees. The cover must be a brass cleanout plug, with a one-inch-high solid wrench head. Additional cleanouts shall be placed a minimum of fifty (50) feet apart along any four-inch building sewer, and every one hundred (100) feet along any six-inch building sewer, and at all other changes in direction greater than forty-five (45) degree bend. Cross supports for cleanouts shall be eighteen (18) inches below the cleanout tops. No waste or soil shall enter cleanout pipes. A test tee shall be required at or near the property line. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 3.13), 1985)  
13.36.200 - Trench safety. 
Safety for all trench excavation and restoration shall be the sole responsibility of the person making the excavation. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 3.14), 1985)  
13.36.210 - Test for leaks. 
All building sewers shall be tested for leaks in the manner prescribed by POTW and in the presence of its inspector. Every joint shall be water tight before acceptance by the inspector. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 3.15), 1985)  
13.36.220 - Specification for joint at point of connection to POTW sewer. 
The connection of the "wye" adjoining to the "wye" on the main sewer shall be entirely surrounded with a collar of a design specified in the POTW construction standards. Connection work shall be done only in the presence of the POTW inspector. The trench shall not be backfilled until the building sewer line has been connected, tested and approved by the POTW inspector. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 3.16), 1985)  
13.36.230 - Earth cover required. 
No sewer line shall have less than two feet of sand cover at finished grade. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 3.17), 1985)  
13.36.240 - Fee for opening sewer if junction pipe not available. 
Where there is no junction pipe in the POTW sewer at the point where connection is desired to be made, the opening of the said sewer and the installation of the junction pipe shall be made by the POTW or its designee, if deemed necessary by the POTW, upon payment of a fee to cover the cost of the work. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 3.18), 1985)  
13.36.250 - Fee for replacing damaged junction pipe. 
In case the junction pipe to the POTW sewer is broken off or damaged, it must be replaced. The installing of a new junction pipe will be made by the POTW or its designee upon payment of a fee to cover the cost of the work. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 3.19), 1985)  
Chapter 13.40 - PRIVATE SEWER DISPOSAL 
Sections: 
 
13.40.010 - Private disposal prohibited when. 
A.  No person shall construct, use or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tanks, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage within the boundaries of the POTW where POTW service is available within three hundred (300) feet of the property line of any property upon which any building, privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility as described above exists. 
B.  No person shall construct, use or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facilities intended or used for the purpose of disposal of sewage from any subdivision located within the boundaries of POTW. 
C.  Within thirty (30) days from the date POTW service becomes available within three hundred (300) feet of the property line of any buildings served by any private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the POTW sewer by the owner at owner's expense in compliance with the provisions contained in this division, and any septic tank, cesspool, privy or similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be immediately emptied and filled with suitable material. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 2.17.1), 1985)  
13.40.020 - Private disposal authorized when. 
A.  Whether POTW service is not available within the limits provided in Section 13.40.010, the building's sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of the Salt Lake City-County health department. 
B.  Prior to commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner or his agent shall first obtain a written permission from the POTW for submission to the Salt Lake City-County health department. 
C.  The owner or his agent shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities at owner's sole expense and in compliance with all federal, state and local laws and rules and regulations. 
D.  No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements which may be imposed by the Salt Lake City-County health department. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 2.17.2), 1985)  
Chapter 13.44 - PUMP STATIONS 
Sections: 
 
13.44.010 - User to pay costs of installation and maintenance. 
Whenever any user makes application for any permits, approvals, subdivision, zoning or any other actions relating to property situated in areas either within or outside of the POTW which, when connected to the POTW's sewer collection or disposal system, will require the sewage to be pumped into the POTW system, the user thereof shall be required to pay the POTW all of the costs of the installation and maintenance of the required pumping station in the manner and in the amounts provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 8.1), 1985)  
13.44.020 - Withholding of approval. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of any other ordinance or regulations of the POTW now or hereafter enacted, the officers and personnel of the POTW dealing with the applications referred to in Section 13.44.010 are directed and authorized to withhold granting of the requested applications pending payment or entry by the applicant into an agreement whereby payments will be made to the POTW in reimbursement for the costs of said pumping stations. The officers and employees of the POTW are directed and authorized to refuse to furnish sewer services to the users until the agreements are fully consummated and there has been reimbursement and payment for all services and fees due and owing thereunder. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 8.2), 1985)  
13.44.030 - Pumping station areas—Surveys and engineering studies—Establishment. 
A.  The POTW is authorized to cause surveys or engineering studies to be made for the purpose of determining those areas either within or without the POTW which would require the installation and operation of pumping stations. The pumping station areas may include areas outside of the POTW limits which might, by annexation, become a part of the POTW or which might require sewer services from the POTW for the purpose of preserving the health and welfare of residents adjacent to such areas. 
B.  Based upon said studies, the POTW shall establish the pumping station areas and designate their confines in such manner as to enable land owners or users to determine whether or not they fall within the areas requiring sewer pump stations. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 8.3), 1985)  
13.44.040 - Construction of pumping stations. 
A.  A POTW may cause a pumping station to be installed in a designated pumping station area in anticipation of the development of buildings or other uses within the near future, or it may cause said construction to occur upon receipt of applications from land owners or users who anticipate developments within the designated area or a portion thereof which will require the construction of a sewer pumping station. 
B.  The construction of the pumping stations shall be of such size as the POTW may determine will be necessary to provide pumping to the entire area even though pending applications before it involve only a portion of the pumping station area. All pump stations shall be planned, designed and constructed in accordance with applicable state laws. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 8.4), 1985)  
13.44.050 - Costs of construction. 
A.  The costs of construction for pumping stations shall include costs of land acquisition, easements, legal services, direct labor and materials, costs of direct supervision and engineering services, plus an amount equal to ten percent of all of said foregoing costs for administrative services by the POTW. 
B.  The costs of construction shall be allocated among the land owners and/or users of the sewage pumping service area in the same proportion that the total of each land owner's area bears to the total area of land situated within the pumping service area. 
C.  The foregoing method of allocation of costs may be varied by action of the POTW when, in its judgment, it finds that unusual topography or other physical circumstances or the contemplated use or uses require a different method of allocating costs. If the pumping station is constructed prior to the filing of an application by a land owner or user, the costs of construction will be the actual costs expended as described in this section. 
D.  If the pumping station has been constructed at the time the application is filed, then costs shall be the costs estimated by the POTW manager or which may be computed based upon contracts let to contractors or subcontractors to perform said construction. The estimated costs shall be used as the basis for establishing the amount of any payments required in advance until such time as construction is completed and actual costs are determined, at which time the costs shall be recomputed and allocated based upon the actual costs. 
E.  Costs of operation and maintenance shall be allocated among the users of the sewage pumping service area. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 8.5), 1985)  
13.44.060 - Method of payment. 
At the time an application is made to the POTW, the POTW shall require the applicant to enter into an agreement with the POTW whereby the applicant will pay his share of said sewer pumping station construction costs at such time or times fixed by the POTW. The agreement may require the applicant to pay a lump sum in cash or may establish a downpayment and thereafter installment payments, of such amounts and frequency as may be determined will best fit the needs of the POTW. The agreement shall provide, in the event the applicant fails to make the payments, as provided, the POTW may refuse to provide services until such time as payment has been made. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 8.6), 1985)  
13.44.070 - Pumping station deemed property of POTW. 
Regardless of the manner in which construction of the sewer pumping station has been achieved, whether by direct action upon the part of the POTW or by action of any applicant, the pumping station shall be deemed the property of the POTW. All maintenance shall be performed by the POTW or its designee. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 8.7), 1985)  
Chapter 13.48 - SUBDIVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
13.48.010 - Approval required before recordation. 
All persons, contractors, builders, operators, subdividers and developers shall conform with this division and shall apply to the POTW office for written approval of any proposed sewage collection facilities for their mobile home parks, subdivisions or other developments prior to recordation of their plats with any county recorders, and shall pay all required fees in a timely manner. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 9.1), 1985)  
13.48.020 - Mobile home park and subdivision connections allowed. 
Any mobile home park or subdivision hereafter constructed having sewage system and appurtenant facilities acceptable to the POTW within said mobile home park or subdivision, as the case may be, may, at the user's sole expense, upon payment of all required fees and subject to any written extension or reimbursement agreements which may be hereafter executed with the POTW, connect such sewage system and facilities directly with an existing POTW sewer at a location designated by the POTW and under the POTW's direction. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 9.2), 1985)  
13.48.030 - Mobile home compliance required. 
All sewage collection systems and appurtenant facilities for mobile home parks and subdivisions shall be designed, constructed and maintained in strict accordance with all applicable provisions of the rules and regulations adopted or amended and revised by the POTW. 
(Ord. 164 § 2 (§ 9.3), 1985)  
Division II. - Water System  
Chapter 13.52 - WATER ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 
 
13.52.010 - Supervisor of the water department. 
The water department supervisor is hired by the mayor, acting as the director of public works and/or the public works supervisor based on merit. 
(Editorially added during 10/96 supplement)  
13.52.020 - Duties and powers of the water department supervisor. 
The water department supervisor shall, under the direction of the mayor and public works supervisor, have charge of the reservoirs, water tanks, water mains, fire hydrants and all machinery, property and appurtenances appertaining to the city waterworks. He shall work with and be under the direction of the city engineer in the putting in of service pipes and shall regulate the water supply to all fire hydrants and water users. He shall report to the mayor annually or as often as is required, the condition of the water department and make suggestions as the nature of the service may require. He shall have authority to supervise and define the duties of all employees of the water department. He or his authorized representative, upon presentation of proper credentials, shall at all ordinary hours be allowed free access to all places supplied with water from the water system to examine the apparatus, the amount of water used and the manner of its use. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 14-1-2)  
13.52.030 - Analysis of city water. 
It shall be the duty of the water department personnel to make or cause to be made a routine monthly bacteriological analysis, according to the standard methods of the U.S. Public Health Service, of the water furnished by the city through its water system, and report the same to the department of public works. All city wells are tested according to Utah state requirements. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 6-1-7)  
13.52.040 - City's right to shut off water—Unlawful water turn-on—Fee. 
A.  The city reserves the right at any time without notice, to shut off the water from its mains for the purpose of making repairs or extensions or for other purposes, and no claim shall be made against the city by reason of breakage whatsoever, or for any damage that may result from the shutting off of water for repairing, laying or relaying mains, hydrants or other connections; or by reason of the stoppage or interruption of the water supply due to scarcity of water, accidents to works or mains, alterations, additional repairs or any other cause whatsoever. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person, after the water has been turned off to his premises on account of nonpayment of rates or other violation of the rules and regulations pertaining to the water supply, to turn on or allow the water to be turned on, or use or allow the water to be used without having received authority so to do. 
C.  Water turned off for nonpayment turned back on by owner or tenant will pay a turn-on fee to be set by resolution of the city council. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 14-1-31)  
13.52.050 - Mayor's proclamation of water use limitation. 
In time of scarcity of water or whenever it shall be deemed necessary by the city council, the mayor shall, by proclamation, limit the use of water to such extent as may be necessary for the public good. Providing, however, that such restrictions and limitations are not discriminatory and are made on a reasonable basis. It is unlawful for any person by himself, family, servants or agents to violate any such proclamation, and in addition to any other penalties which may be imposed, the water shall be turned off and not turned on again until the payment set by resolution of the city council for each violation has been made. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 14-1-29)  
13.52.060 - Purchasing additional water. 
Whenever it shall be deemed necessary or advisable the city council may supplement the city water supply by purchases of water from Salt Lake City, Salt Lake County, or any other available source. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 14-1-30)  
13.52.070 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this title, or in any way interfering with the operation of, or destroying or mutilating any property of the city waterworks shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and may be punished as provided for in this code. 
(Prior code § 14-1-34)  
Chapter 13.56 - WATER USE REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
13.56.010 - Conformance to city plumbing code. 
All service and other pipes used underground and all installations of such pipes shall meet the specifications and requirements set forth in the current edition of the plumbing code adopted by the city. 
(Ord. 2003-07 (part): editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 14-1-14)  
13.56.020 - Application for use or extension—Property owner liability. 
A.  Whenever any person desires to obtain water from the city water department, he or she shall comply with the regulation established in Chapter 13.74 of this title. Whenever any person desires to have the service line extended to the property, he or she shall make application on the forms provided and shall make arrangements for the payment of the fee in accordance with the terms thereof, upon the filing of the proper application and payment, the water department supervisor is authorized to extend the service pipe to the usual point of installation and install meter box. The applicant is responsible to extend the service from the meter box to point of use. 
B.  When the applicant is not the owner of the property, but merely a tenant, the owner of the property must sign an agreement to be legally responsible for any unpaid water bills as a condition precedent to obtaining the service. 
(Ord. 2003-07 (part): editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; Ord. 82 § 1, 1981: prior code § 14-1-3)  
13.56.030 - Use without authorization. 
It is unlawful for any person by himself or herself, family, servants or agents, to use the water coming through the water mains without first having written authorization to do so, or without authority to open any stopcock, valve or other fixture attached to the system of water supply, or to in any way injure, deface or impair any part or appurtenance of the water works, or to cast anything into any reservoir or tank belonging to said works. 
(Ord. 2003-07 (part): prior code § 14-1-6)  
13.56.040 - No unmetered service. 
No person or property shall receive water through the water department facilities except as otherwise noted in this chapter, unless the water is properly metered. 
(Ord. 2003-07 (part): prior code § 14-1-5)  
13.56.050 - Unauthorized water use unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any water user to permit any person from other premises, or any unauthorized person to use or obtain water from his or her premises or water fixtures, whether inside or outside his or her building. No extension shall be made to another water user from the same service pipe without proper written authorization and a stop cock and key box being attached at the junction of the service pipe. Before water will be supplied through the service pipe the property owner must agree to pay for all the water used. Two or more buildings on contiguous lots may receive water from the same service line only if owned by the same person and such person becomes responsible for the bill and obtains permission of the water department supervisor. 
(Ord. 2003-07 (part): editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 14-1-23)  
13.56.060 - Two users of one service pipe—Public works supervisor's power to withhold water. 
Where two or more parties or premises are supplied from the same service pipe, the failure on the part of either of said parties to comply with this chapter shall warrant the public works supervisor in withholding the supply of water through said service pipe until a separate service pipe with stopcock and key box is put in for each separate user of water. 
(Ord. 2003-07 (part): editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 14-1-24)  
13.56.070 - Waste prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any water user to waste water, or to allow tanks, air conditioning units or similar equipment to leak or overflow, or to wastefully run water from hydrants, faucets or stops, or through basins, water closets, urinals, sinks or other apparatus, or to use the water or purposes other than those for which he or she has paid or to use water in violation of the rules and regulations for controlling the water supply and the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2003-07 (part): prior code § 14-1-28)  
13.56.080 - Service pipes and connections within city's control. 
The service pipes and connections from the main to the curb line, including a meter box and a meter yoke to be placed within the line of the street curb, will be put in and maintained by the city water department and kept within its exclusive control. 
(Ord. 2003-07 (part): prior code § 14-1-7)  
13.56.090 - Stop and waste cock valves—Accessibility—Minimum pipe size. 
Whenever a water pipe enters a building, such pipe must be supplied with a stop and waste cock with a handle or wrench fixed thereto for the purpose of turning the same. Such fixture shall be placed on the pipe in an accessible position within nine inches of the wall where such pipe enters the building or in an accessible location. All such pipes shall enter buildings at the excavated portions thereof. The minimum size for service pipe shall be three-fourths inch for pipe from the curb box to the stop and waste cock located inside the building. 
(Ord. 2003-07 (part): prior code § 14-1-27)  
13.56.100 - Pipes and other apparatus to be kept in good repair. 
All water users shall keep their service pipes, connection and other apparatus in good repair and protected from frost at their own expense, but no person, except by permission and under the direction of water department personnel, shall be allowed to dig into a street or a sidewalk for the purpose of laying, removing or repairing any service pipe. 
(Ord. 2003-07 (part): editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 14-1-13)  
13.56.110 - Repairs—Authorization—Procedure. 
No plumber or other person shall be authorized to turn off the water at the meter box without first receiving permission from the superintendent or his authorized agent. Plumbers shall in all cases except those of extreme emergencies use the stop valve inside the premises. In all cases when plumbers shall make repairs to pipes or fixtures on any premises, they shall leave water turned on or off as they found it upon entering the premises. Should anyone damage any water service equipment the city may have it repaired by a competent plumber and the charge must be paid by the owner of the property, where the damage was incurred before water service is restored. 
(Ord. 2003-07 (part): prior code § 14-1-25)  
13.56.120 - Separate trench for water pipes required. 
Water pipes must not be laid in the same trench as sewer, gas or any other pipe, but a separate trench must be provided therefor, or laid on a shelf of undisturbed earth. 
(Ord. 2003-07 (part): prior code § 14-1-15)  
13.56.130 - Steam boilers. 
It is unlawful for any person to fill any steam boiler used for power purposes from the pipes direct. Such boilers must be provided with a tank and supplied therefrom, and necessary safety equipment for protection in the event of water stoppage. Each boiler must have a state approved backflow device installed. 
(Ord. 2003-07 (part): editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 14-1-26)  
13.56.140 - Fire lines. 
A.  Fire lines, which are to be used only in case of fire may be required by the city. 
B.  Fire lines as defined in Section 13.74.020 shall include: water lines which are connected to the water main and which serve a fire hydrant; and water lines that extend off the water main to supply a building or buildings fire protection system(s). 
C.  In addition to the regulation contained elsewhere in this code, fire line water service is provided upon the following conditions. 
1.  Any person or entity which desires to, or is required to extend or provide a fire line to property or to a structure shall make application and obtain a permit and permission for construction from the city engineer. Permit fees shall be paid prior to any excavation or fire line installation. 
2.  Fire lines are not permitted to be served through adjacent properties or across interior property lines to serve interior lots, unless there is a dedicated easement or right of way for such purpose. 
3.  Backflow prevention devices are required for all fire lines. Backflow prevention devices shall not be located in driveways or other locations where accidental damage or visibility obstructions would be a likely consequence. Backflow prevention devices shall be fully accessible for periodic testing, repairs, and replacement. 
4.  All costs associated with installing the fire line from the water main to the property or structure(s) shall be the responsibility of the property owner or the person requesting the permit. 
5.  After installing a fire line, the property owner shall confirm the integrity of the fire line. Such confirmation shall include a hydrostatic test and flush in accordance with National Fire Protection Association 24. 
6.  Also after installing a fire line, the property owner shall conduct a biological test to determine that the line is clean to prevent contamination of the city water system. 
7.  Once installed, the property owner of any approved fire line shall be responsible to maintain and keep the fire line (beginning where the fire line connects to the water main) functional and in good repair. Any maintenance costs for damage, repair, or replacement of the fire line shall be the responsibility of the property owner. 
8.  In any case where maintenance, repair, or replacement of a fire line occurs in a city street, the property owner shall be required to obtain a permit from the city engineer for any work in the street and shall be responsible for the costs of any road restoration. 
9.  Fire lines shall only be used for fire protection purposes. All connections to a fire line that serve a fire protection system, pipe, or value shall conform to adopted codes and standards. Other connections to a fire line are prohibited. 
10.  Water from a fire line may only be used for fire protection proposes or testing of a fire protection system. 
11.  The city may require that a meter be installed upon the fire lines. 
12.  The owner of a property receiving fire line service will pay a monthly fee to the city for that service. The amount of the fee shall be established in the consolidated fee schedule. 
D.  Fire line service shall be subject to the regulation set forth in Chapter 13.74, Customer Service Regulations. 
E.  Effective April 1, 2013, those who own or use a fire line with the city, including any fire line installed by any entity other than South Salt Lake, shall be responsible to maintain and keep the fire line in good repair at their own expense. 
F.  No person or entity, except by permission and under the direction of the city engineer shall be allowed to dig, cut, grind, bore into or under a street or a sidewalk for the purpose of laying, removing, repairing, or replacing a fire line. 
(Ord. 2003-07 (part): prior code § 14-1-33) 
(Res. No. R2013-05, 3-27-2013)  
13.56.150 - Fire hydrants. 
All fire hydrants shall be under the control of, and shall be kept in repair by the city water department; provided, that the fire department, the engineering department and the street department shall have free access to said hydrants. It is unlawful for any person to open or operate any fire hydrants, or to attempt to draw water therefrom, or to obstruct the approach thereto. Provided, however, that contractors of public works or public utilities may upon application and compliance with city regulations use water from the hydrants upon the payment of a permit fee to be set by resolution of the city council and the payment of a daily fee in a sum to be determined by the city council at the time of the approval of the permit. Hydrants will be designated by city, so as not to cause problems, such as dirty water, etc. 
(Ord. 2003-07 (part): editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 14-1-32)  
13.56.160 - Hydrants on private property—Maintenance. 
A.  Hydrants located in private property must be installed with detector check units. Where water may be used from the hydrant supply piping for private purpose they must be metered with an approved meter and installation. 
B.  Maintenance of hydrants and fire protection pipes must be kept in good repair or the city may have repairs completed and back charge the owners. 
(Ord. 2003-07 (part): Ord. 5 § 1, 1976: prior code § 14-1-32(a))  
13.56.170 - Fountains. 
No public fountain attached shall be greater than one-fourth inch in diameter. There shall be a stop cock to each fountain attached, which shall be under the control of the city water department. All fountains shall have an automatic turn-off while not in use. 
(Ord. 2003-07 (part): editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 14-1-16)  
Chapter 13.60 - FEES AND RATES 
Sections: 
 
13.60.010 - Extension or connection permit fee—Water line inspection fee. 
No extension or connection of service pipes shall be made without obtaining a permit and payment of the permit fee to be set by resolution of the city council. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 14-1-12)  
13.60.020 - Special or temporary rates. 
The city council may fix rates for any special or temporary use and they may change or alter by resolution or ordinance any or all rates when in their judgment it becomes expedient or beneficial to do so. Providing, however, the rates may not be changed in violation of any previous commitment or ordinance duly authorized by the city council. 
(Prior code § 14-2-2)  
13.60.030 - Meter tests—Who shall bear charges. 
Should any water user, using a water meter, desire to have the meter on his premises tested, the charge shall be borne by the person requesting the testing, where the meter is found to be correct or register in favor of the consumer; but where it is found to be overregistering the cost of such test shall be borne by the city. Meters shall be changed only at the discretion of the superintendent of the water department. 
(Prior code § 14-2-4)  
13.60.040 - After hours service—Overtime rate. 
Should it be necessary to turn the water on or off at any time other than during regular working hours and during regular working days, the charge for the service shall be at overtime rate for that particular day and for the time of day worked. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 14-2-6)  
13.60.060 - Larger meters furnished at expense of applicant—Property of city. 
Meters of a larger size then one inch shall be furnished at the expense of the applicant, and installed at his expense and the charge shall be the actual cost of work done plus twenty (20) percent. In all cases the meter shall be furnished by and become the property of the city and shall be maintained by the water department. 
(Prior code § 14-1-10)  
13.60.070 - Other charges. 
Other charges for other size connections, and all work done by the water department, including cutting and replacing pavement where necessary, shall be fixed by the public works supervisor and water department supervisor at the actual cost of work done plus twenty (20) percent, unless otherwise provided for by ordinance or resolution. Where an old service pipe is replaced by a new one of larger size, the charge shall be the same as for installation of a new service pipe. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 14-1-11)  
13.60.080 - Bills rendered—Penalty for nonpayment. 
All bills for water used shall be rendered monthly. The water department supervisor shall determine from time to time when meter readings are to be made and bills rendered. If the bills rendered, where delinquent charges are part of bill, as aforesaid are not paid within sixty (60) days of their rendition, the supervisor or other authorized personnel shall give a notice in writing to the user that the water will be turned off within twenty-four (24) hours unless the bill is paid. If the user fails to pay in the time allotted, the supervisor shall cause the water to be turned off and before the water is turned on all unpaid water bills must be paid in full together with a turnon fee to be set by resolution of the city council. In case of vacancy, where service is discontinued or meter is taken out, unless delinquent bills are paid within sixty (60) days, a penalty of ten percent shall be charged in addition to the regular bill. When, for any reason, the water meter shall fail to register, bills shall be rendered at the average rate consumed for like periods of time. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 14-2-3)  
13.60.090 - Abatement for nonuse. 
Any water user, to avail himself of an abatement for nonuse of water on a meter, shall report to the water department supervisor and have the water turned off at his premises, and the meter may be removed at the option of the supervisor. Before water service will again be supplied written notification must be made to the supervisor or his authorized agent. Abatements will not be allowed unless there is a vacancy on the premises being served and in no event for less than thirty (30) days. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 14-2-5)  
Chapter 13.64 - PRIVATE LINES AND EXTENSIONS 
Sections: 
 
13.64.010 - Private lines. 
When permission is granted by the public works supervisor to any person to put in a private water service, the whole cost of installing the same shall be paid by the person obtaining such permission. All such water service shall be maintained and kept in good repair by the owners and users thereof, at their own cost and expense. In all cases a standard meter shall be installed at the curb of each separate premises. Should anyone connect a private pipe to the city water line without a permit from the water department, water may be shut off at the main until such permit is taken out, and all expense of shutting off and turning on is paid. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 14-1-17)  
13.64.020 - Master meters. 
When a private water main supplying more than one house is connected to the city water mains, the superintendent may require a master meter to be installed near the point where the connection is to be made to the city main. This installation will be at the expense of the owners of the private line according to the regular rates for meter installation. Responsible parties must agree to pay all bills for water served through said meter at regular meter rates. The prevailing minimum charge for each service connection taking off from said private line will be made. Where more than one unit is being serviced by one meter, capacity must be provided for eight gallons per minute per unit at a minimum of twenty (20) pounds pressure. 
(Prior code § 14-1-18)  
13.64.030 - Reconnection to city water main. 
Whenever a city water main shall have been laid in front of premises already connected to a private pipe, the owner or occupant shall upon notice from the superintendent make application for reconnecting the premises to the city water main. The city shall tap the main and extend a three-fourths inch service pipe, reconnecting the premises at the curb and the owner must extend his pipe to the meter box and make the connection in front of said premises at his own expense. 
(Prior code § 14-1-19)  
13.64.040 - Extensions. 
All water main extensions shall be made without special taxes being levied to pay for same. It shall be the responsibility of the land owner, the developer or subdivider to pay for the cost of installation of any and all water mains necessary for the service to any particular property or properties, and no water will be furnished through the water main until the extension has been completed and paid for by any of the above-mentioned persons. It is understood that the main and extension upon the commencement and service will automatically become a part of the South Salt Lake water system and subject to the rules and regulations as set forth in this division. The main and/or extension must comply with the requirements of the water department before installation will be permitted. If the owner, developer, etc., shall connect to the main and furnish all materials, including water meters, and do all of the installation work, then the connection fee, except for inspection, will be waived. Otherwise, the usual connection fee will be charged in accordance with provisions as set forth in this division. 
(Prior code § 14-1-20)  
13.64.050 - Extensions to plats, additions or subdivisions—Approval required. 
No water mains shall be laid or water furnished to the occupants of any plat, addition or subdivision of any lot, block or tract of land within the city of South Salt Lake, unless the said plat, addition or subdivision shall have been approved by the city council and the planning commission. 
(Editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; prior code § 14-1-21)  
13.64.060 - Permit for extension required—Plumbing permit. 
It is unlawful for any person to make any extension of any water pipe or water fixture attached to the waterworks system, for any purpose whatsoever, without first obtaining a permit therefor from the superintendent of the water department. All persons must, within twenty-four (24) hours after the completion of any plumbing work connected with the waterworks system, report the same to the superintendent. No person shall be issued a plumbing permit except properly bonded and licensed plumbers who are registered with the state of Utah in accordance with statute or their bonafide employees, excepting therefrom individuals installing limited outside plumbing on their own premises where the work is to be performed by themselves. 
(Prior code § 14-1-22)  
Chapter 13.68 - CROSS-CONNECTIONS 
Sections:  
Article I. - Cross-Connection Control— General Policy 
 
13.68.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is: 
A.  To protect the public potable water supply of the city of South Salt Lake from the possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating within the customer's internal distribution system(s) or the customer's private water system(s) such contaminants or pollutants which could back flow into the public water system; 
B.  To promote the elimination or control of a existing cross-connections, actual or potential, between the consumer's on-site potable water system(s) and nonpotable water system(s), plumbing fixtures and industrial piping systems; and 
C.  To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control which will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems. 
(Ord. 2007-24 (part): Ord. 190 § 1.1.1—1.1.3, 1986)  
13.68.020 - Responsibility. 
The water supervisor shall be responsible for the protection of the public potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to the backflow of contaminants or pollutants through the water service connection. If, in the judgment of said water supervisor an approved backflow prevention assembly is required (at the customer's water connection: or within the customer's private water system) for the safety of the water system, the water supervisor or his designated agent shall give notice in writing to said customer to install such an approved backflow prevention assembly(s) at specific location(s) on the customer's premises. The customer shall immediately install such approved assembly(s) at the customer's expense; and, failure, refusal or inability on the part of the customer to install, test, and maintain said assembly(s) shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such assembly(s) have been satisfactorily installed. 
(Ord. 2007-24 (part): editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; Ord. 190 § 1.2, 1986)  
13.68.030 - Building official. 
The building department of the city of South Salt Lake shall review construction plans and inspect plumbing as it is installed, to prevent cross-connections from being designed and built into structures within its jurisdiction of the city of South Salt Lake. Where the review of building plans, or the inspection of buildings suggests or detects the potential for a cross-connection, the building official shall require that the cross-connection be eliminated, or an approved backflow assembly be installed in accordance with the current plumbing code and amendments adopted by the state of Utah. The building official's responsibility begins at the point of service (downstream side of the water meter) and extends throughout the entire length of the customer's water system. The building inspector shall inquire about the intended use of water at any point where a cross connection is identified, or called for on the plans. Where such a cross connection is discovered, an approved backflow prevention assembly shall be required on the plans and shall be properly installed in the building. 
(Ord. 2007-24 (part): editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; Ord. 190 § 1.3, 1986)  
13.68.040 - Certified backflow prevention assembly technician. 
A.  When employed by the customer or water purveyor to test, repair, overhaul and/or maintain backflow prevention assemblies, a backflow assembly technician will have the following responsibilities: 
1.  Be responsible for ensuring acceptable testing equipment and procedures are used for testing, repairing or overhauling backflow prevention assemblies. 
2.  Make reports of such testing and/or repairs to the customer and/or water purveyor, on a form approved for such use. 
This report shall include a list of materials and replacement parts used. 
3.  Ensure that replacement parts are equal in quality to parts originally supplied with the backflow assembly and that the replacement parts are supplied by the manufacturer, or the manufacture's designated agent. 
4.  Ensure that the design, material, and operational characteristics of the backflow assembly not be altered during repair or maintenance. 
5.  The certified technician shall perform all repairs and inspection work and be responsible for the competence and accuracy of all test and reports. 
6.  It shall be the responsibility of the certified backflow technician to be certified to work on backflow assemblies by the state of Utah, and that the testing equipment being used meets the requirements of the state of Utah, is in proper operating condition, and has been certified yearly. 
7.  Failure to report a failing assembly to the water purveyor, South Salt Lake City, within five working days of the inspection shall be grounds for revocation of the tester's certification by the state. The certified backflow technician shall be equipped with and be fully trained to use all necessary tools, gauges, and other equipment necessary to properly test, repair and maintain backflow prevention assemblies. 
8.  In the case of a consumer requiring a commercial tester, any class II or III certified technician can test and report test results to the water customer and the water purveyor. 
9.  Should a backflow prevention assembly be in need of repair, the only individuals authorized to repair assemblies are a journeyman plumber with a class II or III backflow certification, or an agent of the owner. 
(Ord. 2007-24 (part): Ord. 190 § 1.4, 1986)  
Article II. - Definitions 
 
13.68.050 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases have the meanings as set out in this section: 
Water Supervisor. The water supervisor is responsible for the water department of the city of South Salt Lake, is vested with the authority and responsibility for the implementation of an effective cross connection control program, and has authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
Approved. Accepted by the water supervisor as meeting all applicable specifications stated or cited in this chapter, or as suitable for the proposed use. 
Auxiliary Water Supply. Any water supply on or available to the premises other than the purveyor's approved public water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's public potable water supply or any natural source(s) such as a well, spring, river, stream, etc., or "used waters" or "industrial fluids." These waters may be contaminated or polluted or they may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the water purveyor does not have sanitary control. 
Backflow. The reversal of the normal flow of water caused by either backpressure or backsiphonage. 
Backpressure. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source other than its intended source caused by a pressure reversal in the system. 
Backsiphonage. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source than its intended source caused by the reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system. 
Backflow Preventer. An assembly or means designed to prevent backflow: 
1.  Air Gap. The only absolute means of preventing backflow. It consists of a vertical separation between the end of a water inlet pipe and the overflow rim of the fixture or device served. The air gap shall be twice the diameter of the supply pipe, and in-no case less than one inch. If the pipe is next to a wall the distance shall be three times the supply line and in no case less than three inches. 
2.  Reduced Pressure Backflow Preventer. A mechanical backflow prevention assembly designed for installation in special circumstances where backpressures can be expected. It consists of two hydraulically or mechanically loaded pressure reducing check valves with a pressure regulated relief valve in between, with four test cocks, including shut-off valves, on each side. It should be inspected and tested annually for detection and correction of any malfunction. It shall be installed above ground. 
3.  Double Check Valve Assembly. Consists of two independently acting check valves set between two shut-off valves, and includes four test cocks. It is used to prevent backflow in certain non-health situations. It must be tested annually for detection and correction of any malfunction. A single check valve is not an acceptable backflow assembly under any circumstances. 
4.  Pressure Vacuum Breaker. A mechanical device designed to perform the same function as the atmospheric vacuum breaker. A pressure vacuum breaker may be used in special circumstances on the upstream side of control valves. It must be installed with the critical level at least twelve (12) inches above the flood rim of the fixture served, or twelve (12) inches above all downstream piping on the system. It cannot be subjected to back pressure, and must not be smaller than the supply pipe size. 
5.  Atmospheric Vacuum Breaker. A mechanical device designed to admit air automatically into a water supply whenever the pressure in said pipe falls below atmospheric pressure. It must be installed with the critical level at least six inches above the flood rim of the fixture served, or six inches above all downstream piping on the system, and on the discharge side of the last control valve. It cannot be subjected to back pressure, and must not be smaller than the supply pipe size. 
6.  Air Break. A piping arrangement in which a drain from a fixture, appliance or device discharges indirectly into a second fixture, receptacle or receptor at a point below the flood rim of the latter. No listing is made for this type of device. 
Spill Resistance Pressure Vacuum Breaker. A mechanical assembly designed to perform the same function as the atmospheric vacuum breaker. A modification in design which includes a spring loaded valve and an independent check valve that allows little discharge, permits its use in special circumstances, on the upstream side of control valves. It must be installed with the critical level at least twelve (12) inches above the flood rim of the fixture served, or at least twelve (12) inches above all downstream piping on the system. It cannot be subject to backpressure, and must not be smaller than the supply pipe size. 
Contamination. An impairment of the quality of the potable water by sewage industrial fluids or wasteliquids, compounds or other material to a degree which creates an actual or potential hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease. 
Cross-Connection. Any physical arrangement of piping or fixtures between two otherwise separate piping systems one of which contains potable water and the other nonpotable water or industrial fluids of questionable safety, through which, or because of which, backflow may occur into the potable water system. This would include any temporary connections, such as swing connections. 
Cross-Connection Control by Containment. The installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly at the water service connection to any customer's premises where it is physically and economically infeasible to find and permanently eliminate or control all actual or potential cross-connections within the customer's water system; or, it shall mean the installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly on the service line leading to and supplying a portion of a customer's water system where there are actual or potential cross-connections which cannot be effectively eliminated or controlled at the point of cross-connection. 
Hazard, degree of. The term is derived from an evaluation of the potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the potable water system. 
1.  Hazard—Health. Any condition, device, or practice in the water supply system and its operation which could create or in the judgment of the water supervisor, may create a danger to the health and well-being of the water consumer; 
2.  Hazard—Non-Health. An actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or to the potability of the public or the consumer's potable water system but which would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances, but would not be dangerous to health. 
Industrial Fluids System. Any system containing a fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health hazard, pollution hazard, or a plumbing hazard, if introduced into an approved water supply. This may include, but not be limited to: polluted or contaminated water; all types of process waters and "used waters" originating from the public potable water system which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality; chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances; contaminated natural water such as from well, springs, etc.; oil, gases, glycerin, paraffin's, caustic and acid solutions and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other purposes or for firefighting purposes. 
Pollution. Means the presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, or biological) in water, which tends to degrade its quality to a degree which does not create an actual hazard to the public health but which does adversely and unreasonably affect such water for domestic use. 
Water, nonpotable. Water which is not safe for human consumption or which is of questionable potability. 
Water, potable. Any water which, according to recognized standards, is safe for human consumption. 
Water-Service Connection. The terminal end of the service connection from the public potable water system; i.e., where the water purveyor loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the customer's water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the service connection shall mean the downstream end to the meter. There should be no unprotected takeoffs from the service line ahead of any meter or any backflow prevention assembly located at the point of delivery to the customer's water system. Service connections shall also include water services from fire hydrant and all other temporary or emergency water service connections from the public potable water system. 
Water-Used. Any water supplied by a water purveyor from a public potable water system to a consumer's water system after it has passed through the point of delivery and is no longer under the sanitary control of the water purveyor. 
(Ord. 2007-24 (part): editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; Ord. 190 § 2.1—2.17, 1986)  
Article III. - Requirements 
 
13.68.060 - Water system. 
A.  The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: the utility system and the customer system. 
B.  Utility system shall consist of the source facilities and the distribution system and shall include all those facilities of the water system under the complete control of the utility, up to the point where the customer's system begins. 
C.  The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the production, treatment, storage and delivery of water to the distribution system. 
D.  The distribution system shall include the network of conduits used for the delivery of water from the source to the customer's system. 
E.  The customer's system begins at the downstream side of water meter and carries throughout the entire length of the customer water system. 
(Ord. 2007-24 (part): Ord. 190 § 3.1.1—3.1.5, 1986)  
13.68.070 - Policy. 
A.  No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the water purveyor unless the water supply is protected as required by state laws and regulations and this chapter for control of backflow and cross-connections. Service of water to any premises shall be discontinued by the water purveyor if a backflow prevention assembly required by this chapter for control of backflow and cross-connections is not installed, tested and maintained, or if it is found that a backflow prevention assembly has been removed, by-passed or if any unprotected cross-connection exits on the premises. Service shall not be restored until all such conditions or defects are corrected. 
B.  The customer's system shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorize representatives of the water department of the city of South Salt Lake to determine whether cross-connections of other structural or sanitary hazards, including violation of these regulations, exist. When such a condition becomes known, the water department supervisor shall deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing for a physical break in the service line until the customer has corrected the condition(s) in conformance with the state and city statutes relating to plumbing and water supplies and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
C.  An approved backflow prevention assembly shall also be installed on each service line to a customer's water system at or near the property line or immediately inside the building being served; but, in all cases, before the first branch line leading off the service line wherever the following conditions exist: 
1.  In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply, the nonpotable water system shall not be extended into the building as stated by the current plumbing code and amendment as adopted by the state of Utah. 
2.  In the case of premises on which any industrial fluids or any other objectionable substance is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public water system shall be protected against backflow by an approved backflow prevention assembly appropriate to the degree of hazard. This shall include the handling of process water and water originating from the public water system which has been subject to deterioration in quality. 
3.  In the case of premises having: (1) internal cross-connection that cannot be permanently corrected or controlled or (2) intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross-connections exist, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow prevention assembly in the service line. 
D.  The type of protective assembly required shall depend upon the degree of hazard which exists as follows: 
1.  In the case of any premises where there is an auxiliary water supply as stated in this section, and it is not subject to any of the following rules, the public water system shall be protected by a swing-check valve and an approved reduced pressure zone assembly. 
2.  In the case of any premises where there is water or substance that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health, if introduced into the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved double check valve assembly. 
3.  In the case of any premises where there is any material dangerous to health which is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle assembly. Examples of premises where these conditions will exist include sewage treatment plants, hospitals, mortuaries and plating plants. 
4.  In the case of any premises where there are "uncontrolled" cross-connections, either actual or potential, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly at the service connection. 
5.  In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete in-plant cross-connection survey, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly on each service to the premises. 
E.  Approved Backflow Assemblies. The model and size of all backflow prevention assemblies shall be approved in writing by the State Division of Drinking Water. To gain approval for use within a public drinking water system, all backflow prevention assemblies must be in-line repairable, in-line testable and be certified through a third party certifying agency. The third party certification shall consist of any combination of two laboratories or field test certifications. Acceptable certifying agencies are: ASSE (American Society of Sanitary Engineers); IAPMO (International Association of Plumbing/Mechanical Officials) University of Southern California, Foundation for Cross-Connection and Hydraulic Research (USC-FCCHR). The USC-FCCHR is currently the only field testing provider for backflow protection assemblies. A list of approved backflow prevention assemblies for the state of Utah will be maintained for public inspection and use by the Division of Drinking Water. The South Salt Lake Water Department will also maintain a list of approved backflow prevention assemblies. If any assembly is found within the water system of South Salt Lake City which has not been approved, that assembly shall be removed and a state-approved assembly shall be installed in its place at the water users expense, or service to the installation shall be terminated. 
1.  It shall be the duty of the customer/user at any premises where backflow prevention assemblies are installed to have certified inspections and operational tests made once per year. In those instances where the water superintendent deems the hazard to be great enough, he may require these assemblies be tested at more frequent intervals. These inspections and tests shall be preformed by a class II or class III backflow technician. It shall be the duty of the water supervisor to see that these tests are made according to this document. 
F.  All presently installed backflow prevention assemblies which do not meet the requirements of this section but were approved assemblies at the time of installation and which have been properly maintained, and pass current testing criteria, and manufacturers' parts are still available, shall, except for the inspection and maintenance requirements of this section, be excluded from the requirements of these rules. Whenever the existing assembly does not meet the criteria, or parts are no longer available for that assembly, the assembly shall be replaced by an approved backflow prevention assembly meeting the requirements of this section at the owners expense. 
(Ord. 2007-24 (part): editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; Ord. 190 § 3.2.1—3.2.6, 1986)  
13.68.080 - Installation and inspections. 
Installation: All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed according to the current plumbing code and amendments as adopted by the state of Utah. 
(Ord. 2007-24 (part): editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; Ord. 190 § 4.1, 1986)  
13.68.090 - Testing of assemblies. 
A.  All reduced pressure backflow prevention assemblies, double check valve assemblies, pressure vacuum breakers, and spill resistant vacuum breakers shall be tested in conformance with the Plumbing Code and amendments and the rules for Public Water Systems as adopted by the state of Utah. All assemblies installed in a potable water supply system for protection against backflow shall be maintained in good working condition by the person or persons having control of such assemblies. The South Salt Lake Water Department may inspect such assemblies and, if found to be defective or inoperative, shall remove and replace the defective assembly. The owner will be required to pay for this work. No assembly shall be removed from use or relocated to another device, without the approval of the water department supervisor. If an assembly is moved or replaced then it will be tested as a new assembly. 
B.  All backflow assemblies, such as: reduced pressure backflow preventer, double check valve assembly, pressure vacuum breaker, and spill resistant vacuum breaker, shall be tested within ten days of installation or point of first use. 
C.  If assemblies are found in inaccessible areas, or areas which makes it impossible to test, repair and/or maintain, the assembly will be moved to a more accessible area at the owner's expense. 
D.  No backflow prevention assembly shall be installed so as to create a safety hazard; example: installed over electrical panels, steam pipes, ceiling level or above, or over a pit. 
(Ord. 2007-24 (part): editorially amended during 10/96 supplement; Ord. 190 § 4.2—4.2.1, 1986)  
13.68.100 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any violations of this chapter shall constitute a Class B misdemeanor and each day shall be deemed a separate violation. 
Should any part of this chapter be declared unlawful by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining parts shall not be affected thereby, and shall be in full force and effect. 
Effective Date. This chapter shall become effective immediately upon passage thereof and upon publication or posting as required by law. 
(Ord. 2007-24 (part): Ord. 190 § 5, 1986)  
Chapter 13.70 - DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION 
Sections: 
 
13.70.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Model Drinking Water Source Protection Ordinance." The provisions of this chapter shall be effective within the boundaries of the city of South Salt Lake, Utah, and shall set prohibitions and restrictions to prevent contamination of the public drinking water supply in the city as a result of hazardous and toxic substances entering the groundwater, including wells not owned by the city. This chapter shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes set forth herein. 
(Ord. 98-5 (part))  
13.70.020 - Applicability. 
It shall be the responsibility of any person owning real property and/or owning or operating a business within the jurisdiction of the city to conform and comply with the applicable provisions contained in this chapter. Ignorance of this provision shall not excuse any violations of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 98-5 (part))  
13.70.030 - Authority. 
The city of South Salt Lake has the authority to adopt this chapter to facilitate compliance with drinking water source protection regulations pursuant to the Land Use and Development Act, Utah Code Annotated Section 10-9-102, the Utah Administrative Code, Section R309-113, and other such authorities and provisions as in the statutory and common law of the state of Utah. 
(Ord. 98-5 (part))  
13.70.040 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to protect, preserve, and maintain existing and potential public drinking water sources in order to safeguard the public health, safety and welfare of city residents and visitors. The intent of this chapter is to establish and designate drinking water source protection zones and groundwater recharge areas for all sources of public drinking water within city boundaries and jurisdiction. This chapter establishes criteria for regulating the storage, handling, use or production of hazardous or toxic substances within identified areas where groundwater is, or could be affected by the potential contaminant source. This shall be accomplished by the designation and regulation of property uses and conditions that may be maintained within such zones or areas. Unless otherwise specified, the provisions of this chapter apply to new development and/or handling, movement, and storage of potentially hazardous materials. 
B.  The degree of protection afforded by this chapter is considered adequate for regulatory purposes. This chapter does not ensure that public drinking water sources will not be subject to accidental or intentional contamination, nor does it create liability on the part of the city, or an officer or employee thereof, for any damages to the public water supplies from reliance on this chapter nor any administrative order lawfully made thereunder. 
C.  A notice to cease or an exemption issued under this chapter shall not relieve the owner of the obligation to comply with any other applicable federal, state, regional or local regulations, rule, ordinance or requirement, nor shall said notice or exemption relieve any owner of any liability for violation of such regulations, rules, ordinances, or requirements. 
(Ord. 98-5 (part))  
13.70.050 - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be defined as follows: 
"Abandoned well" means a well the use of which has been permanently discontinued or is in such a state of disrepair that it cannot be used for its intended purpose or for observation purposes. 
"Best management practices (BMPs)" means a practice or combination of practices determined to be the most effective practicable (including technological, economic, and institutional considerations) means of preventing or reducing the amount of pollution to a level compatible with water, soil, and air quality goals. 
"City" means the city of South Salt Lake, Utah. 
"Closure" means the cessation of operation of a facility, or any portion thereof, and the act of securing such facility or portion thereof to ensure protection of groundwater in accordance with the appropriate state, federal, and local regulations applicable to the specific facility and with the provisions of this chapter. 
"Code" means the ordinances of the city of South Salt Lake. 
"Code inspector" means any authorized agent or employees of the city whose duty is to assure code compliance. 
"Collection area" means the area surrounding a groundwater source which is underlain by collection pipes, tile, tunnels, infiltration boxes, or other groundwater collection devices. 
"Continuous transit" means the nonstop movement of a mobile vehicle except for stops required by traffic laws. 
"Council" means the city council of the city of South Salt Lake, Utah. 
"Department" means the public agency, division, or department designated by the city of South Salt Lake to enforce the provisions of this chapter. For the city of South Salt Lake, the department is water department, code enforcement department, health department, or any other enforcement agency. 
"Discharge" means and includes, but is not limited to, spilling, leaking, seeping, pouring, injecting, emitting, emptying, disposing, releasing, or dumping regulated substances to the soils, air, groundwaters, or surface waters of the city. Release does not include the use of a regulated substance in accordance with the appropriate use intended or specified by the manufacturer of the substances, provided that such use is not prohibited by federal, state, or local regulations. Release shall not include releases specifically authorized by federal or state permits. 
"Drinking water source protection review committee" is the public utilities department determined by the city of South Salt Lake, and whose purpose is to make determinations regarding delineation of protection areas and zones. 
"Drinking water source protection zone" means an area within which certain practices are mandated to protect groundwater flowing to public drinking water wells. 
"Drinking water supply spring" means a drinking water spring to supply water which has been permitted or intended for consumptive use. 
"Drinking water supply well" means a drinking water well to supply water which has been permitted or intended for consumptive use. 
"DWSP" means drinking water source protection. 
"EPA" means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
"Groundwater" means any water which may be drawn from the ground. 
"Groundwater discharge area" means an area where the direction of groundwater movement is upward from the principal aquifer to the shallow unconfined aquifer. Discharge areas, determined by the United States Geological Survey (USGS), are shown on Exhibit 2, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
"Groundwater divide" means a ridge in the water table or potentiometric surface, from which groundwater moves away in both directions. 
"Groundwater TOT" means time of travel for groundwater. 
"Handle" means to use, generate, process, produce, package, treat, store, or transport a regulated substance in any fashion. 
"Hazardous waste" means a hazardous waste as defined by the U.S. EPA and applicable federal statutes and regulations. 
"Nonresidential activity" means all activity that is not designated as residential. 
"Operating permit" means a permit to operate a facility handling regulated substances under this chapter. The permit will be issued by the department of building, zoning, and licensing for the city of South Salt Lake, Utah. 
"PCS" means potential contaminant source. 
"Person" means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association, joint venture, governmental entity or other legal entity, and shall include the plural as well as singular. 
"Petroleum product" means and includes fuels (gasoline, diesel fuel, kerosene, and mixtures of these products), lubricating oils, motor oils (new and used), hydraulic fluids, and other similar petroleum-based products. 
"Primary recharge area" means the areas depicted on Exhibit 2, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
"Protection zone" means the delineation zones of the drinking water source protection zone, as summarized in Section 13.70.070 of this chapter. 
"PWS" means public water system. 
"Regulated substances" means substances (including degradation and interaction products) which because of quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical (including ignitability, corrosivity, reactiveness and toxicity), infectious characteristics, radiomutagenicity, carcinogenicity, teratogenicity, bioaccumulative effect, persistence (non-degradability) in nature, or any other characteristics relevant to a particular material that may cause significant harm to human health or and environment (including surface and groundwater, plants, and animals). 
"Residential activity" means any building or structure or portion thereof that is designed for or used for residential purposes and any activity involving the use of occupancy of a lot for residential purposes. Residential activity shall include those customary and accessory residential activities associated with the principal permitted use of a lot for residential purposes as set out in the zoning ordinance of the city. 
"SARA Title III" means the Superfund Amendment and Reauthorization Act section found in 40 CFR 300-302, pertaining to emergency response and right-to-know. 
"Secondary containment" means any system that is used to provide release detection and release prevention, such as trays under containers, floor curbing or other systems designed to hold materials or liquids that may discharge from containers holding regulated substances. Examples include a double-walled tank, a double-walled integral piping system, or a single-walled tank or integral piping system that is protected by an enclosed concrete vault, liner, or an impervious containment area. 
"Secondary recharge area" means the areas depicted on Exhibit 2 attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
"Septic holding tank" means a water-tight receptacle, used to contain septic waste. The contents of which are extilated and disposed of at a waste disposal facility. 
"Septic tank system" means a generally water-tight receptacle connected to a drain field that allows liquid from the tank to enter the soil. The system is constructed to promote separation of solid and liquid components of domestic wastewater, to provide decomposition of organic matter, to store solids, and to allow clarified liquid to discharge for further treatment and disposal in a soil absorption system. 
"Sludge or biosolids" means the solids separated from wastewater during the wastewater treatment process. 
"Solid waste disposal facility" means any solid waste management facility which is the final resting place for solid waste, including landfills and incineration facilities that produce ash from the process of incinerating solid waste. 
"Solid waste transfer facility" means a site the primary purpose of which is to store or hold solid waste for transport to a processing or disposal facility. It does not include green boxes, compactor units, permanent dumpsters, and other containers from which such wastes are transported to a landfill or other solid waste management facility. 
"Travel time contour" means the locus of points that form a line of any configuration in space from which groundwater particles on that line theoretically take an equal amount of time to reach a given destination, such as a well or a well field, as predicted by the Refined Salt Lake Valley MODFLOW/MODPATH model copyrighted. 
"UAC" means the Utah Administrative Code. 
"USGS" means the United States Geological Survey. 
"Well" means any excavation that is drilled, cored, bored, washed, driven, dug, jetted, or otherwise constructed when the intended use of such excavation is for the location, acquisition, development, or artificial recharge of groundwater. 
"Wellfield" means an area of land which contains one or more drinking water supply wells. 
(Ord. 98-5 (part))  
13.70.060 - Recharge area and protection zone map. 
The extent of the recharge areas and the protection zones may be seen on the recharge area and protection zone map, Exhibit 2. The recharge area and protection zone map was completed October 21, 1997, and is incorporated and made a part of this chapter. The recharge area boundary lines have been located along streets and or section lines for convenience of assessing which prohibition and restrictions apply to a specific property. This map shall be on file with the city of South Salt Lake, and shall be maintained by the city and public water systems whose groundwater resources lay within the city of South Salt Lake boundaries and jurisdiction. Any amendments, additions, or deletions to this map shall be by the city and/or the public water system following written notice after approval by the drinking water source protection review committee. Notice shall be published at least thirty (30) days prior to consideration by the committee. 
(Ord. 98-5 (part))  
13.70.070 - Designation of recharge areas and protection zones. 
A.  The following recharge areas and protection zones are designated within the city of South Salt Lake: 
1.  Primary recharge area, as determined by the USGS (see Exhibit 2). 
2.  Secondary recharge, as determined by the USGS (see Exhibit 2). 
3.  Protection Zone 1 shall be the area within a one hundred-foot radius from the well or margin of the collection area. 
4.  Protection Zone 2 shall be area within a two hundred fifty-day groundwater TOT to the margin of the collection area, the boundary of the aquifer(s) which supplies water to the groundwater source, or the groundwater divide, whichever is closer. 
5.  Protection Zone 3 shall be the area within a three-year TOT to the margin of the collection area, the boundary of the aquifer(s) which supplies water to the groundwater source, or the groundwater divide, whichever is closer. 
6.  Protection Zone 4 shall be the area within a fifteen-year TOT to the margin of the collection area, the boundary of the aquifer(s) which supplies water to the groundwater source, or the groundwater divide, whichever is closer. 
B.  In determining the location of properties and facilities within the areas and zones depicted on the drinking water source protection overlay map, the following rules shall apply. 
1.  Property located wholly or partially in a recharge area or a protection zone on the overlay map shall be governed by the restrictions applicable to that recharge area or protection zone. 
2.  Properties located within more than one recharge area or protection zone as shown on the overlay map shall be governed by the restrictions applicable to the most restrictive protection zone. 
(Ord. 98-5 (part))  
13.70.080 - Review of recharge area protection zone map. 
The recharge area and protection zone map shall be reviewed at least one time every five years or more frequently if determined appropriate by the city of South Salt Lake. Failure to conduct this review shall not affect the validity of the existing approved map. The basis for updating the map may include, but is not limited to, the following: 
A.  Changes in technical or scientific knowledge in the areas of geohydrology, hydraulics, and geology; 
B.  Changes in wellfield configuration; 
C.  Changes in pumping rates for the wellfield; 
D.  Development of new wells, wellfields, and/or springs; 
E.  Changes in water quality. 
(Ord. 98-5 (part))  
13.70.090 - Releases. 
No person shall discharge, or permit the discharge of any regulated substances or petroleum products, whether treated or untreated, to soils, air, groundwater, or surface water in any recharge area or protection zone, that may have a deleterious effect upon the groundwater in the city of South Salt Lake, unless the release is in compliance with federal, state, and local regulations. 
(Ord. 98-5 (part))  
13.70.100 - Prohibitions and restrictions. 
Table 1 (attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter) is a summary matrix of potential contamination sources and their prohibited, permitted, or conditional uses in the protection zones referenced in Section 13.70.070.  
13.70.110 - Review of development plans. 
All development plans that lie within the primary recharge area shall be reviewed by a registered geologist who has demonstrated expertise in the assessment of recharge rates. Any development that will result in a loss of the beneficial use of groundwater or that may have an adverse or negative effect upon local groundwater quality shall be rejected. Plans that are rejected may be revised by the developer and resubmitted to the city of South Salt Lake for subsequent review by a registered geologist. Developments that do not lie within either the primary or secondary recharge area may proceed with the development plan processing requirements of the city of South Salt Lake. The developer shall pay for the cost of the review(s) by the registered geologist. 
(Ord. 98-5 (part))  
13.70.120 - Toxic, hazardous, and other materials handling regulations. 
A.  The general classes of substances to be regulated under this chapter shall be those set forth in the generic regulated substances list which is presented as Exhibit 1 of the ordinance codified in this chapter. The Regulated Substances shall include those set forth in the most current lists, as amended from time to time, entitled Identification and Listing of Hazardous Materials (40 CFR Part 261, Subpart D) and List of Extremely Hazardous Substances (40 CFR Part 355, Appendix A and B) and which are in a form that they are, all or in part, capable of entering the groundwater. 
B.  The use and storage of regulated substances in designated protection zones and recharge areas shall be allowed, provided that the quantities of these substances do not exceed the "Reportable Quantity" for each Regulated Substance, as designated in 40 CFR 302 (pursuant to Section 311 of the Clean Water Act). An applicant may be exempted from the provisions of this section provided that he or she demonstrates to the department and to the Utah Division of Drinking Water Quality that the regulated substances pose no hazard to groundwater. 
(Ord. 98-5 (part))  
13.70.121 - Storage containers. 
A.  All regulated substances shall be stored in suitable containers to reduce the chance for the substances to be accidentally introduced into the environment. These storage containers shall be product-tight and, except where provided elsewhere in the chapter, shall be provided with a means to control spillage (primary containment) and to contain or drain off spillage and fire-protection water discharged in the storage area (secondary containment). 
B.  Storage containers which are stored outside must be covered or mounted to prevent the accumulation of rain or other water on the top of the container, or the degradation of the top, sides or bottom of the container, in a manner that would lead to the reduction of the integrity of the container. Defective storage containers shall be removed from service for repair or disposal in accordance with local, state, and federal standards. 
(Ord. 98-5 (part))  
13.70.122 - Secondary containment. 
A.  Where secondary containment is required, it shall be constructed of a material of sufficient structural integrity and composition to contain the required capacity of liquids and not be structurally weakened as a result of contact with the discharge of the regulated substance to be contained. The material shall be free of cracks, joints, gaps, or other imperfections which would allow leakage through the containment material. 
B.  The secondary containment system shall have sufficient capacity to contain (a) ten percent of the volume of all containers and one hundred (100) percent of the volume of the largest single container, whichever is greater, plus (b) the design flow rate of the automatic fire extinguishing system (for twenty (20) minutes) for the area or room in which the storage is located. If the storage area and/or containment area are open to rainfall, the secondary containment system must also accommodate the volume of a twenty-four-hour rainfall as determined by a twenty-five-year storm frequency. Liquid that accumulates in the secondary containment system shall be removed in as timely a manner as necessary to prevent overflow of the system. Nonhazardous liquids may be drained in accordance with applicable local regulations. If the collected material is a hazardous waste under Title 40 Part 261 of the Code of Federal Regulations, it must be managed as a hazardous waste in accordance with all applicable requirements of Parts 262 through 266 of that regulation. 
C.  Vacuum suction devices, absorbent scavenger materials or other devices approved by the department, shall be present on-site or available to facilitate the removal or further containment of spilled regulated substances. Devices or materials shall be available in sufficient magnitude so as to at least control and collect the total quantity of regulated substances that the containment system is designed to contain. Emergency containers shall be present and of such capacity as to hold the total quantity of regulated substances plus absorbent material 
(Ord. 98-5 (part))  
13.70.123 - Regulated substances emergency management plan. 
An emergency plan shall be prepared and filed with the water department, the fire department, the police department, and the PWS indicating the procedures that will be followed in the event of the release of a regulated substance so as to control and collect all such spilled material in such a manner as to prevent it from discharging into any storm or sanitary drains or the ground. Facilities which have had, or appear to have had, unauthorized discharges to soil or groundwater shall be required by the department to submit a regulated substances management plan for the facility. The written plan will be used to demonstrate to the department that the facility owner or operator understands the procedures and has the proper equipment to handle regulated substances within the guidelines of this chapter. The plan should not be implemented without the approval of the department. 
(Ord. 98-5 (part))  
13.70.124 - Reporting of spills. 
Any spill of a regulated substance in excess of the nonaggregate quantity thresholds established by the List of Hazardous Waste (40 CFR Part 261), Subpart D), 40 CFR Appendix VIII—Hazardous Constituents and EPA Designation Reportable Quantities and Notification Requirements for Hazardous Substances under CERCLA (40 CFR 302, effective July 3, 1986), shall be reported by telephone to the city, water department, and fire department designated water utility within one hour of discovery of the spill. Cleanup shall commence immediately upon discovery of the spill. A full written report shall be submitted to the city, water department, and fire department within fifteen (15) days of discovery of the spill. 
(Ord. 98-5 (part))  
13.70.130 - Best management practices. 
Under the provisions of this chapter, all potential contamination sources within the city's boundaries, shall incorporate and utilize best management practices (BMPs) in their operations. BMPs that reduce the potential for spills and leaks at a site to occur and enter groundwater shall be construed within the context of this chapter to include, but not be limited to, structural and nonstructural practices, conservation practices, and operation and maintenance procedures as specified by the Utah Department of Drinking Water Quality and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
(Ord. 98-5 (part))  
13.70.140 - Underground storage tanks. 
A.  Installation of any new underground storage tanks used to store regulated substances for either residential or nonresidential activities in recharge areas and protection zones designated under Sections 13.70.070 and 13.70.090 through 13.70.110 of this chapter, shall require a secondary containment system for the tank and associated underground piping, and an automatic leak detection system. 
B.  A permit from division of environmental remediation and response shall be required for the removal or closure of USTs. The permit shall require that leaking tanks be pumped dry and removed from the ground by a state-licensed company. If removal of the UST(s) is not feasible, the lines shall be disconnected and capped and the tank shall be filled with an inert substance such as washed sand. 
C.  Best management practices implementation is required for all underground storage tanks. 
(Ord. 98-5 (part))  
13.70.150 - Septic tank systems. 
A.  No person shall place, maintain, or operate onsite sewage disposal from a septic tank within the primary recharge area, Zone 1, Zone 2, or within three hundred (300) feet of any public street in which a public sewer is laid. Septic systems in Zones 3 and 4 shall comply with the Utah State Department of Health Care of Waste Disposal Regulations, Part IV and Part V. 
B.  Nonresidential activities which have septic tank systems shall have installed a four-inch-diameter vertical pipe with a locked cap or locked top in the top of the septic tank. This monitoring pipe shall be located in a manner which will permit ready access by department personnel to extract representative samples to check for improper/unauthorized disposal of regulated substances. 
C.  A septic holding tank that does not discharge into the soil would be preferred. The contents of a septic holding tank are removed, and can be treated or disposed of at an appropriate facility. 
(Ord. 98-5 (part))  
13.70.160 - Sewage collection, transmission and disposal. 
A.  No person shall discharge treated or untreated sewage in any area not specifically designated for that purpose by the department. The owner or operators of any wastewater treatment plant, sanitary sewer, force main, gravity sewer, or lateral shall notify the department within twenty-four (24) hours of discovering a break that may or does result in the leakage of sewage. Emergency telephone numbers will be prominently displayed on all sewage lift stations within Zones 1, 2, 3, and 4, and the primary recharging area. 
B.  All leaking sewage collection and transmission pipes shall be repaired or replaced. New sewage collection and transmission pipes shall be installed according to acceptable construction standards and shall have routine inspections during and after construction. 
C.  No person shall place, maintain, or operate a wastewater treatment plant within Zones 1 or 2. 
(Ord. 98-5 (part))  
13.70.170 - General stormwater management. 
A.  All future stormwater management systems to be constructed and implemented for facilities within the protection zones and recharge areas shall be permitted in accordance with applicable local, state, and federal laws and regulations. 
B.  The discharge of stormwater into drainage wells or open sinkholes shall be prohibited without some form of treatment. This treatment shall be applied to at least the first 0.5-inch of runoff from the area tributary to the well or open sinkhole. 
C.  The clean water and stormwater regulations require municipalities and industries to identify, monitor, and limit urban runoff that may enter rivers, thus potentially affecting groundwater quality. 
(Ord. 98-5 (part))  
13.70.180 - Deicing salt storage and application. 
Deicing salt shall be stored on an impermeable pad and shall be covered. Deicing salt application shall use best management practices and shall evaluate substitute products and technologies. 
(Ord. 98-5 (part))  
13.70.190 - Landfills. 
Expansion or creation of new landfills is prohibited in the primary recharge area and Zone 1 and Zone 2. Existing landfills in the primary recharge area or in Protection Zone 1 shall be required to comply with the provisions of UAC R315-301-1 through 301-5. Landfills shall develop and implement a landfill monitoring program. The monitoring shall include the vadose zone and groundwater. If the monitoring detects contamination, the following corrective measures may be required: 
A.  Cover the landfill with suitable low-permeability materials and minimize the application of supplemental water to reduce infiltration of moisture. 
B.  Install groundwater containment and treatment actions, additional monitoring, and erosion controls as required. 
(Ord. 98-5 (part))  
13.70.200 - Environmental quality monitoring. 
Facilities which have had, or appear to have had, unauthorized releases to soil or groundwater shall be required by the department to monitor soil and groundwater in and adjacent to the facility. At the request of the department, the facility will submit a monitoring plan for department review. The plan shall be implemented with the approval of the department. Facilities that undergo closure may be required to monitor soil and groundwater in and adjacent to the facility subject to closure. All costs associated with the closing and monitoring of the site will be paid for by the operator of the facility. 
(Ord. 98-5 (part))  
13.70.205 - Exclusions and exemptions. 
These exclusions and exemptions shall not pertain to Zones 1 and 2 within one hundred (100) feet from the wellfield in the recharge areas. 
(Ord. 98-5 (part))  
13.70.210 - Exclusions. 
The following substances are not subject to the provisions of this chapter provided that these substances are handled, stored, and disposed of in a manner that does not result in an unauthorized release or cause contamination of the groundwater. 
A.  Required substances stored at residences that do not exceed ten pounds or five gallons and used for personal, family, or household purposes. 
B.  Commercial products limited to use at the site solely for office or janitorial purposes when stored in total quantities of less than twenty (20) pounds, or ten gallons. 
C.  Prepackaged consumer products available through retail sale to individuals for personal, family, or household use, that are properly stored. 
D.  Water-based latex paint. 
E.  Fertilizers and treated seed (except as noted in this chapter). 
F.  Pesticide products and materials intended for use in weed abatement, pest control, erosion control, soil amendment or similar applications when applied in accordance with manufacturer's instructions, label directions, and nationally recognized standards. 
G.  Compressed gases. 
H.  Substances or mixtures which may pose a hazard but are labeled pursuant to the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. 
(Ord. 98-5 (part))  
13.70.220 - Continuous transit. 
The transportation of any regulated substance(s) through any protection zone or recharge area shall be allowed provided that the transporting vehicle is in continuous transit. 
(Ord. 98-5 (part))  
13.70.230 - Vehicular and lawn maintenance fuel and lubricant use. 
The use of any petroleum product solely as an operational fuel in the vehicle or lawn maintenance fuel tank or as a lubricant in such a vehicle shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. These spent products shall be properly disposed of in compliance with applicable federal, state, and local regulations. 
(Ord. 98-5 (part))  
13.70.240 - Inspections. 
The department shall be granted the right, under this chapter, to enforce the provisions of this chapter for the city of South Salt Lake. An authorized employee of the city of South Salt Lake or the PWS has the right to conduct inspections of facilities to determine compliance with this chapter. The authorized employee or the PWS shall inform the department and other city entities, as deemed appropriate, of the results of the inspection and whether violations were noted. The authorized employee of the city of South Salt Lake shall enforce the provisions of this chapter without regard to whether the wells within the city of South Salt Lake boundaries are owned by the city of South Salt Lake. Noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter is a violation. If the facility is not complying with the requirements of this chapter, penalties (e.g., citations of noncompliance, orders to cease operations or administrative penalties) may be assessed. This chapter regulates businesses within the protection zones and primary and secondary recharge areas within the city. 
(Ord. 98-5 (part))  
13.70.250 - Notice of violations. 
A.  Whenever it is determined that there is a violation of this chapter or the regulations promulgated pursuant hereto, the notice of violation shall: 
1.  Be in writing; 
2.  Be dated and signed by the authorized city agent that made the inspection or determined the violation; 
3.  Specify the violation or violations; 
4.  Provide a specific date that the violations will be corrected by; 
5.  State that if the violation is not corrected by a specific date a hearing may be requested before the department. 
B.  If a potential contaminant source (PCS) is out of compliance with the provisions of this chapter, but does not pose an immediate threat to public health, then a written warning of violation may be issued within thirty (30) days. The person has the opportunity to show a good faith effort to correct an unintentional violation within a reasonable amount of time. A cease and desist order shall be issued by the department if the PCS is found not to employ BMPs and there is an immediate threat to public health and safety or if the violation is not corrected within the time frame specified in a written warning previously issued to the PCS. In the event that the PCS fails to comply with a cease and desist order within the specified time period, the department has the authority to file a request for the department to initiate proceedings for issuance of penalties and other relief as necessary. 
C.  Any PCS or person found in violation of any provisions of this chapter will be served with a written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time frame for compliance. Violations of the provisions of this chapter constitute a misdemeanor, punishable as provided by law. In the event of a spill, leak or discharge of a regulated substance, the department if it deems the activity to pose a real and present danger of contaminating surface or groundwater which would normally enter the public water supply, the department has the authority under this chapter to cause cessation of said activity or use of regulated substance, require administrative controls to mitigate said danger and/or cause the provision of pollution control and abatement activities. A facility is in violation of this chapter, if use of regulated substances in a protection zone or primary or secondary recharge area exceeds twenty (20) gallons or one hundred sixty (160) pounds at any time. The total use of regulated substances may not exceed fifty (50) gallons or four hundred (400) pounds in any twelve-month period. 
(Ord. 98-5 (part))  
13.70.260 - Appeals. 
Any appeals from a notice of violation and summons or a citation must follow the appeals process outlined in Chapter 2.22 of this code. An appeal request shall be in writing and must be received no later than ten days following such notice or citation. 
(Ord. 2008-21 (part): Ord. 98-5 (part))  
13.70.270 - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and other restrictions, including land use codes or development regulations conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the most stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. 98-5 (part))  
13.70.280 - Disputes. 
Disputes arising from the delineation of DWSP zones and primary and secondary recharge areas shall be directed to the drinking water source protection review committee to review specific detailed delineation maps showing the boundaries. The boundaries have been defined, for ease of implementation of this chapter, according to major city streets. 
(Ord. 98-5 (part))  
13.70.290 - Review of this chapter. 
The city, the drinking water source protection review committee, and all water utilities whose wells and/or springs lay within the city boundaries shall review the provisions of this chapter at least once every five years, or more frequently if determined appropriate by the city, to determine its applicability and may incorporate changes as deemed appropriate. 
(Ord. 98-5 (part))  
13.70.300 - Liability. 
Any person subject to regulation under this chapter shall be liable with respect to regulated substances emanating on or from the person's property for all cost of removal or remedial action incurred by the city or the PWS and for damages for injury to, destruction of, or less of natural resources, including the reasonable cost of assessing such injury, destruction, or loss from the release or threatened release of a regulated substance as defined by this chapter. Such removal or remedial action by the city or the PWS may include, but is not limited to, the prevention of further contamination of groundwater, monitoring, containment, and cleanup or disposal of regulated substances resulting from spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, or dumping of any regulated substance or material which creates an emergency hazardous, or is expected to create, an emergency hazardous situation. 
(Ord. 98-5 (part))  
13.70.310 - Administration. 
The policies and procedures for administration of any protection zone or primary and secondary recharge area established under this chapter, including without limitation those applicable to nonconforming uses, exceptions, enforcement and penalties, shall be the same as provided in any existing zoning ordinance in the city, as the same is presently enacted or may from time to time be amended. 
(Ord. 98-5 (part))  
Division III. - Solid Waste  
Chapter 13.72 - HOUSEHOLD WASTE COLLECTION 
Sections: 
 
13.72.000 - Purpose. 
To promote the health and beauty of the community, to support efficient use of natural resources and to reduce demand for landfill space, the city shall provide a system for the removal of household waste and recyclable waste. The city shall provide for the curbside collection of household waste from residential dwellings of two units or less, that front upon a public owned and maintained road. The collection shall take place at weekly intervals. This chapter shall define the types and quantities of household waste that will be collected by the city. The city will also provide for bi-weekly collection of recyclable waste as defined in this chapter. The collection shall be performed by the city or its contractor. 
(Ord. 2008-17 (part): Ord. 2005-11 (part): Ord. 2005-06 (part))  
13.72.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Bulky waste" means large items of solid waste including, but not limited to, appliances, furniture, construction and demolition waste, motor vehicles, tires, trees, branches, and stumps. 
"Construction and demolition waste" means solid waste resulting from the construction, remodeling, repair and demolition of structures, and from road building and land clearing. Such waste includes, but is not limited to, bricks, concrete and other masonry materials, soil, rock, wall coverings, plaster, drywall, and other inert material, plumbing fixtures, non-asbestos insulation, roofing shingles, asphaltic pavement, glass, plastics that are not sealed in a way that conceals other wastes, wood, and metals that are incidental to any of the above. Solid waste that is not construction and demolition waste (even if resulting from the construction, remodeling, repair and demolition of structures, and from road building and land clearing) includes, but is not limited to, hazardous waste, asbestos-containing material, garbage, fluorescent electrical fixtures containing mercury, transformers containing polychlorinated biphenyls, thermostats containing mercury, refrigeration units containing chlorofluorocarbons, radioactive waste, tires, drums and containers with liquid or unrecognizable wastes, and fuel tanks. 
"Financial hardship" means an owner of a residential dwelling or dwelling qualifying for household waste service by special permit whose income falls at or below the federal poverty guideline and: (1) is either sixty (60) years of age or older; or (2) has been declared disabled by the United States Social Security Administration. 
"Hazardous waste" means solid waste, or a combination of solid wastes which, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics, may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious or incapacitating irreversible illness, or pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment if improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed, or otherwise managed, or any solid waste listed as a hazardous waste under Section R315-2-10 of the Utah Hazardous Waste Management Rules, or any solid waste that exhibits a characteristic of a hazardous waste as defined in Section R315-2-9 of the Utah Hazardous Waste Management Rules. 
"Household waste" means solid waste generated and discarded from a residential dwelling, normally and reasonably associated with households and household activities, not including bulky waste, construction and demolition waste, hazardous waste; or any other type of waste that is prohibited by state rule or law, or health department regulation from being carried by a commercial waste hauler or from being deposited in a municipal landfill. 
"Main artery street" means 1100 West, 900 West, 700 West, 500 West, 300 West, West Temple, Main Street, State Street, 300 East, 500 East, 700 East, 2100 South, 2700 South, 3300 South and 3900 South. 
"Residential dwelling" means a dwelling that abuts on a publicly owned and maintained road within the corporate limits of city, is part of a permanent building having less than three units, is occupied by a person or a group of persons comprising not more than two families, is currently receiving public utility services and includes condominiums where each dwelling unit abuts a public road and has individual drive access to the public road. 
"Recyclable waste" means paper, including: brochures, catalogs, computer paper, junk mail, magazines, mixed office paper, newspapers, telephone books and wrapping paper; cardboard, including: cardboard, cereal boxes, drink cartons, food boxes and cartons, gift, shoe and tissue boxes, milk and juice cartons, paper bags and paper board; plastics, including: clear and colored bottles, plastic grocery bags, food and juice bottles, milk jugs, plastic bottles, plastic containers, plastic jugs, soda pop bottles, water jugs and bottles; and metals, including: aluminum cans, aluminum disposable pans, steel cans, tin cans and various food cans. 
"Residential yard debris" means waste that is typically generated as the result of annual cleanup and maintenance of a residential dwelling yard space. It includes green waste but does not include agricultural waste, bulky waste, construction and demolition waste, dead animals, garbage, hazardous waste (including paint, solvents, household and yard chemicals and vehicle tires), industrial solid waste and infectious waste. "Residential yard debris is included within the definition of "solid waste." 
"Solid waste" means household waste, garbage, refuse, rubbish, junk, hazardous waste, infectious waste, industrial solid waste, construction and demolition waste, dead animals, recyclable waste other spent, useless, worthless, or discarded materials, or materials stored or accumulated for the purpose of discarding; materials that have served their original intended purpose; or waste material resulting from industrial manufacturing, mining, commercial, agricultural, household, institutional, recreational, or community activities. It does not include solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage, in irrigation return flows, or discharges for which a permit is required under Chapter 11, Title 26, Utah Code, Annotated, 1953, as amended, or under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 U.S.C., Section 1251, et seq. 
"Special permit" means a process by which a dwelling that does not meet the definition of "residential dwelling" may receive household waste and recyclable waste collection services from the city. 
"Waste unacceptable for recycling" means all solid waste except recyclable waste, including, but not limited to: aerosol cans, aluminum foil, car batteries, china and ceramics, clothing, cookware, disposable diapers, food and liquid waste, glass, household hazardous waste, light bulbs and tubes, motor oil, paint cans, plastic toys, small appliances, styrofoam packaging, trash and yard waste, used paper plates and cups, pizza boxes, wax paper, wood scraps. 
(Ord. 2008-17 (part): Ord. 2005-11 (part): Ord. 2005-06 (part))  
13.72.020 - Household waste collection. 
A.  The city or its contractor will provide for the weekly curbside collection of household waste as further defined in this paragraph. Such waste shall be collected from a "residential dwelling" or a dwelling that has been issued a "special permit." 
B.  Only household waste and recycling containers provided by the city or its contractor shall be allowed for curbside household waste collection and recyclable waste collection. The city will provide up to one additional household waste container to an owner-occupied dwelling for a fee as described in the consolidated fee schedule. Household waste and recycling containers shall be of different colors. In the event any container which does not conform to the provisions of this section is set out for collection, the city or its contractor shall have the authority to deny collection services for such container. 
C.  The following materials shall not be set out for collection whether placed in a container or otherwise: 
1.  Highly flammable or explosive materials; 
2.  Hazardous or radioactive waste materials; 
3.  Hot ashes, cinders, clinkers, or stove ashes which could ignite other refuse; 
4.  Dead animals; 
5.  Commercial and industrial refuse; 
6.  Bulky waste (unless during designated annual or semi-annual cleanup, see Section 13.72.310); 
7.  Septic tank waste or holding tank waste from recreational vehicles or travel trailers; 
8.  Tires; 
9.  Batteries; 
10.  Oils, paint, paint thinner; 
11.  These restrictions apply equally to the use of recyclable containers in addition to items described in subsection E below. 
D.  Refuse Materials Requiring Special Preparation. Small animal waste material must be dry and mixed with sand, sawdust, commercial pet litter, or similar absorptive material, and double wrapped in paper or placed in a separate plastic bag before being placed in a refuse container for disposal. 
Sharp objects such as broken glass, knives, and hypodermic needles must be double wrapped in paper or other suitable material so that no sharp edge is exposed before being placed in a refuse container for disposal. 
Ashes, cinders or clinkers must be wrapped separately in a plastic bag or other suitable material so as to prevent dust blowing before being placed in a container for disposal. 
E.  Waste unacceptable for recycling shall not be placed for collection in a recyclable waste container. 
F.  The following fees are imposed for collection of household waste in the amounts set forth in the consolidated fee schedule: 
1.  New Can Delivery Charge. No fee will be charged for delivery of a household waste container and a recyclable waste container upon a first-time subscription for service. Afterwards the fee will be imposed any time the city is requested to deliver a new or additional can to a dwelling. 
2.  Non-owner Occupied Residential Dwelling Fee. This fee shall be imposed upon each dwelling unit that receives household waste and recyclable waste collection service from the city but is occupied by a person or persons other than the owner of the dwelling. It shall be assessed in advance on an annual basis and shall be collected in conjunction with the nonregulatory business license fee set forth in Section 5.46.070 of this code. 
3.  Owner Occupied Residential Dwelling Fee. This fee shall be imposed upon each dwelling unit that receives household waste and recyclable waste collection service from the city and is occupied by the owner of the dwelling. It shall be assessed on a monthly basis. 
4.  Late Fee. This fee may be assessed any time payment by the customer is ten or more business days delinquent. 
5.  Special Permit Fee. A one-time fee will be assessed when a property owner whose dwelling does not automatically qualify for waste collection service, requests that the public works department inspect and approve the property for waste collection by special permit. No initial special permit fee will be charged to residential dwellings that were receiving household waste service prior to adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter but which now require a special permit. 
6.  Second Household Waste Container Fee. The city will deliver one additional household waste container to a residential dwelling. Owner-occupied dwellings will be charged a monthly fee for the service. Non-owner-occupied dwellings will be charged a fee in advance annually. 
7.  Fee Waiver. Owners of property who, because of advance age or disability and annual income payment of the household waste fee would create a financial hardship as that term is defined in this chapter are eligible to apply annually to the city's utility department for a fee waiver. The following documentation of eligibility must be provided to the utility department in support of the waiver: 
a.  The most recent federal income tax return; and 
b.  Official government identification reflecting the age of the property owner; or 
c.  Proof of recognition of disability status by the United States Social Security Administration. 
G.  In its discretion, the city may discontinue household waste or recyclable waste collection services to any residential dwelling, or dwelling receiving collection service by special permit, if it has probable cause to believe that the provisions of this chapter have been violated. Furthermore, the city may discontinue these services to any residential dwelling, or dwelling receiving services by special permit, that is delinquent in the payment of any other fee or other sum owing to the city. 
H.  When an account is a delinquent account, the city shall issue a written late notice to inform the account holder of the delinquent status and the risk of termination of service. A late notice or reminder notice must include a statement that the account is delinquent, that it is at risk of termination and the date upon which the delinquent balance must be paid to avoid termination. 
I.  At least ten calendar days prior to a proposed termination of household waste or recyclable waste service, the city shall give written notice of termination to the account holder. The ten-day time period is computed from the date the notice is postmarked. The notice shall be given first class mail or delivery to the premises and shall contain a summary of the specific steps that may be taken by the customer to avoid termination (to be printed in a conspicuous fashion); and the date on which payment arrangements must be made to avoid termination. 
J.  At least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the time when termination of service is scheduled, the city shall notify the account holder by leaving a copy of the notice attached to the entrance of the property at which service is provided. 
1.  If termination of service is not accomplished within fifteen (15) days following the forty-eight (48) hour notice, the utility will follow the above procedures for another forty-eight (48) hour notice. 
2.  The city shall mail duplicate copies of the ten-day termination notice to the owner of the property. 
K.  Upon expiration of the notice of termination, the city may terminate household waste and recyclable waste service by retrieving the waste containers. 
L.  Restrictions upon Termination Practices. The city shall not employ termination practices other than those set forth in this chapter. The city shall have the right to employ or pursue all legal methods to ensure collection of obligations due it. 
(Ord. 2008-17 (part): Ord. 2005-11 (part): Ord. 2005-06 (part))  
13.72.030 - Accumulations of solid waste—Removal required. 
It is unlawful for any person to allow solid waste of any nature, kind or description to accumulate on sidewalks, in the streets or upon premises under his control, except the same is temporarily deposited for immediate removal; or to fail to remove the same within twenty-four (24) hours after notification from the city or Salt Lake Valley Health Department. All such solid waste not collected and hauled away by the city or its contractor in its regular household waste or recyclable waste collections must be regularly hauled away and disposed of by licensed collectors or by the owner or occupant of the premises at which such solid waste materials are produced or stored. 
(Ord. 2008-17 (part): Ord. 2005-11 (part): Ord. 2005-06 (part))  
13.72.040 - Burning. 
It is unlawful for any person to burn solid waste except in compliance with the Uniform Fire Code as promulgated by the International Fire Code Institute and this code. 
(Ord. 2008-17 (part): Ord. 2005-11 (part): Ord. 2005-06 (part))  
13.72.050 - Spilling on streets. 
It is unlawful for any person engaged in hauling solid waste to permit, allow or cause any solid waste to fall and remain in the streets. Any such vehicle used in the hauling of any of solid waste in South Salt Lake shall be kept in a sanitary condition and shall be subject to inspection by the Salt Lake Valley Health Department. The solid waste in such vehicle shall be kept covered at all times except when loading and unloading, and no such vehicle shall remain standing on any public street in the city of South Salt Lake any longer than may be necessary for the purpose of loading and transporting the same. Violation of this provision is a class B misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 2008-17 (part): Ord. 2005-11 (part): Ord. 2005-06 (part))  
13.72.060 - Vacating premises—Failure to remove solid waste. 
It is unlawful for any person upon vacating or removing from dwellings, storerooms or any other building situated in the city of South Salt Lake to fail to remove all solid waste from such buildings and premises, and also the grounds appurtenant thereto; or to fail to place the same in a thoroughly sanitary condition within twenty-four (24) hours after said premises shall be vacated. Violation of this provision is a class C misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 2008-17 (part): Ord. 2005-11 (part): Ord. 2005-06 (part))  
13.72.070 - Solid waste containers. 
A.  Every owner, lessee or occupant of any building, premises or place of business, shall provide or cause to be provided, and at all times keep, suitable and sufficient receptacles for receiving and holding solid waste that may accumulate from said building, place of business or upon said premises or the portion thereof under control of such person. 
B.  All residents receiving household waste collection service from the city of South Salt Lake through services provided by the city or its contractor must use containers provided by the city or its contractor, or containers approved by the contractor or the city or both. All containers shall be set out for collection at the places and only at such times as may be designated by the city or the city's household waste collection contractor. All empty containers must be removed from the street as soon as practicable after being emptied, and in every case must be removed from the street the same day they are emptied. 
(Ord. 2008-17 (part): Ord. 2005-11 (part): Ord. 2005-06 (part))  
13.72.080 - Segregation of garbage—Items which will not be taken. 
The city or its contractor may adopt such rules and regulations as they deem necessary requiring the segregation of household waste and recyclable waste materials prior to being collected, and may refuse, after notification to residents, to pick up any items which they may designate, including any household waste or recyclable waste not in a proper receptacle as set forth in Section 13.72.070, any item which is forbidden to be placed in household waste or recyclable waste containers pursuant to this chapter or other regulation or any other item which from time to time may be so designated. 
(Ord. 2008-17 (part): Ord. 2005-11 (part): Ord. 2005-06 (part))  
13.72.090 - Waste collection by special permit. 
Pursuant to the "special permit" process described in this part, the city or its contractor may agree to provide curbside collection of household waste and recyclable waste to a dwelling that is part of a single parcel or planned unit development, where at least a portion of the parcel or planned unit development abuts a publicly owned and maintained road, is part of a building having less than three units, is occupied by a person or a group of persons comprising not more than two families and is currently receiving public utility services. 
(Ord. 2008-17 (part))  
13.72.100 - Application. 
The owner of a residential dwelling or the authorized representative of an owner's association of a planned unit development that falls within the definition in Section 13.72.090 may request curbside collection of household waste and recyclable waste by submitting a written application to the city accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in the amount established in the consolidated fee schedule. 
(Ord. 2008-17 (part))  
13.72.110 - Inspection. 
Upon receiving an application, accompanied by the appropriate fee, the department of public works will conduct an inspection of the location for which the special permit is sought to ascertain the following: 
1.  That each dwelling for which service is sought, is part of a building having less than three units within the corporate limits of the city, that is occupied by a person or a group of persons comprising not more than two families, that is currently receiving public utility services; 
2.  That each dwelling is part of a single parcel under common ownership or part of a planned unit development under the control of a home owner's association and at least a portion of the parcel or development abuts upon a publicly owned and maintained road; 
3.  That each unit applying for household waste or recyclable waste service has a location to store the containers, that there is an adequate area or areas on the portion of the parcel or development that abuts the public road for one solid waste can and one recyclable waste can per unit to be placed in a manner that the city or its contractor can access and dump the cans with a garbage truck safely and without difficulty in accordance with standards to be promulgated by the director of public works; and 
4.  That placement of the cans in the designated area or area will not obstruct the vision of drivers of vehicles and will not interfere with the flow of vehicle or pedestrian traffic. 
(Ord. 2008-17 (part))  
13.72.120 - Service agreement. 
If, pursuant to the criteria established in this part, a special permit is approved by the department of public works, the owner of a residential dwelling or the authorized representative of an owner's association of a planned unit development or condominium shall sign a service agreement with the city containing the following terms: 
1.  The name, address, phone number and signature of the person authorized to enter into the agreement; and 
2.  An agreement to place cans only in the area or areas designated by the city. 
(Ord. 2008-17 (part))  
13.72.130 - Permit revocation. 
A special permit may be revoked by the director of public works for violation of the terms of the service agreement or other regulations contained in this chapter. The director shall notify the owner of a residential dwelling or the authorized representative of the owner's association of the reason for the revocation and the right to appeal the decision to the city's administrative law judge according to the provisions of Title 2, Chapter 22 of this code. 
(Ord. 2008-17 (part))  
13.72.200 - Recyclable waste collection. 
A.  The city or its contractor may provide for bi-monthly curbside collection of recyclable waste as defined in this chapter. Such waste shall be collected from a "residential dwelling" or a dwelling that has been issued a "special permit." 
B.  Only recycling containers provided by the city or its contractor shall be allowed for curbside recyclable waste collection. Solid waste and recycling containers shall be of different colors. In the event any container which does not conform to the provisions of this section is set out for collection, the city or its contractor shall have the authority to deny collection services for such container. 
C.  Only recyclable waste may be placed in a recycling container provided by the city or its contractor. 
D.  In addition to other solid waste prohibited from being placed in a recycling container, waste unacceptable for recycling is prohibited from being placed in a recycling container. 
(Ord. 2008-17 (part): Ord. 2005-11 (part): Ord. 2005-06 (part))  
13.72.300 - Annual or semi-annual city cleanup. 
In its discretion the city may, from time to time, provide an annual or semi-annual cleanup. When the city decides to conduct a cleanup, it will give residents reasonable notification by flyers, in utility bills or city publications or by any other reasonable method setting forth the cleanup schedule. 
(Ord. 2008-17 (part): Ord. 2005-11 (part): Ord. 2005-06 (part))  
13.72.310 - Cleanup regulations. 
The following regulations shall govern annual or semi-annual cleanups scheduled by the city: 
A.  After notice by the city of an annual or semiannual cleanup, residential yard debris may be placed in a designated location within the city's right-of-way at a designated date for pickup subject to the following conditions: 
1.  The cleanup is available only to residents and owners of residential dwellings in the city of South Salt Lake who may only deposit residential yard debris in the city's right-of-way that is immediately adjacent to and abutting the property that they own or at which they reside; 
2.  On main artery streets, residential yard debris may be placed in the city's right-of-way only between the street side of the sidewalk and the edge of the curb or roadway; it may not be placed upon the roadway or sidewalk; 
3.  On city streets other than main artery streets, residential yard debris may be placed in the city's right-of-way between the street side of the sidewalk and upon the roadway but no further than eight feet from the edge of the curb or roadway and not upon the sidewalk; 
4.  In no event shall residential yard debris be stacked so as to impede or interfere with the flow or view of pedestrian or vehicle traffic; 
5.  Residential yard debris may not be stacked higher than four feet; 
6.  Residential yard debris may not be stacked between a fire hydrant and the street or within five feet of a fire hydrant; 
7.  Residential yard debris may not be stacked so as to interfere with access to a water meter vault or manhole cover; 
8.  Loose clippings or trimmings of plant material must be contained in packaging of sufficient strength, the total package not to exceed eighty (80) pounds; 
9.  Limbs and branches must be trimmed to six feet in length or less; 
10.  No part of a tree or shrub greater than eight inches in diameter or weighing more than eighty (80) pounds may be placed for collection; and 
11.  Residential yard debris may only be placed for collection during the time period permitted in the notice provided by the city. 
B.  Solid waste placed upon the city right-of-way in violation of these regulations will not be picked up. It is the responsibility of the resident or owner of property immediately adjacent to and abutting the city right-of-way to assure that no solid waste is placed in the right-of-way in violation of this chapter and to remove any solid waste placed in the city right-of-way in violation of this chapter within twenty-four (24) hours of its placement. 
(Ord. 2008-17 (part): Ord. 2005-11 (part): Ord. 2005-06 (part))  
13.72.400 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person who shall fail to do those acts required in this chapter and/or any person who shall do any act prohibited in this chapter shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor. Each day that said violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. In its discretion, the city may choose to address violation of this chapter by civil citation as provided in Title 8, Chapter 14 of this code. 
(Ord. 2008-17 (part): Ord. 2005-11 (part): Ord. 2005-06 (part))  
Chapter 13.74 - CUSTOMER SERVICE REGULATIONS* 
Sections: 
 
13.74.010 - General provisions. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish and enforce uniform utility service practices and procedures governing eligibility, security deposits, account billing, termination, refusal to provide utility service, deferred payment agreements and dispute resolution. 
B.  Policy. 
1.  The policy of this chapter is to assure the adequate provision of utility service, to restrict unreasonable termination of or refusal to provide utility service, to provide functional alternatives to termination or refusal to provide utility service, and to establish and enforce fair and equitable procedures governing eligibility, security deposits, account billing, termination, deferred payment agreements and dispute resolution. 
2.  Nondiscrimination. Utility service shall be provided to qualified persons without regard to employment, occupation, race, handicap, creed, sex, national origin, marital status, or number of dependents. 
3.  Requirement of Good Faith. Every agreement or obligation within this chapter imposes an obligation of good faith, honesty, and fair dealings in its performance and enforcement on behalf of the customer and the city utility. 
4.  Customer Information. The city utility shall provide all consumers with a consumer information pamphlet which clearly describes and summarizes the substance of this chapter. The city utility shall mail or deliver a copy of this pamphlet, or a summarized version to all customers annually in September or October. Copies of this pamphlet shall be prominently displayed in all utility business offices and furnished to consumers upon request. The city has a continuing obligation to inform its customers of significant amendments to this chapter. 
The city utility shall inform its account holders of the third-party notification procedure at the time of application for service and at least once each year. 
5.  Scope. This chapter shall apply to water and sewer utilities which are subject to the regulatory authority of the city. 
6.  Customer's Statement of Rights and Responsibilities. When utility service is extended to an account holder, annually, and upon first notice of an impending service disconnection, the city utility shall provide a copy of the "customer is statement of rights and responsibilities." The statement of rights and responsibilities shall be a single-page document. It shall be prominently displayed in all utility business offices. 
7.  Utility service shall be offered only to premises which is permanent improvement to real property. 
(Ord. 2008-19 (part): Ord. 2003-07 (part): Ord. 2003-05 (part))  
13.74.020 - General definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
"Account holder" means a person, corporation, partnership, or other entity which has agreed with the city to pay for receipt of utility service and to which the city provides service. An account holder must be either the owner, owner's agent or actual tenant of the property. 
"Applicant" means a person, corporation, partnership, or other entity which applies to the city for utility service. 
"Budget billing" means monthly payment plan under which the customer's estimated annual billing is divided into twelve (12) equal monthly payments. 
"City business day" means days excluding weekends and city holidays on which the city utility is open to the public. 
"City utility" means the various departments of the city that provide water and sewer service to a residence. 
"Deferred payment agreement" means an agreement to receive or to continue to receive utility service pursuant to Section 13.74.050 and to pay an outstanding debt or delinquent account owed to the city. 
"Delinquent account" means a service bill which has remained unpaid beyond the statement due date. 
"Fire line" shall include: private water lines which are connected to the water main and which serve a fire hydrant; and private water lines that extend off the water main to supply a building's fire protection system(s). 
"Tampered fire line" means any use of, or connection to, a fire line for a purpose other than fire protection. 
"Tampered meter" means any unauthorized reconnection of service, after disconnection by the city utility, shall be presumed to have been caused by the account holder and shall constitute a "tampered meter." 
Termination of Service. The terms "termination," "disconnection," and "shutoff' as used in this chapter are synonymous and mean the stopping of service for whatever cause. 
"Utility service" means water, fire line and/or sewer service provided by the city to a customer. 
(Ord. 2008-19 (part): Ord. 2003-07 (part): Ord. 2003-05 (part)) 
(Res. No. R2013-05, 3-27-2013)  
13.74.030 - Deposits and eligibility for service. 
A.  Security Deposits and Guarantees. 
1.  Every individual who applies for a new or a transfer of utility services for a nonowner occupied premises from the city shall be required to pay a security deposit equal to an average sixty (60) day billing period at his/her service locations, if available (the average will be calculated based on the most recent fifteen (15) month history of consumption), or the standard utility deposit rate as established in the consolidated fee schedule, whichever is greater. 
2.  The owner or owner's agent of a property may allow a tenant of the property to be the account holder; however, before a tenant may become the account holder, the property owner must agree in writing to be responsible for payment of any account balance that the tenant fails to pay. Before any new account for utility service to a property may be opened in the name of a tenant, all balances from prior accounts for service at the same location must be paid in full. 
3.  The security deposit is due at the time of application; however, the city utility, at its discretion, may agree to allow the deposit to be billed in two monthly installments. 
4.  No security deposit shall be used in lieu of a monthly payment to discharge a delinquency on the account unless service has been discontinued. 
5.  Any account holder who has his/her utility service disconnected or executes a deferred payment agreement may be required to pay a security deposit under the terms of this section. 
6.  Refusal by the city utility to offer service may be disputed through the process set forth in Section 13.74.040(H). 
7.  Any customer filing bankruptcy shall be required to comply with the terms and conditions as set forth in Section 366 of the United States Bankruptcy Code. 
B.  Eligibility for Service. 
1.  Utility service is to be conditioned upon: 
a.  Proof of ownership, proof of agency for owner or proof of tenancy with a signed agreement by the property owner or owner's agent; 
b.  Payment of a security deposit if the applicant is not the owner of the property; 
c.  Payment of all outstanding debts for past utility service which are owed by the applicant to the city; 
d.  If the applicant is not the owner of the property, payment of all balances from prior accounts for services at the same location and a signed agreement by the property owner; and 
e.  Proof that no condition exists which would be a cause for termination of service as described in Section 13.74.060. 
f.  If the tenant or owner of a property receiving water service is required to hold a city business license or permit, it shall be an essential requirement of eligibility for service that the business license or permit be kept current and that all fees be paid when due. 
2.  Applicants for service have a duty to provide accurate and honest information to the city utility. Application may be made only in the name of person who is either the owner, owner's agent or actual tenant of the property. When an account holder moves from the premises, the city utility must be notified within ten city business days of the change in the account information. 
(Ord. 2008-19 (part): Ord. 2003-07 (part): Ord. 2003-05 (part))  
13.74.040 - Account billing. 
A.  Billing Cycle. All city utilities shall use a billing cycle which has an interval between regular periodic billing statements of twenty-eight (28) to thirty-two (32) days. This section applies to permanent continuous service customers, not to seasonal customers. 
B.  Estimated Billing. 
1.  Water Service. Water meters shall be read monthly beginning no later than March 1st and ending no earlier than October 31st. 
2.  Fire Line Service. Fire line service, unless metered, will be billed at a standard monthly rate as established in the consolidation fee schedule. 
C.  Periodic Billing Statement. 
1.  City shall mail or deliver an accurate bill to the account holder, for each billing cycle at the end of which there is an outstanding credit or debit balance for current service, a statement which the account holder may retain, setting forth each of the following disclosures to the extent applicable: 
a.  The outstanding balance; 
b.  The amount of all charges to the account during the current billing cycle; 
c.  The amount of all payments made to the account during the current billing cycle; 
d.  The amount of all credits other than payments to the account during the current billing cycle; 
e.  The amount of all late payment charges to the account during the current billing cycle; 
f.  The closing date of the current billing cycle and the outstanding balance due on that date; 
g.  The date upon which payment is due; 
h.  The percentage of interest which will be assessed against the account for late payment; 
i.  A brief summary of the account holder's right to dispute the bill, as permitted pursuant to Section 13.74.040(H) with the current number at which to contact the city utility; and 
j.  The amount of water used during the billing cycle. 
D.  Late Charge. 
1.  Thirty (30) days after the statement date, a late charge not to exceed one and one-half percent per month shall be assessed against any unpaid balance in excess of new charges debited to the account during the current billing cycle. 
E.  Statement Due Date. An account holder shall have twenty (20) days from the date the current bill was prepared to pay the new balance, which date shall be the statement due date. 
F.  Disconnect and Reconnect Fees—Water/Sewer Service. 
1.  Disconnect Fee. Disconnect at request of owner, owner's agent, tenant, or landlord account holder due to temporary vacancy: no charge. 
2.  Reconnect Fee. 
a.  Reconnect fee to reinstate utility service to the same account holder after nonpayment disconnection: 
i.  Between eight a.m. and three p.m. on city business days: the amount established in the consolidated fee schedule plus balance of the account. 
ii.  Between three p.m. and ten p.m. on weekdays, and from eight a.m. and ten p.m. on Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays recognized by city: the amount established in the consolidated fee schedule plus balance of the account. 
b.  Reconnect at request of owner, owner's agent, tenant, or landlord account holder, due to temporary vacancy: an amount to be established in the consolidated fee schedule plus any outstanding balance of the account. 
c.  Reconnect fee to provide utility service to a new account holder after disconnection of service to a former account holder for nonpayment: the amount established in the consolidated fee schedule. 
3.  Tampered Meter Fee. Upon discovery by the city utility of a tampered meter, the amount established in the consolidated fee schedule as the tampered meter fee must be paid before service will be reconnected. 
4.  Tampered Fire Line Fee. Upon discovery by the city utility of a tampered fire line, the amount established in the consolidated fee schedule as the tampered fire line fee must be paid before service will be reconnected. 
5.  Service of Notice Fee. After an account holder has been served with a notice of disconnection, if the city is required to serve a notice of disconnection one or more additional times within the same twelve-month period, a service fee will be assessed to the account holder in an amount sufficient to cover the city's cost of service each time such service is performed. The service fee will be set forth in the consolidated fee schedule. 
G.  Fees must be actually paid to receive the requested disconnect or reconnect service. 
H.  Disputes. 
1.  Account holders may only dispute billing errors, the accuracy of meter readings, the accuracy of the meter, refusal by the city utility to offer service or the city utility's basis for termination of service other than termination for nonpayment. 
2.  Technical errors such as misspellings, inaccurate dates that do not affect the bill, etc. are not subject to dispute. Inability to pay does not render a bill in dispute. 
3.  For any of the reasons set forth in subsection (H)(1) of this section, an account holder may dispute the action of the city utility by setting forth the reason for the dispute in writing, dated and signed by the account holder and delivered to the city utility: 
a.  Within five city business days of the due date of the bill for the disputed period when the dispute is regarding the amount of payment owed; 
b.  Within five city business days of a refusal by the city utility to offer service; or 
c.  Within five city business days of the initial notice of termination of service for any reason other than nonpayment. 
4.  A designated representative of the city utility will review the dispute and send a written decision to the account holder by mail within five city business days of receiving the dispute. 
5.  The decision will notify the account holder of the right to appeal an adverse decision to a hearing officer as provided in subsections (H)(6) and (H)(7) of this section. The decision will explain how to make the appeal and set forth the time period within which the appeal must be made. 
6.  An account holder may appeal to the hearing officer designated pursuant to Section 13.74.090 an adverse decision by the city utility regarding a dispute. The appeal must be in writing, dated and signed by the account holder, clearly setting forth the nature of the dispute and attaching a copy of the adverse decision from the city utility. Only matters first reviewed by the city utility pursuant to subsections (H)(3) and (H)(4) of this section may be appealed. The appeal shall be delivered to the city recorder within five business days of the adverse decision by the city utility. 
7.  Within five business days of delivery of a timely appeal to the city recorder, the hearing officer appointed by the city for this purpose shall convene a hearing. The hearing shall be limited to the matters disputed pursuant to subsections (H)(1) through (H)(3) of this section as set forth in the account holder's written request for appeal described in subsection (H)(6) of this section. 
8.  The hearing officer shall render a decision in writing and send a copy of it by mail to the account holder and city utility within two business days of the hearing. 
9.  The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. 
I.  Rate to be Charged Upon Failure of Meter. When, for any reason, the meter fails to register, operate or otherwise does not function properly, there is a presumption that use of utility services during the billing period for which the meter malfunctioned is equivalent to the following: 
1.  If the account holder has had twelve (12) months continuous service prior to the failure of the meter, the account shall be charged the amount as for the same billing period of the month of the previous year. The amount charged shall be based on the average daily consumption multiplied by the number of days in the current billing period; or 
2.  If the account holder has not had continuous service of twelve (12) months, the amount charged to the account shall be based on the average consumption for the history of the account multiplied by the number of days in the current billing period; and 
3.  The account holder shall be notified by the city utility of the meter malfunction and given an explanation of the formula used to determine use of utility services during the billing period as part of the billing statement for any such periods; and 
4.  Absent evidence to the contrary offered by the account holder, in the context of a timely dispute made pursuant to subsection H of this section, the account holder shall be charged and responsible to pay according to the terms of this subsection. 
J.  Waiver of Fees. 
1.  At the request of a property owner who is called to active duty with a branch of the armed forces of the United States, the city will waive fees for public utilities provided by the city to the owner's residence up to the amount provided in the consolidated fee schedule. 
2.  This waiver applies only to owner-occupied residences in the city, and in order for the waiver to go into effect the owner must certify that he or she will not collect rental income from the property while he or she is deployed. 
3.  Proof of active deployment is required in order to qualify for the waiver. Proof may be provided by presenting deployment papers to the city. 
4.  The waiver will continue as long as the owner is on active deployment, but will automatically expire at the end of the deployment period indicated in the papers. If a property owner's deployment is extended, then it is incumbent upon the property owner to notify the city of that extension, or to bring satisfactory proof of the extended deployment upon his or her return. 
5.  The provisions of this section do not apply to rental units occupied by the person on active deployment. 
6.  In cases not constituting forgery, any person who provides false information to the city in order to obtain a waiver shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 2008-19 (part): Ord. 2004-21: Ord. 2003-07 (part): Ord. 2003-05 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2009-16, 12-2-2009)  
13.74.050 - Deferred payment agreement. 
A.  Deferred Payment Agreement. 
1.  A customer who is unable to pay for utility service may be eligible to enter into a deferred payment agreement with the city for the payment of the delinquent utility account if done prior to termination of service for nonpayment. A deferred payment agreement may be executed provided that at the time of the execution of the agreement the following standards are satisfied: 
a.  All sums under three hundred dollars ($300.00) shall be repaid within a six-month period of time from the date of execution of the deferred payment agreement; 
b.  All sums in excess of three hundred dollars ($300.00) shall be paid within a twelve (12) month period of time from date of execution of the deferred payment agreement; 
c.  At the time of the execution of the deferred payment agreement, one-sixth of the delinquent balance shall be paid; 
d.  A deferred payment agreement shall contain language to the effect that the customer must keep his then current balance paid on a current basis when due; 
e.  Customer shall not be entitled to execute more than one deferred payment agreement within any eighteen (18) consecutive months period of time; and 
f.  The account holder shall have the right to prepay the outstanding balance due under a deferred payment agreement at any time during the term of the agreement. 
2.  The terms of the deferred payment agreement shall be set forth in a written agreement, a copy of which shall be provided to the customer. 
3.  A deferred payment agreement shall include a finance charge of one and one-half percent per month. The deferred payment agreement shall contain notice of such charge. 
B.  Breach. If an account holder breaches any condition or term of a deferred payment agreement, the city utility may treat that breach as a delinquent account and shall have the right to terminate service pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter and the account holder shall not have the right to a renewal of the deferred payment agreement. Renewal of deferred payment agreements after a breach shall be at the option of the city. 
(Ord. 2008-19 (part): Ord. 2003-07 (part): Ord. 2003-05 (part))  
13.74.060 - Termination. 
A.  Delinquent Account. 
1.  When an account is a delinquent account, the city utility shall issue a written late notice to inform the account holder of the delinquent status and the risk of termination of service. A late notice or reminder notice must include the following information: 
a.  A statement that the account is delinquent, that it is at risk of termination and the date upon which the delinquent balance must be paid to avoid termination; and 
b.  The account holder's ability to obtain a deferred payment agreement pursuant to the terms of Section 13.74.050. 
2.  Service will not be terminated at any time during which an account holder has a timely and proper dispute pending pursuant to provisions of Section 13.74.040(H) as long as any amounts due which are not in dispute have been paid. 
B.  Reasons for Termination. 
1.  Utility service may be terminated for the following reasons: 
a.  Nonpayment of a delinquent account where the delinquent account balance is more than ten dollars ($10.00) or an account balance of less than ten dollars ($10.00) if the balance is more than two months delinquent; 
b.  Nonpayment of a security deposit; 
c.  Failure to comply with the terms of a deferred payment agreement or a final order; 
d.  Unauthorized use of or diversion of utility service or tampering with wires, pipes, meters, or other equipment owned by the utility; 
e.  Any deception or false information offered for the purpose of obtaining utility service; 
f.  Failure to provide access to meter during the regular route visit to the premises after reasonable notification by the city utility. For this purpose, twenty-four (24) hours advance notification is presumed to be reasonable; 
g.  Failure to make good a dishonored check which was tendered for payment within forty-eight (48) hours of notice; 
h.  An unsafe condition that has been verified by a city building inspector or health department official. Service will only be restored when the unsafe condition is remedied by the customer to the satisfaction of the city building inspector or health department official; or 
i.  Failure to timely notify the city utility of a change in the name of the account holder. 
j.  Failure of a tenant or owner of a property receiving water service who is required to hold a city business license or permit, to keep the license or permit current and to timely pay all associated fees. 
3.  The following shall be insufficient grounds for termination of service: 
a.  Cohabitation of a current account holder with a delinquent account holder as long as the delinquent account holder's balance relating to the same premises has been paid in full; 
b.  Where the delinquent account balance is less than ten dollars ($10.00), unless no payment has been made for two months; or 
c.  Failure to pay any amount in bona fide dispute presently before the hearing officer. 
C.  Restrictions Upon Termination During Serious Illness. 
1.  An account holder is entitled to one thirty (30) day extension of time to make payment during any twelve (12) month period of time under either of the following conditions: 
a.  If prior to termination of service the city receives satisfactory documentation that a person residing in a home receiving city water service has a serious illness that will be aggravated by the loss of water service; or 
b.  If after termination of service the city receives satisfactory documentation that a person residing in a home receiving city water service has a serious illness that will be aggravated by the loss of water service, water service will be restored for a period of thirty (30) days from the date service was first terminated. 
D.  Termination Without Notice. The city may terminate utility service without notice where, in its judgment, a clear emergency or serious health or safety hazard exists for as long as such condition exists, or where there is unauthorized use of or diversions of utility service or tampering with wires, pipes, meters, or other equipment owned by the utility. The utility shall immediately attempt to notify the customer of the termination and explain the reasons. 
E.  Notice of Proposed Termination. 
1.  At least ten calendar days prior to a proposed termination of utility service, the city utility shall give written notice of disconnection to the account holder. The ten-day time period is computed from the date the notice is postmarked. The notice shall be given first class mail or delivery to the premises and shall contain a summary of the following information: 
a.  A statement of the customer's rights and responsibilities under this chapter; 
b.  The approved policy on termination; 
c.  The availability of deferred payment agreements and sources of possible alternative assistance; 
d.  The process by which an account holder may dispute the grounds for termination other than for nonpayment; 
e.  Specific steps that may be taken by the customer to avoid termination (to be printed in a conspicuous fashion); and 
f.  The date on which payment arrangements must be made to avoid termination. 
2.  At least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the time when termination of service is scheduled, the city utility shall notify the account holder by leaving a copy of the notice attached to the entrance of the property at which service is provided. 
a.  If termination of service is not accomplished within fifteen (15) days following the forty-eight (48) hour notice, the utility will follow the above procedures for another forty-eight (48) hour notice. 
3.  The city utility shall mail duplicate copies of the ten-day termination notice to the owner of the property. 
F.  Termination. Upon expiration of the notice of termination, the city utility may terminate utility service. 
G.  Restrictions upon Termination Practices. The city shall not employ termination practices other than those set forth in this chapter. The city shall have the right to employ or pursue all legal methods to ensure collection of obligations due it. 
(Ord. 2008-19 (part): Ord. 2003-07 (part): Ord. 2003-05 (part))  
13.74.090 - Appeal procedure. 
A.  Right of Appeal. Appeals from an adverse decision on a dispute with the city utility shall be made using the administrative hearing process outlined in Chapter 2.22 of the city code. A hearing request shall be in writing and must be received no later than ten days following such actions. 
(Ord. 2008-19 (part): Ord. 2003-07 (part): Ord. 2003-05 (part))  
Division IV. - Storm Sewer System  
Chapter 13.76 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, adopted Apr. 3, 2019, repealed the former Ch. 13.76, §§ 13.76.010—13.76.14, and enacted a new Ch. 13.76 as set out herein. The former Ch. 13.76 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2013-18, adopted Dec. 5, 2013. 
 
13.76.010 - Intent. 
By implementing this chapter as part of its stormwater management program, the city intends to reduce the amount of pollutants entering streams, lakes and rivers as a result of runoff from residential, commercial, public and industrial areas, and to enable the city to comply with Utah Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit (NPDES/UPDES) No. UTS000001 for Jordan Valley Municipalities ("State MS4 Permit") and applicable regulations, 40 CFR § 122.26 et. seq., for stormwater discharges. The provisions of Division IV, Storm Sewer System, are required under the Federal Clean Water Act, the Utah Water Quality Act and regulations promulgated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and Utah Department of Environmental Quality. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, 4-3-2019)  
13.76.020 - Definitions. 
As used in Division IV of this code: 
"Analytical monitoring" refers to monitoring of waterbodies (streams, ponds, lakes, etc.) or of stormwater, according to state and federal regulations or to protocols established by state or federal agencies for biomonitoring or stream bioassessments. 
"Authorized enforcement agent" means the city engineer and/or any individual that the city engineer, the provisions of this ordinance, or the underlying legal authorities designate as authorized to implement and enforce this ordinance, which individuals include, but are not limited to, city employees, employees of the Utah Division of Water Quality, and EPA personnel. 
"Best management practices" or "BMPs" means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control Site Runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
"Channel" means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts flowing water continuously or periodically. 
"City" means the city of South Salt Lake, Utah, including the mayor and all other employees of the administrative branch of the city. 
"City engineer" means the professional engineer for the city or a designee of the professional engineer. 
"City permit" means a project approval from the city including, but is not limited to, a building permit, street cut permit, or excavation permit. 
"Clean Water Act" means the federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
"Clearing" means any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover. 
"Construction activity" means activities subject an NPDES Construction Permit. NPDES stormwater Phase II Permits are required for construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one acre or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
"Contaminant" means any physical, chemical, biological, or radiological substance or matter in water. 
"Control measure" refers to any BMP or other method used to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants to the stormwater system or waters protected by the state of Utah or the federal government. 
"DEQ" refers to the Utah Department of Environmental Quality. 
"Discharge" means to dispose, deposit, spill, pour, inject, seep, dump, leak or place by any other means including direct or indirect entry of a solid or liquid matter into the MS4. 
"Division" means the Utah Division of Water Quality. 
"Drainage way" means any channel that conveys surface runoff throughout a construction site. 
"Erosion control" means a measure that prevents erosion. 
"Grading" means excavation or fill of material, including the resulting conditions thereof. 
"Grubbing" means to clear roots and stumps. 
"Groundwater" means water in a saturated zone or stratum beneath the surface of land or below a surface water body. 
"Hazardous materials" means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. See 40 C.F.R. part 262. 
"Illegal discharge" means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the storm drain system, except as exempted in Section 13.80.070. 
"Illicit connections" means either of the following: 
1.  Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
2.  Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
"Industrial activity" means activities subject to NPDES industrial Permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14). 
"Intentionally" has the same meaning as in Section 76-2-103(1) of the Utah Criminal Code, as amended. 
"Knowingly" has the same meaning as in Section 76-2-103(2) of the Utah Criminal Code, as amended. 
"Maintenance" means any activity that is necessary to keep a stormwater facility in good working order so as to function as designed. maintenance shall include complete reconstruction of a stormwater facility if reconstruction is needed in order to restore the facility to its original operational design parameters. maintenance shall also include the correction of any problem on the site property that may directly impair the functions of the stormwater facility. 
"Maintenance agreement" means a duly executed and legally recorded document that provides for long-term maintenance of post-construction stormwater management measures. 
"Manual" refers to the SWMP guidance document published by Salt Lake County Engineering and Flood Control. 
"MS4" is an acronym referring to the city municipal separate storm sewer system. 
"MS4 permit" refers to UPDES Permit No. UTS000001 for Jordan Valley Municipalities, including the city, as amended. 
"Maximum extent practicable" or "MEP" is the technology-based discharge standard for MS4s established by the Clean Water Act. 
"Monitoring" means tracking or measuring activities, progress, results, etc. 
"Municipal separate storm sewer system" means the conveyance system employed by the city to collect and convey stormwater into waters of the state, including the roads and streets and their drainage systems, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, and storm drains. 
"National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit" means a permit issued by EPA (or by the state of Utah under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
"Negligence" means simple negligence, the failure to exercise that degree of care that an ordinary reasonable and prudent person exercises under like or similar circumstances. 
"Non-stormwater discharge" means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
"Perimeter control" means a barrier that prevents Sediment from leaving a Site by filtering sediment-laden runoff or diverting it to a sediment trap or basin. 
"Permit" refers to authorization to discharge municipal stormwater under the UPDES, including but not limited to coverage under UPDES Construction General Permit No. UTRC000000 ("construction general permit") and UPDES General Multi-Sector Industrial stormwater Permit Industrial stormwater No. UTR000000 ("industrial general permit"). 
"Person" means any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent. 
"Phasing" means clearing a parcel of land in distinct phases, with the Stabilization of each phase completed before the clearing of the next. 
"Pollutant" means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordnances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
"Post construction stormwater management measures" means the use of structural or non-structural measures at developed sites after construction that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff and pollutant loading to the MS4, as directed by the city's SWMP and approved by the city engineer. 
"Premises" means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
"Qualified person" means a person knowledgeable in the principles and practice of erosion control, sediment control, and pollution prevention who possesses the skills to assess conditions at effectiveness of any stormwater controls selected and installed to meet permit requirements, such as but not limited to, the following: Utah Registered Stormwater Inspector (RSI); certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC); certified professional in stormwater quality (CPSWQ); certified erosion, sediment, and stormwater inspector (CESSWI); certified inspector of sediment and erosion control (CISEC); National Institute for Certification in Engineering Technologies, Erosion, and Sediment Control, Level 3 (NICET); and Utah Department of Transportation Erosion Control Supervisor (ECS). 
"Recklessly" has the same meaning as in Section 76-2-103(3) of the Utah Criminal Code, as amended. 
"Responsible person" means the person(s) determined by the city who is responsible for causing or maintaining a violation of this ordinance. The term shall include, but is not limited to, a property owner, agent, tenant, lessee, occupant, architect, builder, contractor, or other person who individually or together with another person is responsible for the violation of any provision of this chapter. 
"Runoff" is water that travels across the land surface, or laterally through the ground near the land surface, and discharges to water bodies either directly or through a collection and conveyance system. Runoff includes stormwater and water from other sources that travels across the land surface. 
"Sediment" means solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, gravity, or ice and has come to rest on the earth's surface either above or below sea level, and which can settle in stream beds and disrupt the natural flow of the stream. 
"Sediment control" means measures that prevent sediment from leaving the Site. 
"Site" means a parcel of land or a contiguous combination thereof, where Grading work is performed as a single unified operation. 
"Stabilization" means providing adequate measures, vegetative and/or structural, that will prevent erosion from occurring. 
"Standard operating procedure" or "SOP" means a set of written instructions that document a routine or repetitive activity. For purposes of this ordinance, SOPs refer to pollution control measures to protect water quality. 
"Start of construction" means the first land-disturbing activity associated with a development, including land preparation such as clearing, grading, and filling; installation of streets and walkways; excavation for basements, footings, piers, or foundations; erection of temporary forms; and installation of accessory buildings such as garages. 
"Storm drainage system" means publicly-owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures. 
"Stormwater" means stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. 
"Stormwater management plan" or "SWMP" means a written plan that outlines various control measures required under the MS4 Permit, including specifications to accomplish measurable goals, actions, and activities which are designed to reduce the discharge of pollutants from the MS4 to the quality and quantity of stormwater runoff to pre-development levels, and to protect water quality. 
"Stormwater pollution prevention plan" or "SWPPP" means a document which describes the BMPs and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the MEP. 
"Stormwater runoff" means flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from precipitation. 
"Uncontaminated" means water which is free from all physical, chemical, biological, or radiological substances or matter. 
"Utah pollutant discharge elimination system" or "UPDES" has the same meaning as the current version of Utah Administrative Rule R317-8-1.5(63), and which is currently defined as the state-wide program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, terminating, Monitoring and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements under the Utah Water Quality Act. 
"UPDES Permit" means a permit issued by the Utah Water Quality Board pursuant to Utah laws and regulations. 
"Wastewater" means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility. 
"Watercourse" means a permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface water within the city, regardless of its source. 
"Waterway" means a channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to the MS4. 
"Waters of the state" means all streams, lakes, ponds, water-courses, Waterways, wells, springs, irrigation systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface and underground, natural or artificial, public or private which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state of Utah. "Waters of the state" does not include bodies of water confined to and retained within the limits of private property which do not develop into or constitute a nuisance, a public health hazard, or a menace to fish or wildlife. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, 4-3-2019)  
13.76.030 - Creation and maintenance of SWMP—Policies and procedures. 
A.  The city engineer is responsible for the creation and maintenance of a stormwater management program for all Discharges into the stormwater system of the city. 
B.  The city engineer shall have authority to implement policies and procedures consistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  The city engineer, in consultation with the city attorney, shall have the authority to bring administrative or civil actions to enforce the provisions of this chapter, or the policies and procedures duly created and published by the city engineer. The city attorney shall have the authority to bring criminal actions to enforce the provisions of this chapter, or the policies and procedures duly created and published by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, 4-3-2019)  
13.76.040 - Non-stormwater discharges exempt from SWMP. 
The following discharges are not prohibited, unless the city engineer determines that these discharges are a significant source of pollutants to the MS4 or the waters of the state: 
A.  Water line flushing; 
B.  Landscape irrigation; 
C.  Diverted stream flows; 
D.  Rising groundwaters; 
E.  Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration to separate storm sewers; 
F.  Uncontaminated pumped groundwater; 
G.  Discharges from potable water sources; 
H.  Uncontaminated foundation or footing drains; 
I.  Air conditioning condensate; 
J.  Irrigation water; 
K.  Springs; 
L.  Uncontaminated water from crawl space pumps; 
M.  Individual residential car washing; 
N.  Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; 
O.  De-chlorinated swimming pool or water reservoir discharges; 
P.  Residual street wash water; 
Q.  Discharges or flows from emergency firefighting activity; 
R.  Any other discharge specifically exempted by a UPDES permit. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, 4-3-2019)  
13.76.050 - Altering drainage channels. 
A.  Property owners shall not alter or restrict natural channels and waterways without proper federal, state, and city permits. 
B.  Modification of sensitive areas may require approval from other governing agencies. 
C.  Property owners proposing to redirect runoff, surface, and/or pipe flow to properties or facilities outside of city boundaries shall provide written approval from the state, county, or municipality onto which the water will be directed. 
D.  Discharges or modifications to the canal require written approval from the canal owners and applicable government agencies. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, 4-3-2019)  
Chapter 13.78 - POLLUTANT DISCHARGES FROM CONSTRUCTION SITES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-02, adopted Jan. 13, 2010, changed the title of Ch. 13.78 from "Pollutant Discharge Elimination" to "Pollutant Discharges from Construction Sites." Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, adopted Apr. 3, 2019, repealed the former Ch. 13.78, §§ 13.78.010—13.78.130, and enacted a new Ch. 13.78 as set out herein. The former Ch. 13.78 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2006-4 (part)); and Ord. No. 2013-18, adopted Dec. 5, 2013. 
 
13.78.010 - Introduction/purpose. 
During the construction process, soil is highly vulnerable to erosion by wind and water. Watercourses are also vulnerable to debris, chemicals and other potentially harmful construction materials if those materials are permitted to enter the city's MS4. Eroded soil is a major cause of stream degradation and necessitates repair of sewers and ditches and the dredging of rivers. As a result, the purpose of this local regulation is to safeguard persons, protect property, and prevent damage to the environment within and around the city. This chapter will also promote the public welfare by guiding, regulating, and controlling the design, construction, use, and maintenance of any development or other activity that disturbs or breaks the topsoil or results in the movement of earth on land in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, 4-3-2019)  
13.78.020 - Definitions. 
Definitions for this chapter are included in Section 13.76.020. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, 4-3-2019)  
13.78.030 - City permits. 
A.  No person shall be granted a building permit or other city permit for land-disturbing activity that would uncover one acre or more without obtaining coverage under the general construction stormwater permit from the Utah State Division of Water Quality. If a site less than one acre in size is part of a common plan of development or sale more than one acre in size, the requirements of this section will still apply. 
B.  Permittees for sites greater than one acre in size, or sites that are less than one acre in size but are part of a common plan of development or sale one acre in size or more, shall employ post construction stormwater management measures. 
C.  No person shall be granted a building permit for land disturbing activity of less than one acre of land if such activity poses a significant or unique threat to water or public health or safety without obtaining coverage under the construction general permit. 
D.  Prior to issuing a city permit, a SWPPP complying with the requirements of the general construction stormwater permit and this chapter shall be submitted for review and approval by the city engineer, addressing sediment and erosion control and other applicable requirements of the SWMP. 
E.  No SWPPP is required for the following activities, unless otherwise provided: 
1.  Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property, or natural resources; 
2.  Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as a permitted main or accessory use; 
3.  Agricultural activity that is consistent with an approved farm conservation plan or a management plan prepared or approved by the appropriate city, federal, or state agency; 
4.  Additions or modifications to existing single-family structures; or 
5.  Residential gardening. 
F.  Each SWPPP shall include the following: 
1.  Name(s) and address(es) of the owner or developer of the Site, and of any consulting firm retained by the applicant together with the name and telephone number of the applicant's contact at such firm that will be responsible for the implementation of the SWPPP; 
2.  Address and legal description of the subject property including the tax reference number and parcel number of the subject property; 
3.  A statement indicating the nature, extent and purpose of the land disturbing activity, and a certification that any land Clearing, construction, or development involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance with the SWPPP; and 
4.  Measures addressing the requirements of Section 13.78.050. 
G.  The applicant may be required to file with the city building official a faithful performance bond, letter of credit, or other improvement security in an amount deemed sufficient by the city to cover all costs of improvements, landscaping, maintenance of improvements for such period as specified by the city, and engineering and inspection costs to cover the cost of failure or repair of improvements installed on the site. 
H.  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, all land disturbance activity must be carried out in accordance with the the control measures addressed in a SWPPP. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, 4-3-2019)  
13.78.040 - Review and approval. 
A.  For every Construction Activity that meets or exceeds the scope designated in Section 13.78.030 of this chapter, the city building official will review each application for a city permit to determine its conformance with the provisions of this regulation. Within thirty (30) days after receiving an application, the city Engineer shall, in writing: 
1.  Approve the city Permit application; 
2.  Approve the city Permit application subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this regulation, and issue the permit subject to these conditions; or 
3.  Disapprove the city Permit application, indicating the reason(s) and procedure for submitting a revised application and/or submission. 
B.  Failure of the city Engineer to act on an original or revised application within thirty (30) days of receipt shall authorize the applicant to proceed in accordance with the plans as filed unless such time is extended by agreement between the applicant and the city. Pending preparation and approval of a revised plan, development activities shall be allowed to proceed in accordance with conditions established by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, 4-3-2019)  
13.78.050 - Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan. 
A.  The SWPPP shall include the following information: 
1.  A general location map and a Site map (including spot elevations and contour lines before and after construction) indicating: 
a.  Drainage patterns before and after minor Grading activities; 
b.  Construction boundaries and a description of existing vegetation prior to Grading activities; 
c.  Estimates of the total area of the Site and the total area that will be disturbed by construction activities; 
d.  The location of major structural and nonstructural controls identified in the plans; 
e.  The location of areas where Stabilization practices are expected to occur; 
f.  All surface waters including wetlands; 
g.  Locations where stormwater is discharged to surface water; 
h.  Locations of material and equipment storage; 
2.  A description of the nature and location of construction activities; 
3.  A description of the intended sequence and schedule of major construction activities for development of the site, including clearing and grubbing; rough grading; construction of utilities, infrastructure, and buildings; and final grading and landscaping. Sequencing shall identify the expected date on which clearing will begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, areas of clearing, installation of temporary erosion and sediment control measures, and establishment of permanent vegetation pursuant to an approved landscaping plan; 
4.  An estimate of the runoff coefficient for the site before and after construction activities are completed; 
5.  The name of waters receiving runoff from the site; 
6.  A copy of the construction general permit requirements; 
7.  A description of all control measures that will be implemented to meet the objectives of the construction general permit throughout all phases of construction and after completion of development of the site. Depending upon the complexity of the project, the drafting of intermediate plans may be required at the close of each season; 
8.  The name, address and phone number of the person or entity responsible for implementation of each control measure; 
9.  Provisions for maintenance of control facilities, including easements and estimates of the cost of maintenance; 
10.  Statement of recognition and permission for an authorized enforcement agent to inspect the site for compliance with the SWPPP. 
11.  All parties responsible for execution of the SWPPP must certify and sign the SWPPP. 
B.  Modifications to the SWPPP shall be processed and approved or disapproved in the same manner as Section 13.78.040 of this chapter, may be authorized by the city engineer by written authorization to the permittee, and shall include: 
1.  Major amendments of the SWPPP submitted to the city engineer; 
2.  Field modifications of a minor nature. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, 4-3-2019)  
13.78.060 - Design requirements. 
A.  Control measures shall be designed to meet the following criteria: 
1.  Prevent or Minimize Discharges. The proposed control measures shall be designed to prevent or minimize the discharge of sediment, chemicals, debris, and other construction-related pollutants from the construction site by stormwater runoff into the storm drainage system. 
2.  Prevent or Minimize Construction Debris. The proposed control measures shall be designed to prevent or minimize, to the MEP, the deposit, discharge, tracking by construction vehicles, or dropping of mud, sediment, debris, or other potential pollutants onto the public streets and rights-of-way. 
3.  The proposed control measures shall include BMPs available at the time that the SWPPP is submitted. 
4.  The proposed control measures shall be designed to preserve existing vegetation, where possible. Disturbed portions of the Site shall be stabilized. 
5.  The proposed control measures shall be employed to minimize the risk of discharge of construction-related pollutants (such as paint, thinners, solvents and other chemicals) from the construction site. 
B.  Clearing and grading of sensitive areas such as forests and wetlands, is not permitted, except when in compliance with all other chapters of this ordinance. Clearing techniques that retain natural vegetation and drainage patterns shall be used to the satisfaction of the city engineer. 
C.  Clearing, except that necessary to establish sediment control devices, shall not begin until all sediment control devices have been installed and have been stabilized. 
D.  Phasing shall be required on all sites disturbing greater than thirty (30) acres, with the size of each phase to be established at plan review and as approved by the city engineer. 
E.  Erosion control requirements shall include the following: 
1.  Soil stabilization shall be completed as soon as practicable, but in no case more than fourteen (14) days after clearing or inactivity in construction except under the following circumstances: 
a.  If the initiation of stabilization measures by the fourteenth day after construction activity temporarily or permanently ceases is precluded by snow cover or frozen ground conditions, stabilization measures shall be initiated as soon as practicable; or 
b.  If construction activity on a portion of the site is temporarily ceased, and earth disturbing will resume within fourteen (14) days, temporary stabilization measures need not be initiated on that portion of the site. 
2.  If seeding or another vegetative erosion control method is used, it shall become established within two weeks or the city engineer may require the site to be reseeded or a nonvegetative option employed. 
3.  Special techniques that meet the design criteria outlined in the manual on steep slopes or in drainage ways shall be used to ensure stabilization. 
4.  Soil stockpiles must be stabilized or covered at the end of each workday. 
5.  If the city engineer deems it necessary, the entire site must be stabilized, using a heavy mulch layer or another method that does not require germination to control erosion, at the close of the construction season. 
6.  Techniques shall be employed to prevent the blowing of dust or sediment from the site. 
7.  Techniques that divert upland runoff past disturbed slopes shall be employed. 
8.  Sediment control requirements shall include: 
a.  Settling basins, sediment traps, or tanks and perimeter controls. sediment must be removed from sediment traps or settling basins when design capacity has been reduced by fifty (50) percent; 
b.  Settling basins that are designed in a manner that allows adaptation to provide long-term stormwater management, if required by the city Engineer; 
c.  Protection for adjacent properties and waterways by the use of a vegetated buffer strip in combination with perimeter controls. 
9.  Waterway and watercourse protection requirements shall include: 
a.  A temporary stream crossing installed and approved by Salt Lake County if a wet watercourse will be crossed regularly during construction; 
b.  Stabilization of the watercourse channel before, during, and after any in-channel work; 
c.  All on-site stormwater conveyance channels designed according to the criteria outlined in the manual; 
d.  Stabilization adequate to prevent erosion located at the outlets of all pipes and paved channels. 
10.  The use of impervious surfaces for stabilization should be minimally used. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, 4-3-2019)  
13.78.070 - Low impact development. 
As required by the MS4 permit, the city encourages a low impact development (LID) approach, which includes the implementation of structural BMPs, where practicable, that infiltrate, evapotranspire, or harvest and use the stormwater for the site to protect water quality. All development requiring a city permit and compliance with the construction general permit must include an LID analysis. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, 4-3-2019)  
13.78.080 - Inspection. 
A.  The construction permittee shall allow an authorized enforcement agent to enter the premises to make inspections as hereinafter required or authorized. Upon inspection, the authorized enforcement agent shall approve the portion of the work completed or shall notify the permittee wherein the completed work fails to comply with the SWPPP, as approved. The permittee shall maintain a copy of the SWPPP at the Site during the progress of the work. The permittee shall notify the city building official at least two working days before the following: 
1.  Start of construction; 
2.  Installation of sediment and erosion measures; 
3.  Completion of site clearing; 
4.  Completion of rough grading; 
5.  Completion of final grading; 
6.  Close of the construction season; 
7.  Completion of final landscaping. 
B.  The permittee or his/her agent shall make regular inspections of all control measures at least once every fourteen (14) calendar days and within twenty-four (24) hours of the end of a storm that produced twenty-five one-hundredths (0.25) of an inch of rainfall or greater. The purpose of such inspections will be to determine the overall effectiveness of the control plan and the need for additional control measures. All inspections shall be documented in written form, maintained on-site, and made available to the city building official or authorized enforcement agent upon request. 
C.  An authorized enforcement agent is hereby authorized to enter the property of the applicant as deemed necessary to make regular inspections to ensure the validity of the reports filed pursuant to subsection (B) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, 4-3-2019)  
13.78.090 - Post-construction inspections—Maintenance agreements. 
A.  Consistent with the requirements of the MS4 permit, the city is required to inspect stormwater control measures on private property to ensure that adequate maintenance is being performed. 
B.  Property owners must, for the purposes of maintenance of post-construction stormwater management measures: 
1.  Provide permission for inspections of post-construction stormwater management measures on private property annually by a qualified person pursuant to a maintenance agreement and every five years by an authorized enforcement agent, or more frequently at the discretion of the city engineer, when that property discharges into the MS4, as necessary; 
2.  Prior to issuance of a city permit, enter into a maintenance Agreement which requires the property owner to reimburse the city for inspection costs and that requires annual certification of maintenance by the property owner, tenant or a qualified third party. Such certification must state that all maintenance has been performed and that the structural controls are operating as designed to protect water quality. The maintenance agreement shall run with the land and must be transferred to subsequent purchasers. 
B.  The city may conduct oversight inspections every five years, or when there is an apparent system failure. If a property owner objects to the inspection, an authorized enforcement agent may apply for an administrative warrant to inspect the property. 
C.  If a property owner does not appropriately maintain the stormwater control measures, then the city may seek all remedies identified in this chapter, including abatement and assessment of costs, civil or criminal actions, and declaratory or injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, 4-3-2019)  
13.78.100 - Construction site access and traffic. 
This section shall apply to all construction activities regardless of the size of the construction site. 
A.  Construction site access requirements shall include a temporary access road provided at all sites as well as the following measures to assure that sediment is not carried onto public streets by construction vehicles or washed into storm drains. 
B.  Each permittee shall be responsible to see that vehicles used in the process of carrying out the work authorized by the building permit shall not track any mud, dirt, or debris of any kind upon any city street and, if necessary, shall install a suitable process to clean vehicles prior to leaving the job site and entering city streets. The suitable process shall consist of: 
1.  A cleaning area and crew to clean mud and dirt off the wheels and exterior body surface of the equipment; 
2.  The cleaning area shall be arranged to provide adequate drainage to prevent puddling, and the cleaning area shall be kept mud-free and may be on a macadam or concrete slab; 
3.  The cleaning area shall be located on private property and arranged in such a way that there is no blocking of traffic on city streets; 
4.  The cleaning water or solution used for cleaning shall not be allowed to enter the city street, gutter or storm drain system. 
C.  All trucks and equipment leaving the site with earthen materials or loose debris shall be loaded and/or covered in such a manner as to prevent dropping of materials on city streets and/or sidewalks. 
D.  Ramps constructed over curbs and gutters shall not interfere with or block the passage of water along the gutter and shall be constructed of material that will not erode or deteriorate under adverse weather conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, 4-3-2019)  
13.78.110 - Required Measures and Enforcement. 
A.  The permittee shall install erosion and water runoff controls sufficient to ensure that no stormwater, surface water, or debris from the construction site shall erode, drain, wash, or be tracked into any public right-of-way, including curb and gutter, into any part of the city's storm sewer system or into any ditch, canal, stream, or river. These controls shall be sufficient to cover any contingency, including, but not limited to, seasonal storms, unseasonable storms, and methods of construction. 
B.  The sidewalk, street, and/or curb and gutter shall not be used for storage of debris, dirt, or excavated materials. The sidewalks shall not be removed, blocked, or otherwise rendered unusable by either the storage of construction equipment or material or the construction procedures unless a safe, usable alternate walkway along the same side of the street is provided by the contractor. All alternate walkways shall be ramped and so constructed as to provide a walking surface four feet wide and as sound and smooth as the normal concrete sidewalk. 
C.  The permittee shall be responsible for the immediate removal of mud, dirt, or debris deposited on city streets, sidewalks, and/or curb and gutters by equipment leaving the site or by his construction procedures. 
D.  If it becomes necessary for the city to remove any mud, dirt, or debris which has been deposited upon a street, gutter, or sidewalk, or in any storm sewer, the total cost to the city for such removal will be charged to the property owner, including legal fees, if any. Payment of such charges will be made to the city prior to final inspections, utility clearances, and issuance of a certificate of occupancy. pursuant to South Salt Lake City Ordinance, 2.22, the property owner may appeal the costs of such abatement. 
E.  If any person holding a city permit pursuant to this chapter violates the terms of the permit or implements Site development in such a manner as to materially and adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood or development site so as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, the city building official may stop the work and suspend or revoke the city permit. 
F.  The permittee shall develop and implement post construction stormwater management measures to reduce runoff and the discharge of pollutants after construction is completed, as directed and approved by the city engineer. These post construction measures shall be sufficient to cover any contingency, including, but not limited to, seasonal and unseasonable storms. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, 4-3-2019)  
13.78.120 - Violation and penalties. 
A.  Any person who violates a provision of this chapter, or who fails to comply with an affirmative obligation established by this chapter, shall be deemed guilty of a class B misdemeanor of a separate offense for each day during which any violation of a provision of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted. 
B.  In its sole discretion, the city may choose to enforce this chapter against any person violating any of its provisions by criminal citation, civil citation, notice of violation, and summons as provided in Chapter 8.14 of this ordinance, or other judicial remedies, including injunctive relief. 
C.  Any person found responsible in a civil proceeding of violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed responsible for a separate violation of this ordinance for each day during which any violation of any of the ordinance is committed, continued, or permitted. Upon civil citation for any such violation, such Person, partnership, or corporation shall be punished by a civil fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. 
D.  In addition to any other penalty authorized by this section, any Person, partnership, or corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be required to bear the expense of any work or restoration performed by the city pursuant to an order from an administrative proceeding. Properties which require correction by the city are subject to liens for the work completed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, 4-3-2019)  
13.78.130 - Separability. 
The provisions and sections of this chapter shall be deemed to be separable, and the invalidity of any portion of this chapter shall not affect the validity of the remainder. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, 4-3-2019)  
Chapter 13.79 - POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURES 
 
13.79.010 - Policy. 
Property owners shall use a combination of structural and nonstructural stormwater management measures to minimize the discharge of stormwater to the MS4 and to achieve flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant reduction. Property owners shall select and develop stormwater BMPs based on physical site conditions and the origin, nature, and anticipated quantity and quality of pollutants. Multiple stormwater management measures may be necessary to achieve established performance standards for water quality, quantity, and groundwater recharge. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § II, 4-3-2019)  
13.79.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter 13.79 is to establish minimum long-term stormwater management requirements and controls for new development and redevelopment in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § II, 4-3-2019)  
13.79.030 - Applicability. 
The provisions of this Chapter 13.79 apply to new development and redevelopment projects that discharge to the MS4 with a land disturbance of greater than or equal to one acre, including projects that are less than one acre but are part of a common plan of development or sale with a land disturbance greater than one acre. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § II, 4-3-2019)  
13.79.040 - Site plans. 
A.  Property owners subject to this Chapter 13.79 shall develop a site plan for development that demonstrate that the development or redevelopment project meets the standards set forth in this ordinance. 
B.  The site plan shall include the following information: 
1.  Assessment of the water-quality impacts of the project; 
2.  Description of nonstructural and structural stormwater management measures to be employed through the life of the project from commencing land disturbance to post-construction stormwater management measures; 
3.  A topographic base map extending at least two hundred (200) feet beyond the limits of the proposed development that includes the following information: existing surface-water drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or intermittent streams, wetlands, pervious or vegetative surfaces, impervious surfaces, existing man-made structures, and significant natural and man-made features not otherwise shown; 
4.  An environmental analysis consisting of a written and graphic description of the natural and man-made features of the project site and its immediately surrounding environs. The written description shall include, as appropriate to the site conditions, a discussion of soil conditions, slopes, wetlands, waterways, and vegetation on the project site. Particular attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally sensitive features; and 
5.  A project description, including map(s), at the scale of the topographical base map indicating the location of existing and proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural facilities for stormwater management, and other permanent structures. 
C.  The property owner shall submit the site plan to the city engineer for review and approval. 
D.  The city engineer may waive submission of any of the requirements of the site plan listed in subsection B of this provision when the property owner can demonstrate: 
1.  That the required information cannot be obtained or that obtaining the required information would impose a hardship on the property owner; and 
2.  That the absence of the required information will not materially affect the site plan review process. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § II, 4-3-2019)  
13.79.050 - Standards for nonstructural stormwater management measures. 
A.  To the maximum extent practicable, property owners shall use nonstructural stormwater management measures to reduce the discharge of stormwater to the MS4 and to achieve flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant reduction. 
B.  Nonstructural stormwater management measures shall: 
1.  Protect areas that provide water-quality benefits and areas that are particularly susceptible to erosion or sediment loss; 
2.  Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the flow of runoff from impervious surfaces; 
3.  Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and vegetation; 
4.  Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages retention and the planting of native vegetation and minimizes the use of fertilizers and pesticides; 
5.  Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems discharging into and through stable vegetated areas; and 
6.  Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or exposure of pollutants at the site to prevent the release of pollutants to the MS4 including, but not limited to: 
a.  Site design features that prevent accumulation of trash and debris in drainage systems; 
b.  Site design features that prevent the discharge of trash and debris from drainage systems; and 
c.  Site design features that prevent or contain spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at industrial or commercial development sites. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § II, 4-3-2019)  
13.79.060 - Standards for structural stormwater management measures. 
A.  Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to take into account existing site conditions, including, but not limited to, environmentally critical areas; wetlands; flood-prone areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high-water table; soil type, permeability, and texture; and drainage area and drainage patterns. 
B.  Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and ensure proper functioning. 
C.  Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed, constructed, and installed to be strong and corrosion resistant. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § II, 4-3-2019)  
13.79.070 - maintenance of stormwater management measures 
A.  Property owners shall maintain in good condition and promptly repair and restore all stormwater management measures, maintenance access routes and appurtenances, including, but not limited to, surfaces, walls, drains, dams, structures, vegetation, erosion and sediment-control practices, and other stormwater maintenance facilities. 
B.  Property owners shall perform preventative and corrective measures to maintain the functioning of all stormwater management measures, including, but not limited to, repair or replacement of stormwater management measures; sediment, debris, and trash removal; restoration of eroded areas; snow and ice removal; fence repair or replacement; and vegetation restoration. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § II, 4-3-2019)  
13.79.080 - Failure to Maintain 
A.  If the property owner fails to maintain stormwater management measures in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and the maintenance agreement, an authorized enforcement agent may perform any corrective work after thirty (30) days' written notice. 
B.  The 30-day notice requirement is waived if an authorized enforcement agent determines that the violation constitutes an immediate risk to the public health, safety, or the environment. Upon an immediate-risk determination, the authorized enforcement agent may enter the premises to perform any necessary corrective work on twenty-four (24) hours' notice to the property owner. 
C.  If the city performs repairs, remediation, or maintenance work in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance or other applicable ordinances, the city may assess the property owner for the cost of corrective work and any applicable penalties or administrative fees. The city shall assess the cost of any corrective work as a lien on the property. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § II, 4-3-2019)  
13.79.090 - Recordkeeping. 
Property owners shall make records of the installation, maintenance, and repairs of all stormwater management measures and shall retain these records onsite for at least five years. The property owner shall make these records available to the authorized enforcement agent during inspections and shall furnish them to the city upon request. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § II, 4-3-2019)  
Chapter 13.80 - ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND CONNECTIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, adopted Apr. 3, 2019, repealed the former Ch. 13.80, §§ 13.80.010—13.80.210, and enacted a new Ch. 13.80 as set out herein. The former Ch. 13.80 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2010-02, adopted Jan. 13, 2010; and Ord. No. 2013-18, adopted Dec. 5, 2013. 
 
13.80.010 - Purpose/intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the MEP as required by federal and state law. This chapter establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the MS4to comply with requirements of the NPDES Permit process. The objectives of this chapter are: 
1.  To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 by stormwater discharges by any user. 
2.  To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4. 
3.  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, 4-3-2019)  
13.80.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the definitions in Section 13.76.020 apply. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, 4-3-2019)  
13.80.030 - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement agent. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, 4-3-2019)  
13.80.040 - Responsibility for administration. 
City, county, state, and federal authorities (as defined as "authorized enforcement agent") shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the city may be delegated in writing by the city engineer to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, 4-3-2019)  
13.80.050 - Severability. 
If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, 4-3-2019)  
13.80.060 - Ultimate Responsibility. 
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are minimum standards; therefore, this chapter does not intend nor imply that compliance with these standards by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, 4-3-2019)  
13.80.070 - Discharge prohibitions. 
A.  Prohibition of Illegal Discharges. All persons are prohibited from discharging or causing to be discharged into the MS4 or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater, has violated this chapter. 
B.  The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited, except as described as follows: 
1.  Uncontaminated water line flushing or other potable water sources; 
2.  Uncontaminated landscape irrigation or lawn watering; 
3.  Diverted stream flows; 
4.  Rising groundwater; 
5.  Groundwater infiltration to storm drains; 
6.  Uncontaminated springs or pumped groundwater; 
7.  Uncontaminated foundation or footing drains; 
8.  Uncontaminated crawl space pumps or air conditioning condensation; 
9.  Individual residential car washing; 
10.  Natural riparian habitat or wetland flows; 
11.  Swimming pools (if dechlorinated typically less than one PPM chlorine); 
12.  Dye-testing, if verbal notification is provided to the authorized enforcement agent prior to the time of the test; and 
13.  Emergency fire fighting activities or discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement agenct as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
C.  The prohibition does not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system. 
D.  Sanitary sewer overflows are expressly prohibited from entering the MS4, and must be immediately reported to the city engineer or other authorized enforcement agent. Removal and clean-up of such overflows must be immediately undertaken when they occur. 
E.  Prohibition of Illicit Connections. 
1.  The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of Illicit Connections to the storm drain system is prohibited. 
2.  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, Illicit Connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
3.  A Person violates this chapter if having ownership or control over a sewage line, such sewage line conveys or discharges sewage into the MS4. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, 4-3-2019)  
13.80.080 - Suspension of MS4 Access. 
A.  Suspension Due to Illicit Discharges in Emergency Situations. The city may, without prior notice, suspend ms4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agent may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons. 
B.  Suspension Due to the Detection of Illicit Discharge. Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agent shall notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. Pursuant to South Salt Lake City Ordinance 2.22, the violator may appeal the proposed termination of its MS4 access. 
C.  Unauthorized Reinstatement. A person violates this chapter if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the authorized enforcement agent. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, 4-3-2019)  
13.80.090 - Industrial or Construction Activity Discharges. 
Any person subject to a state industrial or construction general permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Industrial and high-risk users are subject to inspections and reporting requirements, as provided in the city's SWMP. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, 4-3-2019)  
13.80.100 - Monitoring of Discharges. 
A.  Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction activity. 
B.  Access to Commercial and Industrial Facilities. 
1.  Facility operators shall permit the authorized enforcement agent to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this chapter as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. 
2.  Facility operators shall allow the authorized enforcement agent ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of a permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law. 
3.  An authorized enforcement agent may set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the authorized enforcement agent to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge. 
4.  An authorized enforcement agent may require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The discharger shall maintain the facility's sampling and monitoring equipment at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at its own expense. The discharger shall calibrate all devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality to ensure their accuracy. 
5.  At the request of an authorized enforcement agent, the operator shall promptly remove and not replace any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled. The operator shall bear the costs of clearing such access. 
6.  Unreasonable delays in allowing an authorized enforcement agent access to a permitted facility is a violation of this chapter. The operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the operator denies the authorized enforcement agent reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this chapter. 
7.  If the authorized enforcement agent has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter; that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any order issued hereunder; or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agent may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, 4-3-2019)  
13.80.110 - Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce storm water pollutants by use of best management practices. 
A.  The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial facility shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs. The owner or operator shall bear the expense of all maintenance and annual inspections of BMPs. 
B.  Any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at that person's expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the MS4. 
C.  Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid industrial general permit, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a SWPP as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES Permit. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, 4-3-2019)  
13.80.120 - Watercourse protection. 
Every person owning, licensing, or leasing property through which a watercourse passes shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner, licensee, or lessee shall maintain existing privately-owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not compromise the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, 4-3-2019)  
13.80.130 - Notification of spills. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for the emergency response of that facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or water of the state, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. in the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agent in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city within three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least five years and provided to the authorized agent upon request. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, 4-3-2019)  
13.80.140 - Enforcement. 
A.  Enforcement Actions. Whenever the city engineer, in consultation with the city attorney, has reason to believe that a person has violated or is violating a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter the city may pursue any and all remedies under the law to obtain compliance. 
B.  Each Day a Separate Offense. Any person found responsible in a civil proceeding of violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed responsible for a separate violation of this ordinance for each day during which any violation of any of the ordinance is committed, continued, or permitted, and may be fined a maximum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each of those violations. 
C.  Culpability of Responsible Person. When imposing fines, the city shall take into consideration whether the act was committed intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly as opposed to negligently. violation, this shall constitute prima facie evidence that further violations or the continuation of the violation are committed Intentionally. 
D.  Increased Penalty for Discharge of Hazardous Materials. A person who discharges hazardous materials in violation of this chapter, regardless of whether that act was committed intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or negligently, shall be subject to higher fines than one who discharges pollutants that are not considered hazardous materials, due to the added harm that hazardous materials contribute to the environment and the city's added expense of monitoring and abating those discharges. 
E.  Increased Penalty for Repeat Offenders. A person who violates a provision of this chapter is subject to higher penalties if that person has been found to have violated a provision of this chapter within the previous three years. For purposes of this section, a previous violation includes an uncontested civil citation, an order from the administrative court upholding a citation or notice of violation, or a criminal conviction. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, 4-3-2019)  
13.80.150 - Criminal prosecution. 
Any person that has intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or negligently violated or continues to violate this chapter shall be liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law and shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor. The city may recover all attorney fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this chapter, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, 4-3-2019)  
13.80.160 - Notice of violation and summons. 
A.  Whenever the city finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the city may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. such notice may require without limitation: 
1.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
2.  An order to eliminate illicit connections or discharges; 
3.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
4.  Abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
5.  Imposition of fines and fees to cover administrative and remediation costs; and 
6.  Requirement to implement control measures, including but not limited to treatment BMPs. 
B.  If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work may be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
C.  The notice of violation and summons shall be issued in accordance with the provisions of Section 8.14.310 of this ordinance, and served in accordance with Section 8.14.120 of this ordinance. 
D.  When a person has been served with a notice of violation and summons, that person shall be directed to attend a hearing before the city's administrative law judge to make final administrative determinations. The administrative law judge has authority to assess civil fines and order abatement of the violation, as provided in Chapter 2.22 of this ordinance. Fines shall be in the amount established in the consolidated fee schedule. 
E.  When a responsible person who, after receiving notification of an administrative hearing as provided in this section, fails to appear at the hearing, the administrative law judge shall accept evidence in that person's absence. If the administrative law judge upholds the violation alleged in the notice of violation and summons, the administrative law judge shall enter an administrative order requiring the action demanded in the city's notice of violation and summons, shall assess fines and fees, and may grant the city authority to enter the property to abate the violation if the responsible person fails to do so by the deadline established in the notice of violation and summons. 
F.  If the city abates a violation, it shall comply with the provisions of Sections 8.14.360 and 8.14.380 of this ordinance, as well as any applicable state laws relating to filing liens or garnishments upon the abated property. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, 4-3-2019)  
13.80.162 - Emergency abatement on private property. 
If the authorized enforcement agent determines that a discharge from private property, which requires entry onto the property to stop the discharge, constitutes an imminent threat to the health or safety of the community, he may take immediate action to abate the violation.  
13.80.170 - Administrative citation. 
A.  Whenever the city finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the city may issue an administrative citation. 
B.  The administrative citation shall comply with the content and notice provisions of Sections 8.14.210 and 8.14.120, respectively. 
C.  Civil fees are due and payable immediately upon service of the administrative citation, and the provisions of Section 8.14.220 shall apply to administrative citations issued under this chapter. Fines shall be in the amount established in the consolidated fee schedule. 
D.  A responsible person that has received an administrative citation shall have the right to contest the citation at an administrative hearing. A request for hearing shall comply with Section 2.22.040 of this ordinance. The failure to request an administrative hearing shall constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing and a waiver of the right of appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, 4-3-2019)  
13.80.180 - Injunctive relief. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the city may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, 4-3-2019)  
13.80.190 - Compensatory action. 
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this chapter, the city may require a responsible person to perform alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, 4-3-2019)  
13.80.200 - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, 4-3-2019)  
13.80.210 - Remedies not exclusive. 
The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state, or local law and it is within the discretion of the city to seek cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 2019-05, § I, 4-3-2019)  
Title 15 - IMPACT FEES, DRAINAGE AND SUBSURFACE WATER CONTROL, JORDAN RIVER PARKWAY EASEMENT, FLOOD PLAINS, and INTERLOCAL AGREEMENTS[1] 
Chapters: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2020-02, § III, adopted Jan. 8, 2020, repealed Title 15, Chapters 15.04—15.20. Section III(Exh. B) of said ordinance reenacted Title 15, Chapters 15.01—15.05, as set out herein. Formerly Title 15 pertained to land development and derived from Prior code §§ 15-14-1—15-14-12, 15-15-1—15-15-4, 15-26-1—15-26-5, 15-26-7, 15-26-8; Ord. No. 51 § 1 (part), adopted in 1979; Ord. No. 79 §§ 1, 2(part), adopted in 1981; Ord. No. 96-18 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 97-20 § 1; Ord. No. 98-1 §§ 8, 9; Ord. No. 98-9 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 02-03 §§ 1—5 (part); Ord. No. 297 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2005-02, Attach. A (part); Ord. No. 2006-17 (part); Ord. No. 2007-06; Ord. No. 2007-07; Ord. No. 2007-08; Ord. No. 2007-25; Ord. No. 2008-01 (part); Ord. No. 2008-21 (part); Ord. No. 2009-07, adopted Sept. 2, 2009; Ord. No. 2014-24, adopted Nov. 19, 2014; Ord. No. 2015-32, Exhs. B, C, adopted Dec. 2, 2015; Ord. No. 2016-04, adopted April 14, 2016; and Ord. No. 2018-12, §§ I, II, adopted Sept. 19, 2018. 
 
Chapter 15.01 - IMPACT FEES 
Sections:  
PART I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
15.01.010 - Findings and authority. 
The City Council finds and determines that: 
A.  Growth and development activity within the City will create demands upon public facilities, including culinary water production and delivery; 
B.  Those who are responsible for growth and development activity should pay a proportionate share of the cost of such planned facilities needed to serve the growth and development activity; 
C.  The impact fees established by this Chapter are based upon the costs which are generated through the need for new facilities and other capital acquisition costs required, incrementally, by new development in the City, in comparison with benefits already received and yet to be received; and 
D.  The impact fees established by this Chapter do not exceed the reasonable cost of providing public facilities occasioned by development projects within the City. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.01.020 - Definitions. 
A.  For purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions apply: 
"Act" means the Impact Fees Act, contained in Chapter 11-36a of the Utah Code, as in existence today or as hereafter amended. 
"Building permit" means an official document or certification which is issued by the building officials of the City and which authorizes the construction, alteration, enlargement, conversion, reconstruction, remodeling, rehabilitation, erection, demolition, moving or repair of a building or structure. 
"City" means the City of South Salt Lake. 
"Developer" means an individual, group of individuals, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, association, municipal corporation, state agency or other person undertaking development activity, and their successors and assigns. 
"Development activity" means any construction or expansion of a building, structure, or use, any change in use of a building or structure, or any changes in the use of land that creates additional demand and need for public facilities. 
"Development approval" means any written authorization from the City, other than a building permit, which authorizes the commencement of development activity, including, but not limited to, plat approval, planned unit development approval, site plan approval, lot line adjustment, and a conditional use permit. 
"Director" means the director of the community development department for the City of South Salt Lake. 
"Encumber" means a pledge to retire a debt, such as through bond payments, or an allocation to a current purchase order or contract. 
"Impact fee" means a payment of money imposed upon new development activity as a condition of development approval to mitigate the impact of the new development on public infrastructure. "Impact fee" does not include a tax, special assessment, building permit fee, hookup fee, fee for project improvements, or other reasonable permit or application fee. 
"Impact fee analysis" or "IFA" means the written analysis of each impact fee required by Section 11-36a-303 the Act. 
"Impact fee facilities plan" or "IFFP" means the plan required by Section 11-36a-301 of the Act. 
"Impact fee account" means a separate account established for a particular category of planned facility for which impact fees are collected, which is an interest-bearing account. 
"Level of service" means the defined performance standard or unit of demand for each capital component of a public facility within a service area. 
"Project improvements" means site improvements and facilities that are: planned and designed to provide service for development resulting from a development activity; necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of a development resulting from a development activity; and not identified or reimbursed as a system improvement. "Project improvement" does not mean system improvements. 
"Public facilities" means impact fee facilities as defined in the Act that have a life expectancy of ten or more years and are owned or operated by or on behalf of a local political subdivision or private entity. For purposes of this Chapter, and as defined in the Act, impact fee facilities include culinary water for service areas designed by the City. 
"Service area" means the geographic area designated by the City on the basis of planning or engineering principles in which the public facility provides services within the area. Service areas for each impact fee are established in this Chapter. 
"System improvements" means existing public facilities that are identified in the impact fee analysis under Section 11-36a-304 of the Act, and designed to provide services to service areas within the community at large and future public facilities identified in the impact fee analysis under Section 11-36a-304 that are intended to provide service to service areas within the community at large. "System improvements" do not include project improvements. 
B.  Except for any terms which are defined in Subsection A of this Section, the terms defined in the Act, as amended, are hereby adopted for use in this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.01.030 - Authority and applicability. 
A.  The collection of impact fees shall apply to all new development activity in the City unless otherwise provided herein. Until any impact fee required by this Chapter has been paid in full, no building permit for any development activity shall be issued. 
B.  A stop work order shall be issued on any development activity for which the applicable impact fee has not been paid in full. 
C.  The movement of a structure onto a lot shall be considered development activity and is subject to the impact fee provisions, unless otherwise provided herein. 
D.  Public facilities for which impact fees may be imposed by the City include public facilities for: 
1.  Culinary water; and 
2.  Sanitary sewer; and 
3.  Parks. 
E.  The City may not impose an impact fee to: 
1.  Cure deficiencies in public facilities serving existing development; 
2.  Raise the established level of service of a public facility serving existing development; 
3.  Recoup more than the local political subdivision's costs actually incurred for excess capacity in an existing system improvement; or 
4.  Include an expense for overhead, unless the expense is calculated pursuant to a methodology that is consistent with generally accepted cost accounting practices and the methodological standards set forth by the Federal Office of Management and Budget for federal grant reimbursement. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.01.040 - Service areas. 
A.  Impact fees may only be assessed upon development which takes place within established service areas within the City, as it relates to the specific fee. 
B.  The City shall establish service areas for each impact fee which is imposed under this Chapter. 
C.  Impact fees collected within a service area shall be spent within that service area, only on capital projects identified in the IFFP related to that fee. 
D.  Boundaries of service areas may only be revised following a public hearing and all other procedures provided in the Act. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.01.050 - Impact fee facilities plan and impact fee analysis. 
A.  Prior to imposing an impact fee for a service area, the City shall prepare or have prepared an impact fee facilities plan for any service area for which an impact fee is proposed. 
B.  At the time of acceptance, the IFFP shall comply with the Act, identify the level of service, determine the public facilities required to serve development resulting from new development activity, and contain a written certification by the person or entity who prepared the plan, certifying that the IFFP complies in each and every relevant respect to the Act. 
C.  Prior to imposing an impact fee for a service area, the City shall prepare or have prepared an impact fee analysis for any service area for which an impact fee is proposed. 
D.  The IFA shall identify the anticipated impact of system improvements required by anticipated development activity in order to maintain the level of service in the service area, demonstrate how the impacts are reasonably related to the anticipated development activity, estimate the proportionate share of the costs for existing capacity that will be recouped and the costs of impacts on system improvements that are reasonably related to new development activity, identify how the impact fee was calculated, and contain a written certification by the person or entity who prepared the plan, certifying that the IFA complies in each and every relevant respect with the Act. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.01.060 - Calculation of impact fees. 
A.  In calculating impact fees, the City may consider the construction contract price, the cost of acquiring land, improvements, materials and fixtures, planning costs, surveying, engineering fees, and debt service charges. 
B.  To the extent that new growth and development will be served by previously constructed improvements, the City's fees may include public facility costs and outstanding bond costs related to system improvements previously incurred by the City. 
C.  Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter, impact fees shall be imposed as follows: 
1.  Schedule. The fee published in the City's schedule shall be the means of calculating impact fees for specific development, unless the developer, pursuant to this Chapter, requests an independent impact fee calculation, or qualifies for an adjustment or credit. 
2.  Maximum Fee. The fee identified in the IFA represents the maximum fee which may be assessed as a result of development activity. 
3.  Residential impact fees may be collected by unit, lot size, or utility connection. For purposes of this Chapter, mobile and manufactured homes are considered residential. 
4.  For categories of uses not specified in the applicable impact fee schedule, the director shall apply the category of use set forth in the applicable fee schedule that is deemed to be the most similar to the proposed use. 
5.  If development approval is sought for a mixed-use development, the impact fees shall be calculated separately for each use according to the fee schedule, and the results aggregated. 
6.  For additions to, remodeling or replacement of existing structures, or for a change of use of an existing structure, the impact fee to be paid shall be the difference, if any, between: 
a.  The fee, if any, that would be payable for existing development on the site, or in the case of demolition or removal of a structure, the previous development on the site, provided that the demolition or removal has occurred within one year of the date of submittal of the application for which impact fees are assessed; and 
b.  The fee, if any, that would be payable for the development on the site for the new development. 
7.  Upon written request of an applicant, the director shall provide an estimate of the current fee based on the data provided by the applicant. However, the director shall not be responsible for determining at such preliminary date the accuracy of the information provided, nor shall such estimate provide any vested rights. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.01.070 - Exemptions. 
A.  The following are exempted from payment of impact fees: 
1.  Replacement of a structure or mobile home with a new structure or mobile home of the same size and use at the same site or lot, when such replacement occurs within twelve (12) months of the demolition or destruction of the prior structure or removal of the mobile home. 
2.  Alterations, expansion, enlargement, remodeling, rehabilitation, or conversion of an existing building or unit where no additional units are created and the use is not changed. 
3.  Demolition or moving of a structure. 
4.  Construction of accessory structures that do not impact the system improvements. 
5.  Miscellaneous accessory improvements to use, such as fences, walls, and signs. 
6.  Placing on a lot in the City a temporary construction trailer or office, but only for the life of the building permit issued for the construction served by the trailer or office. 
7.  Any use specifically exempted by a part of this Chapter which addresses a specific impact fee. 
B.  The City Council may, on a project-by-project basis, authorize exemption from impact fees for development activity attributable to development activity with a broad public purpose. Such determinations of exemption shall be by resolution by the City Council, accepting the results of a study conducted under Section 10-8-2 of the Utah Code. 
C.  Applications for exemptions under Subsection B shall be filed with the City at the time the applicant first requests the extension of service to the applicant's development or property. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.01.080 - Adjustment after individual assessment of impact fees. 
A.  If a person submitting an application for which payment of an impact fee is a prerequisite to approval believes that the impacts of the proposed development will be substantially less than would be indicated by using the fee schedule, such person may request to perform an individual assessment of the impact of the proposed development. A request for an individual assessment, accompanied by the information, data or studies supporting that assessment, must be made prior to payment of fees for a building permit or final plat approval, as applicable. 
B.  The City may make a downward adjustment to impact fees at the time the fee is charged to respond to unusual circumstances in specific cases, to address development activity by the state or school district, to ensure that impact fees are imposed fairly, or to fairly allocate costs associated with impacts created by a development activity or project. 
C.  Circumstances are unusual if sufficient written information, studies or data is presented to the City showing a significant discrepancy between the fee being assessed and the actual impact on the system improvement. 
D.  The City may issue building permits or plat approvals if the impact fee is tendered by the developer. The fee is subject to partial refund if a downward adjustment is approved by the director. For purposes of appeal or challenge, the date for such appeal or challenge shall run from the date on which the City makes its determination of the individual assessment. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.01.090 - Credits. 
A developer is eligible for credits against or a proportionate reimbursement of impact fees if the developer: 
A.  Dedicates land for a system improvement identified in the IFA; 
B.  Builds and dedicates some or all of a system improvement identified in the IFA; 
C.  Dedicates a public facility that the City and the developer agree will reduce the need for a system improvement identified in the IFA; 
D.  Dedicates land for, improvement to, or new construction of, any system improvements identified in the IFA provided by the developer if the facilities: 
1.  Are system improvements identified in the IFA; or 
2.  Are dedicated to the public and offset the need for an identified system improvement identified in the IFA. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.01.100 - Fund accounting for impact fees. 
A.  The City shall establish an impact fee account for each category of impact fee which is collected. Such fees shall be invested by the City and the yield on such fees, at the actual rate of return to the City, shall be credited to such accounting fund periodically in accordance with the accounting policies of the City. Such funds need not be segregated from other City monies for banking purposes. 
B.  The City shall maintain and keep financial records for such accounting fund showing the revenues to such fund and the disbursements from such fund, in accordance with normal City accounting practices. The records of such fund shall be open to public inspection in the same manner as other financial records of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.01.110 - Expenditure of impact fees. 
A.  Impact fees shall be expended or encumbered within six years after their receipt, unless the Council identifies, in writing, an extraordinary and compelling reason to hold the impact fees longer than six years. Under such circumstances, the Council shall establish an absolute date by which the impact fees shall be expended. 
B.  Impact fees may only be expended upon the system improvements which have been identified by the IFFP which formed the justification for the specific impact fee collected. 
C.  Impact fees may be spent to retire bonds with a term of more than six years, so long as the improvements are included in the IFFP, and the fees are equivalent to the debt service of the six-year planning period. 
D.  If the City does not spend or encumber an impact fee within the time period established in the Act, it shall return unspent fees, or the unspent portions thereof, to the person or entity which paid the fee. 
E.  Unless otherwise provided by state law, if the person or entity which paid the fee is not responsive to the City's written notice of refund, the refund shall be paid to the record owner of the property on the date that the original fee was paid. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.01.120 - Refunds of impact fees. 
A.  The City shall refund any impact fee paid by a developer, plus interest earned, when: 
1.  The developer does not proceed with the development activity and files a written request for a refund; 
2.  The fees have not been spent or encumbered; and 
3.  No impact has resulted. 
B.  An impact that would preclude a developer from a refund from the City may include any impact reasonably identified by the City, including, but not limited to, the City having sized facilities, paid for, installed, or caused the installation of facilities based in whole or in part upon the developer's planned development activity even though that capacity may, at some future time, be utilized by another development. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.01.130 - Separate fees and costs. 
The impact fees authorized by this Chapter are separate from and in addition to user fees and other charges lawfully imposed by the City and other fees and costs that may not be included as itemized component parts of the impact fee. In charging any such fees as a condition of development approval, the City recognizes that the fees must be a reasonable charge for services provided. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.01.140 - Additional fees or refund after development. 
Should any developer undertake development activities such that the ultimate acreage or other impact of the development activity is not revealed to the City, either through inadvertence, neglect, a change in plans, or any other cause whatsoever, and the impact fees are not initially charged against all acreage within the development, the City shall be entitled to charge an additional impact fee to the developer or other appropriate person covering the acreage for which an impact fee was not previously paid. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.01.150 - Challenges to impact fees—Generally. 
A.  A person or entity required to pay an impact fee who believes that the impact fee does not meet the requirements of law may file a written request for information with the City, which request shall be answered within two weeks after receipt of the request, providing the person or entity with copies of the applicable IFA, IFFP and other relevant information related to the impact fee being questioned. 
B.  A person or entity who will potentially be aggrieved by the impact fee may request an advisory opinion by filing a request with the Utah Office of Property Rights Ombudsman, in accordance with Title 13, Chapter 43 of the Utah Code. The aggrieved party requesting an advisory opinion is not required to exhaust administrative appeals procedures prior to requesting an advisory opinion. 
C.  Any person or entity which resides in or owns property within a service area, or an organization, association or corporation representing the interests of persons or entities owning property within the service area, may file a declaratory judgment action challenging the validity of an impact fee. 
D.  A person who has paid an impact fee imposed under this Chapter may challenge the fees as provided in Title 11, Chapter 36a, Part 7 of the Act. The grounds for appeal, remedies and time restrictions provided in the Act, as amended, are applicable to all challenges filed against impact fees imposed by this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.01.160 - Administrative appeals. 
A.  An administrative appeal may be initiated by a person or entity which has paid an impact fee imposed under this Chapter by filing written notice of the administrative appeal with the City recorder within thirty (30) days after the day on which the person or entity paid the fee. 
B.  The notice of appeal shall set forth the grounds for the appeal and shall include applicable filing fees, as established by the consolidated fee schedule. 
C.  Upon receiving written notice of appeal, the recorder shall set a date for the administrative law judge to consider the appeal. The procedures established in Chapter 2.22 of this Code shall apply to appeals, except that the administrative judge shall render a decision within thirty (30) days after the date the challenge of appeal is filed, the person filing the appeal requests or agrees to an extension of that time. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.01.170 - Mediation for specified public agencies. 
In addition to challenges and appeals, specified public agencies may file a request for mediation in accordance with Section 11-36a-705 of the Act, which proceedings are governed by the Act. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.01.180 - Remedies for challenges, appeals or mediation. 
A.  A person or entity who successfully challenges an impact fee due to defects with the notice requirements or procedural requirements may receive the remedy of requiring the City to correct the defective notice or procedure and repeat the process. 
B.  A person or entity who challenges an impact fee may receive the remedy of a refund of the difference between what the person or entity paid as an impact fee and the amount the impact fee should have been if it had been correctly calculated. 
C.  Attorney fees may only be awarded to the extent provided in the Act. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.01.190 - Effective date of impact fees. 
A.  Pursuant to Section 11-36a-401 of the Act, this Chapter shall not take effect until ninety (90) days after the day on which the ordinance is approved by the Council. 
B.  Additional categories of impact fees shall have an effective date of ninety (90) days after the day on which the additional category is approved by the Council. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
PART II. - SPECIFIC IMPACT FEES 
 
15.01.200 - Culinary water impact fee—Service area, IFFP and IFA. 
A.  Service Area. The service area for culinary water impact fees includes Pressure Zone 1 (shaded red) on the South Salt Lake City Drinking Water System Master Plan, which was previously adopted by this Council, as shown at Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1
B.  Culinary Water Impact Fee Facilities Plan. Pursuant to Section 15.01.050 of this Chapter and Section 11-36a-302 of the Act, the City has, through its consultants, researched and analyzed the factors set forth in the Act and caused to be prepared a culinary water impact fee facilities plan, as part of the Culinary Water Impact Fee Facilities Plan and Impact Fee Analysis: City of South Salt Lake. The culinary water IFFP establishes the current and proposed level of service. The City currently maintains a system which meets the state's requirements for drinking water systems related to peak and average distribution, and future development will require the City to expand its water source, distribution and storage systems in a manner which continues to meet the state's standards for drinking water systems. The Culinary Water Impact Fee Facilities Plan and Impact Fee Analysis: City of South Salt Lake, attached as Exhibit A to Ordinance 2014-24, is hereby adopted in its entirety by the City in accordance with applicable provisions of this Chapter and the Act. 
C.  Impact Fee Analysis. Pursuant to Section 15.01.050 of this Chapter, and Section 11-36a-303 of the Act, the City has, through its consultants, researched and analyzed the factors set forth in the Act and prepared a culinary water impact fee analysis, as part of the Culinary Water Impact Fee Facilities Plan and Impact Fee Analysis: City of South Salt Lake, which is attached as Exhibit A to Ordinance 2014-24, is hereby adopted in its entirety by the City in accordance with the applicable provisions of this Chapter and the Act. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.01.210 - Culinary water impact fee—Calculation. 
A.  Based upon the culinary water IFA, equivalent residential connections in the City are those which connect to the City's culinary water system within the service area with a three-quarter-inch or smaller water meter. 
B.  The maximum impact fee for culinary water for each equivalent residential connection is seven hundred thirty-three dollars ($733.00). 
C.  The City Council may, by amending the consolidated fee schedule, implement impact fees for development within the service area, with fees based upon the number of equivalent residential connections for a development, which fee shall be determined by the size of meter or meters installed for the development. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.01.220 - Sanitary sewer impact fee—Service area, IFFP and IFA. 
A.  Services Area. The service area for sanitary sewer impact fees includes the boundaries of South Salt Lake City generally north of the Millcreek waterway, as shown in Figure 3 (outlined in green). 
 
Figure 3
B.  Sanitary Sewer Impact Fee Facilities Plan. Pursuant to Section 15.01.050 of this Chapter and Section 11-36a-302 of the Act, the City has, through its consultants, researched and analyzed the factors set forth in the Act and caused to be prepared a sanitary sewer impact fee facilities plan, as part of the Sanitary Sewer Impact Fee Facilities Plan and Impact Fee Analysis: City of South Salt Lake. The sanitary sewer IFFP establishes the current and proposed level of service. The City currently maintains a system which meets the state's requirements for sanitary sewer systems related to peak and average flow. In addition, the City maintains treatment facilities through Central Valley Water Reclamation Facility. Future development will require the City to expand its collection systems in a manner which continues to meet the state's standards for sanitary sewer systems. The Sanitary Sewer Impact Fee Facilities Plan and Impact Fee Analysis: City of South Salt Lake, attached as Exhibit A to Ordinance 2015-32, is hereby adopted in its entirety by the City in accordance with applicable provisions of this Chapter and the Act. 
C.  Impact Fee Analysis. Pursuant to Section 15.01.050 of this Chapter, and Section 11-36a-303 of the Act, the City has, through its consultants, researched and analyzed the factors set forth in the Act and prepared a sanitary sewer impact fee analysis, as part of the Sanitary Sewer Impact Fee Facilities Plan and Impact Fee Analysis: City of South Salt Lake, which is attached as Exhibit A to Ordinance 2015-32, is hereby adopted in its entirety by the City in accordance with the applicable provisions of this Chapter and the Act. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.01.230 - Sanitary sewer impact fee—Calculation. 
A.  Based upon the sanitary sewer IFA, equivalent residential connections in the City are those which connect to the City's sanitary sewer system within the service area converted to the demand of any three-quarter-inch or smaller water meter. 
B.  The maximum impact fee for sanitary sewer for each equivalent residential connection is one thousand sixty-three dollars ($1,063.00). 
C.  The City Council may, by amending the consolidated fee schedule, implement impact fees for development within the service area, with fees based upon the number of equivalent residential connections for a development, which fee shall be determined by the size of meter or meters installed for the development. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.01.240 - Parks and recreation impact fee—Service area, IFFP and IFA. 
A.  Services Area. The service area for parks and recreation impact fees is all areas within South Salt Lake City. 
B.  Parks and Recreation Impact Fee Facilities Plan. Pursuant to Section 15.01.050 of this Chapter and Section 11-36a-302 of the Act, the City has, through its consultants, researched and analyzed the factors set forth in the Act and caused to be prepared a Parks and Recreation Impact Fee Facilities Plan, as part of the Parks and Recreation Impact Fee Facilities Plan and Impact Fee Analysis: City of South Salt Lake. The Parks and Recreation IFFP establishes the current and proposed level of service. The City currently maintains a system of park and recreation infrastructure. Future development will require the City to expand or provide additional facilities to maintain the existing level of service. The Parks and Recreation Impact Fee Facilities Plan and Impact Fee Analysis: City of South Salt Lake, which is attached as Exhibit A to Ordinance 2016-04, is hereby adopted in its entirety by the City in accordance with applicable provisions of this Chapter and the Act. 
C.  Impact Fee Analysis. Pursuant to Section 15.01.050 of this Chapter, and Section 11-36a-303 of the Act, the City has, through its consultants, researched and analyzed the factors set forth in the Act and prepared a Parks and Recreation Impact Fee Analysis, as part of the Parks and Recreation Impact Fee Facilities Plan and Impact Fee Analysis: City of South Salt Lake, which is attached as Exhibit A to Ordinance 2016-04, is hereby adopted in its entirety by the City in accordance with the applicable provisions of this Chapter and the Act. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.01.250 - Parks and recreation impact fee—Calculation. 
A.  Based upon the parks and recreation IFA, fees should be calculated based upon the number of single-family or multi-family households in a development. 
B.  The City Council may, by amending the consolidated fee schedule, implement impact fees for development within the service area, with fees based upon the number of single-family or multi-family households for a development. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
Chapter 15.02 - DRAINAGE AND SUBSURFACE WATER CONTROL 
Sections: 
 
15.02.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The City, by and through its City Council, recognizes that the tremendous increase in property development has a significant impact on surface water runoff, both in terms of quantity and quality. 
B.  The City is in need of a method and procedure whereby it can provide for and control surface water runoff, so as to protect the persons and property both within and without the corporate boundaries of South Salt Lake City. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.02.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words have the meanings as set out in this Section: 
"Development" means any commercial or industrial project of one quarter of an acre. 
"Drainage plan" means a plan showing all drainage facilities, both on- and off-site, designed to carry all surface and subsurface waters from a subdivision or development. 
"Subdivision" means any residential development of over one lot concurrently, or any development (including one lot) which will cause a significant change in the existing drainage pattern. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.02.030 - Applicability. 
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all subdivisions and developments to be constructed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.02.040 - Interpretation. 
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Chapter the requirements set forth in this Chapter are declared to be the minimum requirements for the purposes set forth in this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.02.050 - Conflicts with Chapter. 
This Chapter shall not nullify the more restrictive provisions of any private covenants, agreements or other ordinances or laws, but shall prevail over such provisions which are less restrictive. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.02.060 - Drainage plan. 
Prior to approval of the development or subdivision by the City engineering department, a drainage plan shall be prepared at the expense of the developer or subdivider, by a qualified and licensed engineer. The plan shall include a complete analysis of all surface drainage and subsurface drainage patterns and the impact that the proposed project will have upon them; including plans showing, in detail, proposed construction designs for handling of drainage. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.02.070 - Fees. 
The developer, subdivider, or owner shall, prior to being granted any permits whatsoever, pay a fee which shall be determined by the formula in Section 15.02.080. Said formula shall determine the cubic feet of runoff per second which is attributable to the proposed development. The fee shall be assessed at a rate set by resolution of the City Council per cubic foot per second additional runoff created on the proposed development or subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.02.080 - Determination of fee (formula). 
The amount of surface water runoff shall be established by using the following tables and formula: 
A.  Rainfall Factor: The fee shall be assessed on the basis of 1.4 inches of rainfall per hour (which is the acceptable one-hundred-year standard). This shall be known as factor A in the formula. 
B.  Area Factor: The rainfall factor shall be multiplied by the number of acres in the development or subdivision. This factor shall be known as factor B in the formula. 
C.  Land Use Factor: 
1.  The following table shall be used to determine the runoff from various types of development: 
General Land Use Classification 	Runoff Coefficients 
Undeveloped 	0.15 
Residential: 	
Single-family 	0.35 
Two-family 	0.45 
Multiple-family 	0.60 
Suburban estates 	0.25 
Commercial: 	
Neighborhood 	0.60 
General 	0.80 
Drive-in movies 	0.70 
Industrial: 	
Light 	0.60 
Heavy 	0.80 
Agriculture 	0.15 
Institutional 	0.30 
Parks and recreation: 	0.20 
Utilities and transportation 	0.50 
Streets 	0.85 
Vacant 	0.15 
Other: 	determined by City Engineer 
 
2.  Differential runoff will be determined by evaluating the land use before the development C1 and after the development C2. The difference (C2 - C1) will be multiplied by the factors A and B to determine the additional runoff in cubic feet per second. 
D.  The number of cubic feet per second of increased runoff caused by the proposed development shall be known as Factor f. 
E.  The formula for determining the service fee for water runoff and storm drain shall be determined by the following formula: 
A × B × (C 2 - C 1 ) = F 
F × amount set by resolution of 
the City Council = Service Fee. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.02.090 - Storm drain sumps and detention ponds. 
In the event there is no gutter or storm drain line existing within three hundred (300) feet of the property which is proposed to be developed, with adequate capacity to convey storm water as determined by the City Engineering Department, the developer or owner may be permitted to use a storm drain sump or detention pond upon approval of the City Engineering Department. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.02.100 - Catch basins requirement. 
In any new development whether residential subdivision, industrial park, multiple unit dwellings or otherwise, surface water will not be allowed to be carried in a gutter for more than seven hundred (700) feet without the installation of a catch basin or other device for depositing the surface water into the storm drain system. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.02.110 - Appeals. 
Any person, firm or corporation aggrieved by the decision of any authorized official regarding this Chapter may appeal such determination to the administrative law judge by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Recorder within ten days of any final adverse decision, as outlined in Chapter 2.22 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.02.120 - Violations—Penalty. 
A.  Any person, firm or corporation who shall create, or cause to be created, a development as defined in this Title, or construct a building within the limits of South Salt Lake City, without complying with the provisions of this Chapter, or who shall violate any provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day in which any such violation shall continue, or be permitted, shall be deemed a separate offense. 
B.  The City shall authorize the necessary public officials and/or officials to investigate and make reports to the planning commission of any such violations. The planning commission, if it finds that such a violation does exist, may recommend that legal action be taken by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
Chapter 15.03 - JORDAN RIVER PARKWAY EASEMENT 
Sections: 
 
15.03.010 - Purpose. 
In enacting the ordinance codified in this Chapter, it is the purpose of the City of South Salt Lake to foster the development of recreational areas, water conservation, flood control, reclamation and wildlife resources on and along the Jordan River by reserving to itself and to the general public the right to enter upon, cross over, use and make improvements upon an easement strip immediately adjoining the bank of said river. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.03.020 - Conditional subdivision approval. 
In addition to all other requirements and conditions contained in this Title, it is a further condition, upon the approval and recording of any subdivision, that the subdivider of any property containing within its boundaries one or both banks of the Jordan River, convey to South Salt Lake an easement within a strip or strips extending fifty (50) feet from the bank or banks of the river. In no event shall the easement described in this section exceed ten percent of the total area of the subdivision without just compensation being paid therefor. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.03.030 - Extent of easement. 
A.  Without prior written approval from South Salt Lake City, the owner of property affected by the easement described in Section 15.03.020 is prohibited from: 
1.  Diverting, filling in, lining or culverting the natural watercourse of the Jordan River; 
2.  Erecting any structures or improvements, including, but not limited to, buildings, fences, bridges and parking lots, within fifty (50) feet of the banks of the Jordan River; 
3.  Dumping or permitting the dumping of any garbage or other refuse within fifty (50) feet of the banks of the Jordan River; 
4.  Cutting, grubbing or removing any trees or other natural vegetation, removing any stones or earth, or otherwise disturbing the natural environment of the area within fifty (50) feet of the banks of the Jordan River. 
B.  The City of South Salt Lake reserves to itself and to the general public, the rights of: 
1.  Entry by agents, employees and contractors of South Salt Lake City or of the Provo-Jordan River parkway authority to survey, plan, construct and maintain such improvements as may be necessary to give effect to the water conservation, recreation, flood control, reclamation and wildlife preservation purposes of this Chapter. No such improvement shall, without consent of the property owner, extend outside of the fifty-foot easement strip without just compensation being paid therefor; and 
2.  Entry by the general public for the purposes of recreation or for any other purpose contemplated under this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.03.040 - Easement limitations. 
A.  Rights acquired by the City of South Salt Lake subject to this Chapter shall be held and exercised only for the advancement of the purposes contemplated in this Chapter. 
B.  Ownership in fee simple absolute of the easement strip shall remain unaffected by the provisions of this Chapter and shall remain in the owner of the servient realty. The interest created by this Chapter is an appurtenant easement and shall remain unaffected by the sale or other alienation of the realty upon which it lies. Upon dissolution, disincorporation, consolidation or other disability of the City of South Salt Lake, the easement created by this Chapter shall, without further transferring act, vest in the succeeding government entity having territorial jurisdiction over the easement. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.03.050 - Waiver of flood control impact fee. 
The flood control impact fee imposed by Chapter 15.02 of this Code shall be waived for that portion of the subdivision or development conveyed pursuant to this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
Chapter 15.04 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION* 
Sections: 
 
15.04.010 - Statutory authorization. 
The Legislature of the state of Utah has by statute delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City Council of South Salt Lake City, Utah, does ordain as follows in this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.04.020 - Purpose of Chapter. 
A.  Findings of Fact. 
1.  The flood hazard areas of South Salt Lake City are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, as well as health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare of the City. 
2.  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately flood proofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood damage and loss. 
B.  Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this Chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions to specific areas by provisions designed: 
1.  To protect human life and health; 
2.  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
3.  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding which are generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
4.  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
5.  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
6.  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas; 
7.  To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
8.  To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
C.  Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. In order to accomplish its purposes, this Chapter includes methods and provisions for reducing flood losses by: 
1.  Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
2.  Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
3.  Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate, control or channel floodwaters; 
4.  Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
5.  Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters, or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.04.030 - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this Chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This Chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. This Chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of South Salt Lake, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.04.040 - Relationship of floodplain regulations to zoning districts. 
The flood damage prevention regulations of this Chapter shall be supplemental to, and not in lieu of, the applicable zoning provisions of the use district in which the land is located and/or general provisions under Title 17 of this Code. 
Property located within said flood hazard areas shall be developed only in conformance with the provisions set forth in this Chapter. 
In cases of conflict between such district classifications and the flood damage prevention regulations, the most restrictive provisions shall govern. 
Permitted, conditional and accessory uses allowed in the flood hazard areas are those which are permitted uses in the underlying applicable use district. However, additionally, all uses, whether principal or secondary, involving construction or relocation of permanent buildings (or structures); or placement of temporary structures, mobile or modular homes; or excavation or placement of fill materials, shall further meet the supplemental conditions and standards set forth in this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.04.050 - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined in this Section, words or phrases used in this Chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this Chapter its most reasonable application. For purposes of this Chapter the following terms mean: 
"Alluvial fan flooding" means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. 
"Apex" means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
"Appeal" means a request for a review of the flood plain administrator's interpretation of any provisions of this Chapter or is a request for a variance. 
"Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AO, AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent chance or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
"Area of special flood hazard" is the land in the floodplain within the community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AI, Ah, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE or V. 
"Base flood" means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
"Basement" means any are of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
"Critical feature" means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
"Development" means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations or the storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood hazard. 
"Elevated building" means a non-basement building (i) built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-30, AE, A A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in Zones V1-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns,)posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the floor of the water and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters. In the case of Zones V1-30, VE, of V, "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building," even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls if the breakaway walls met the standards of Section 60.3(e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
"Existing construction" means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
"Existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) are completed before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter. 
"Expansion to existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
"Flood" or "flooding" means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
1.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or 
2.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
"Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones. 
"Flood insurance study" means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the flood boundary-floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
"Floodplain or flood-prone area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding). 
"Floodplain management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
"Floodplain management regulations" means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provided standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
"Flood protection system" means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorize, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees of dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
"Flood proofing" means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation facilities, structures and their contents. 
"Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
"Functionally dependent use" means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
"Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
"Historic structure" means any structure that is: 
1.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
2.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
4.  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or; 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states with approved programs. 
"Levee" means a man-made structure; usually an earthen embankment designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
"Levee system" means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
"Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
"Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle," as defined in this Section. 
"Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
"Mean sea level" means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. "New construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the original ordinance, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
"New manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management regulations codified in this Chapter. 
"Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
"Start of construction" includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
"Structure" means a walled and roofed building or manufactured home that is principally above ground. 
"Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
"Substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
1.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
2.  Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
"Variance" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this Chapter when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this Chapter. For full requirements refer to Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance program regulations. "Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance program regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
"Water surface elevation" means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of costal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.04.060 - General provisions. 
A.  This Chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the City of South Salt Lake. 
B.  The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study for the City of South Salt Lake," dated September 25, 2009, with an accompanying flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and flood boundary floodway maps (FBFM), and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this Chapter. The City of South Salt Lake also automatically adopts any future effective FEMA flood insurance rate maps and effective FEMA flood insurance studies and includes them to be part of this Chapter. 
C.  Establishment of Development Permit. A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
D.  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this Chapter and other applicable regulations. 
E.  Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This Chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this Chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
F.  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this Chapter, all provisions shall be: 
1.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
2.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
3.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.04.070 - Administration; designation of the floodplain administrator. 
A.  The South Salt Lake City community and economic development director is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this Chapter and other appropriate section of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
B.  Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this Chapter. 
2.  Review permit applications to determine whether proposed building site, including placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
3.  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this Chapter. 
4.  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
5.  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the area of special flood hazard (for example where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the flood plain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
6.  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
7.  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
8.  When base flood plain elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 15.04.060 the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this Chapter. 
9.  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the FIRM for South Salt Lake City unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
10.  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations, a community may approve certain development in A1-30, AE, AH on the communities FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot, provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA (condition letter of map revision). 
C.  Application for a development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
1.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; 
2.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been flood proofed; 
3.  Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the flood proofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the flood proofing criteria of this Chapter. 
4.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
5.  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with this Chapter. 
D.  Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this Chapter and the following relevant factors: 
1.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
2.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
3.  The danger that material may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
4.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
5.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
6.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
7.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
8.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
9.  The relationship of the proposed use to the general plan of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
15.04.080 - Development standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following standards are required for all new construction or substantial improvements: 
A.  Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure and capable of resisting the hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads. All manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement and capable of resisting the hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. Specific requirements may be: 
1.  Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four corners of the manufactured home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations, with manufactured homes less than fifty (50) feet long requiring one additional tie per side; 
2.  Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points, with manufactured homes less than fifty (50) feet long requiring four additional ties per side; 
3.  All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force of four thousand eight hundred (4,800) pounds; and 
4.  Any additions to the manufactured home be similarly anchored. 
B.  Construction Materials and Methods. 
1.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
2.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
3.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
C.  Utilities. 
1.  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
2.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharge from the systems into floodwaters. 
3.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
D.  Specific Standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in (i) Section 15.04.060(A), (B), (ii) Section 15.04.070(B)(8), or (iii) Section 15.04.080(F)(3), the following provisions are required: 
1.  Residential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of a residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this Subsection as proposed in 15.04.070, Section (C)(1) is satisfied. 
2.  Nonresidential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this Subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are flood proofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
3.  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered profession engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
4.  Manufactured Homes. 
a.  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is an addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.  Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
c.  Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of paragraph (4) of this Section be elevated so that either: 
i.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or 
ii.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are not less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
5.  Recreational Vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either: 
a.  Be on site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; 
b.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
c.  Meet the permit requirements of Section 15.04.070(C)(1), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in paragraph (4) of this Section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions. 
E.  Standards for Subdivision Proposals. 
1.  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with Section 15.04.020(A), (B), and (C) of this Chapter. 
2.  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet Development Permit requirements of Section 15.04.060(C); Section 15.04.070(C); and the provisions of Section 15.04.080 of this Chapter. 
3.  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to Section 15.04.060(A), (B), (ii) Section 15.04.070(B)(8) of this Chapter. 
4.  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
5.  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
F.  Standards for Areas of Shallow Flooding (Ago/Ah Zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in Section 15.04.060(B), are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
1.  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified). 
2.  All new construction and substantial improvement of non-residential structures: 
a.  Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified); or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic load of effects of buoyancy. 
3.  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this Section, as proposed in Section 15.04.070, are satisfied. 
4.  Require within Zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures. 
G.  Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 15.04.060 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
1.  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
2.  If Section 15.04.080(H)(1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 15.04.080. 
3.  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM and floodway revision through FEMA. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
Chapter 15.05 - INTERLOCAL AGREEMENTS 
Sections: 
 
15.05.010 - Interlocal Agreement. 
It is the intent of the City that the provisions of the agreement between the Utah Transit Authority and the City adopted on February 17, 2004 by Resolution R-2004-5 shall restrict the exercise by the City of its authority within the designated corridors to the full extent provided by the agreement, notwithstanding anything in an existing or future City ordinance to the contrary. Accordingly, all operative provisions of the agreement are adopted and incorporated into this Code by reference. To the extent any City ordinance existing at the time of the adoption of Resolution R-2004-5 conflicts with the provisions of the adopted agreement, such ordinance is amended to limit and restrict the operation and applicability thereof solely to territory outside the corridor. Any future City ordinance to come after the time of the adoption of Resolution R-2004-5 that conflicts with the provisions of the agreement shall, during the term of the agreement, be construed as applying solely to territory located outside the corridor. For purposes of this Section, "corridor" is as defined in the agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § III(Exh. B), 1-8-2020)  
Title 17 - LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Chapters: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV, adopted Jan. 8, 2020, repealed Title 17, Chapters 17.01—17.48. Section IV(Exh. C) of said ordinance reenacted Title 17, Chapters 17.01—17.12, as set out herein. Formerly, Title 17 pertained to zoning and derived from Ord. No. 02-12 § 1 (Att. A (part)); Ord. No. 2008-08; Ord. No. 2010-01, adopted Jan. 13, 2010; Ord. No. 2011-07, adopted Aug. 10, 2011; Ord. No. 2011-11, adopted Oct. 19, 2011; Ord. No. 2012-01, adopted April 4, 2012; Ord. No. 2012-02, adopted April 4, 2012; Ord. No. 2012-03, adopted April 4, 2012; Ord. No. 2012-06, adopted June 20, 2012; Ord. No. 2012-08, adopted July 25, 2012; Ord. No. 2012-11, adopted Aug. 30, 2012; Ord. No. 2012-12, adopted Aug. 30, 2012; Ord. No. 2012-13, adopted Aug. 30, 2012; Ord. No. 2013-02, adopted Jan. 24, 2013; Ord. No. 2013-04, adopted Feb. 4, 2013; Ord. No. 2013-10, adopted Aug. 2, 2013; Ord. No. 2013-12, adopted Aug. 15, 2013; Ord. No. 2013-15, adopted Oct. 24, 2013; Ord. No. 2013-16, adopted Nov. 21, 2013; Ord. No. 2013-19, adopted Dec. 12, 2013; Ord. No. 2014-03, adopted Feb. 12, 2014; Ord. No. 2014-07, adopted Apr. 2, 2014; Ord. No. 2014-22, adopted Sept. 17, 2014; Ord. No. 2014-25, adopted Nov. 19, 2014; Ord. No. 2015-06, adopted Apr. 22, 2015; Ord. No. 2015-11, adopted May 27, 2015; Ord. No. 2015-19, adopted July 8, 2015; Ord. No. 2015-20, adopted July 8, 2015; Ord. No. 2015-24, adopted Aug. 12, 2015; Ord. No. 2015-28, adopted Sept. 2, 2015; Ord. No. 2015-29, adopted Sept. 2, 2015; Ord. No. 2015-30, adopted Sept. 2, 2015; Ord. No. 2016-01, adopted Jan. 27, 2016; Ord. No. 2016-06, adopted Apr. 14, 2016; Ord. No. 2016-21, adopted Aug. 24, 2016; Ord. No. 2016-26, adopted Nov. 17, 2016; Ord. No. 2017-03, adopted Feb. 22, 2017; Ord. No. 2017-04, adopted Feb. 22, 2017; Ord No. 2017-05, adopted March 23, 2017; Ord. No. 2017-09, adopted June 7, 2017; Ord. No. 2017-22, adopted July 12, 2017; Ord. No. 2017-24, adopted Aug. 9, 2017; Ord. No. 2017-26, Exh. 1, adopted Nov. 8, 2017; Ord. No 2017-28, §§ 1, II(Exh. 1), adopted Dec. 13, 2017; Ord. No. 2017-29, §§ 1, II(Exh. 1), III, adopted Dec. 13, 2017; Ord. No. 2017-30, §§ 1, II(Exh. 1), adopted Dec. 13, 2017; Ord. No. 2018-18, §§ I—VII, adopted Dec. 12, 2018; Ord. No. 2019-02, §§ II—VI, adopted Feb. 27, 2019; Ord. No. 2019-03, §§ III—IX, adopted March 27, 2019; Ord. No. 2019-06, §§ II—VI, adopted May 8, 2019; and Ord. No. 2019-07, §§ I—III, adopted May 22, 2019. 
 
Chapter 17.01 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
17.01.010 - Definitions. 
"Active Business" means a business holding a current South Salt Lake City business license. 
"Administrative Law Judge" means a person appointed by the Mayor or the Mayor's designee to preside over administrative hearings. 
"Adult Day Care" means non-residential daytime care and supervision of three (3) or more functionally impaired adults. Adult Day Care is not Day Treatment or a Homeless Shelter. 
"Affected Entity" for the purposes of required notice of public hearings for a General Plan amendment or the adoption or revision of a Land Use Regulation, means a county, municipality, local school district, special service district under Utah Code Annotated (UCA) Title 17D, Chapter 1, Special Service District Act, school district, interlocal cooperation entity established under UCA Title 11, Chapter 13, Interlocal Cooperation Act, specified public utility under UCA Title 10, Chapter 9a, Municipal Land Use, Development, and Management Act, a property Owners' association, or the Utah Department of Transportation, if: 
1.  The entity's services or facilities are likely to require expansion or significant modification because of an intended Use of land; 
2.  The entity has filed with the City a copy of the entity's general or long-range plan; or 
3.  The entity has filed with the City a request for notice during the same calendar year and before the City provides notice to an Affected Entity in compliance with a requirement imposed under the state Land Use Development and Management Act. 
"Alcoholic Beverage, Banquet and Catering" means an entity operating under and holding the required Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control license issued in accordance with Utah Code Annotated Title 32B, Chapter 6, Part 6, On-Premise Banquet License, and corresponding City liquor license. 
"Alcoholic Beverage, Bar Establishment" means an entity operating under and holding the required Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control license issued in accordance with Utah Code Annotated Title 32B, Chapter 6, Part 4, Bar Establishment License, and corresponding City liquor license. 
"Alcoholic Beverage, Beer Recreational" means an entity operating under and holding the required Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control license issued in accordance with Utah Code Annotated Title 32B, Chapter 6, Part 7, On-premise Beer Retailer License, and corresponding City beer license. 
"Alcoholic Beverage, Beer Wholesaler" means an entity operating under and holding the required Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control license issued in accordance with Utah Code Annotated Title 32B, Chapter 13, Beer Wholesaling License Act, and corresponding City beer license. 
"Alcoholic Beverage, Hotel" means an entity operating under and holding the required Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control license issued in accordance with Utah Code Annotated Title 32B, Chapter 8b, Hotel License Act, and corresponding City liquor license. 
"Alcoholic Beverage, Liquor Warehouse" means an entity operating under and holding the required Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control license issued in accordance with Utah Code Annotated Title 32B, Chapter 12, Liquor Warehousing License Act, and corresponding City liquor license. 
"Alcoholic Beverage, Local Industry Representative" means an entity operating under and holding the required Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control license issued in accordance with Utah Code Annotated Title 32B, Chapter 11, Part 6, Local Industry Representative License Act, and corresponding City liquor license. 
"Alcoholic Beverage, Manufacturer" means an entity operating under and holding the required (a) Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control license issued in accordance with Utah Code Annotated Title 32B: 
1.  Chapter 11, Part 3, Winery Manufacturing License, 
2.  Chapter 11, Part 4, Distillery Manufacturing License, or 
3.  Chapter 11, Part 5, Brewery Manufacturing License; and 
(b) Corresponding City liquor license. 
"Alcoholic Beverage, Off-Premise Beer" means an entity operating under and holding the required Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control license issued in accordance with Utah Code Annotated Title 32B, Chapter 7, Off-Premise Beer Retailer Act, and corresponding City beer license, and only as a component of a Convenience Store with Fuel Pumps, General Retail, or Manufacturer Alcoholic Beverage Use. 
"Alcoholic Beverage, Package Agency" means an entity other than the state operating a retail liquor location to sell packaged liquor for consumption off the premises of the package agency under (a) an agreement with the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, as authorized by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission in accordance with Utah Code Annotated Title 32B, Chapter 2, Part 6, Package Agency, and (b) corresponding City liquor license. 
"Alcoholic Beverage, Reception Center" means an entity operating under and holding the required Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control license issued in accordance with Utah Code Annotated Title 32B, Chapter 6, Part 9, Reception Center License, and corresponding City liquor license. 
"Alcoholic Beverage, Restaurant (Beer Only)" means an entity operating under and holding the required Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control license issued in accordance with Utah Code Annotated Title 32B, Chapter 6, Part 9, Beer-Only Restaurant License, and corresponding City beer license. 
"Alcoholic Beverage, Restaurant (Limited Service)" means an entity operating under and holding the required Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control license issued in accordance with Utah Code Annotated Title 32B, Chapter 6, Part 3, Limited-service Restaurant License, and corresponding City liquor license. 
"Alcoholic Beverage, Restaurant (Full Service)" means an entity operating under and holding the required Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control license issued in accordance with Utah Code Annotated Title 32B, Chapter 6, Part 2, Full-service Restaurant License, and corresponding City liquor license. 
"Alcoholic Beverage, Special Use (Educational)" means an entity operating under and holding the required Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control educational use permit issued in accordance with Utah Code Annotated Title 32B, Chapter 10, Special Use Permit Act, and corresponding City special-use license. 
"Alcoholic Beverage, Special Use (Industrial/Manufacturing)" means an entity operating under and holding the required Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control industrial or manufacturing use permit issued in accordance with Utah Code Annotated Title 32B, Chapter 10, Part 4, Industrial or Manufacturing Use Permit, and corresponding City special-use license. 
"Alcoholic Beverage, Special Use (Scientific)" means an entity operating under and holding the required Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control scientific use permit issued in accordance with Utah Code Annotated Title 32B, Chapter 10, Special Use Permit Act, and corresponding City special-use license. 
"Alcoholic Beverage, Special Use (Religious)" means an entity operating under and holding the required Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control religious wine use permit issued in accordance with Utah Code Annotated Title 32B, Chapter 10, Part 6, Religious Use of Alcoholic Products, and corresponding City special-use license. 
"Alcoholic Beverage, Tavern" means an entity operating under and holding the required Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control license for a tavern, issued in accordance with Utah Code Annotated Title 32B, Chapter 6, Part 7, On-premise Beer Retailer License, and corresponding City beer license. 
"Alcoholic Beverage, State Liquor Store" means an means a facility established by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission in accordance with Utah Code Annotated Title 32B, Chapter 2, Part 5, State Store, the for the sale of packaged liquor located on premises owned or leased by the state and operated by a state employee. State Liquor Store does not include any other Alcoholic Beverage Use. 
"All-Terrain Vehicle (ATV), Motorcycle, Personal Watercraft (PWC), Snowmobile Sales and Service" means the indoor sale or lease of any motorized off-road vehicle fifty (50) inches or less in overall width, with a dry weight of eight hundred (800) pounds or less, or other similarly sized motorized vehicles, not including automobiles, trucks, trailers, etc. This Use includes the incidental and subordinate service of such motorized off-road vehicles but does not include any outdoor storage or sales. 
"Alley" means a paved Right-of-Way that provides secondary vehicular access and is not intended for general traffic circulation. 
"Alteration" means any change or rearrangement in the structural parts or design of a Sign, whether by extending on a side, by increasing in area or height or in moving from one location or position to another. Alteration does not include the regular repair or maintenance of a Sign. 
"Amusement Device" means any machine, device, or contrivance, not prohibited or declared unlawful by the City or the state of Utah, designed or intended to be operated or used for amusement or the playing of a game upon or in exchange for paying a fee or inserting a coin or token. 
"Antenna" means a transmitting or receiving device used in telecommunications that radiates or captures radio signals. 
"Animal Boarding/Raising (Farm)" means a business primarily engaged in raising or boarding animals for profit on a farm. 
"Animal Hospital/Veterinary Office (Small Animal)" means an establishment operated by a licensed veterinarian, at which small or medium-sized farm animals or household pets are treated within a completely enclosed Structure. Animal Hospital or Veterinary Office includes the incidental and subordinate boarding of small animals. 
"Animal Kennel/Day Care, Commercial" means a facility where three (3) or more pet animals, owned by another person, are temporarily boarded for pay, trade, barter, commission, or remuneration of any sort. Commercial Animal Kennels do not include zoos, Veterinary Offices, or Animal Hospitals. 
"Antique or Classic Automobile" means an automobile that is at least 25 years old, with enough historical interest to be collectable and worth preserving or restoring rather than scrapping. 
"Apiary" means a place where beehives are kept and maintained, where bees are raised primarily for honey. 
"Applicant" means a property Owner, or the property Owner's designee, who submits an Application regarding the property Owner's land. 
"Application" means a submission required by the City to obtain a Land Use Decision. An Application does not include a Petition to (a) enact, amend, or repeal a Land Use Regulation; or (b) modify the General Plan. 
"Architectural Elements" means the unique details and component parts that, together, form the architectural style of a Structure. 
"Art Gallery" means a business engaged in the exhibition and sale of artwork. Art Gallery does not include the sale of art supplies or other raw materials used in the creation of artwork. 
"Art Studio" means a place where artwork is created. An Art Studio includes, but is not limited to, a place to paint, sculpt and fire clay, or engrave and work metal into artistic forms. An Art Studio does not include a place to practice or perform Performance Art. 
"Assisted Living Facility" means a residential facility, licensed by the state of Utah, with a home-like setting that provides an array of coordinated supportive personal, health care services, aides in daily living, social and recreational services, available twenty-four (24) hours per day, to residents who have been assessed under Utah Department of Health or Department of Human Services regulations to need any of these services. Assisted Living Facilities create service plans for residents based on assessment that include: 
1.  Specified services of intermittent nursing care; 
2.  Administration of medication; or 
3.  Support services promoting the resident's independence and self-sufficiency. 
An Assisted Living Facility does not include Adult Daycare or Homeless Shelter. 
"ATM, Kiosk, Vending Machine (Self-Service, Interactive, Outdoors)" means any unattended self-service device that performs services upon a required payment or command by the user. Such services include but are not limited to banking or financial functions at a location remote from the controlling Financial Institution; dispensing anything of value including food, beverage, goods, wares, merchandise, or services; or posting of notices or advertisements. 
"Auction House" means a Structure or area within a Building used for the public sale of goods, wares, merchandise, livestock, or equipment to the highest bidder. 
"Auto, Light Truck, RV, Boat, Trailer Dealerships (Sale, Lease, or Rent)" means a business engaged in the sale, lease, or rental of automobiles, light trucks, vans, RVs, boats, or trailers and includes incidental parking of such vehicles, and warranty repair work and other repair services that is incidental and subordinate to the sale, lease, or rental aspect of the business. 
"Auto Auction" means the sale of automobiles though a process in which multiple bidders compete to acquire a vehicle that is ultimately sold to the person offering the highest price. 
"Auto Body Repair" means a facility for repairing passenger vehicles, light and medium trucks, and other motor vehicles such as motorcycles, boats, and recreational vehicles. Auto Body Repair includes auto body painting. 
"Automotive Restoration" means the process of repairing degraded aspects of Antique or Classic Automobiles to return them to an "authentic" condition. 
"Automotive Service and Repair" means a business engaged in the repair or maintenance of motor vehicles, trailers, or recreational vehicles. Automotive Service and Repair does not include Auto Body Repair or auto dismantling or salvage. 
"Automotive Service Station (Non-Mechanical)" means a business that provides routine maintenance (windshield, tire, fluids, etc.) for passenger vehicles, while the customer waits on-site. 
"Aviary" means an enclosure specifically constructed to hold live birds in confinement. Aviary does not include Urban Poultry. 
"Bail Bonds" means any sole proprietor or entity that: (a) is licensed under Utah Code § 31A-35-404(1) or (2); (b)(i) is the agent of a surety insurer that sells a bail bond in connection with judicial proceedings; (ii) pledges the assets of a letter of credit from a Utah depository institution for a bail bond in connection with judicial proceedings; or (iii) pledges personal or real property, or both, as security for a bail bond in connection with judicial proceedings; and (c) receives or is promised money or other things of value for a service described in Subsection b. 
"Bakery, Commercial" means an establishment that makes and sells food products such as bread, cake, or pastries for large-scale distribution and wholesale. 
"Bakery, Neighborhood" means an establishment that is no more than 2,000 square feet, primarily serving the surrounding neighborhood, that makes and sells food products such as bread, cake, and pastries. 
"Barber Shop/Hair Salon" means a business that primarily provides hair coloring or trimming services for a fee. A Barber Shop/Hair Salon does not include a Day Spa. 
"Berm" means an earthen mound designed to provide visual interest on a site, screen undesirable views, reduce noise, or fulfill other similar purposes. 
"Billboard" means a Detached Sign that is designed or intended to direct attention to a business, product or service that is not sold, offered, or existing on the property where the Sign is located. A Billboard is an outdoor advertising Structure as defined by state statutes. The following also apply to Billboards: 
1.  "Nonconforming Billboard" means an existing Billboard that is located in a zoning district or otherwise situated, sized, or constructed in a way that would not be permitted by the provisions of this Title. 
2.  "Embellishment" means an extension of the Billboard resulting in increased square footage as part of an artistic design to convey a specific message or advertisement. 
"Block" means the aggregate of Lots, Parcels, and Right-of-Ways, other than Alleys or lanes, bounded on all sides by Streets. 
"Blood/Plasma Donation Center" means a walk-in facility, that is not accessory to a Medical Clinic, where blood and/or plasma is donated or sold, and then distributed for use in medical or other similar products. 
"Buffer" means an open space, Landscaped Area, fence, wall, Berm, or any combination thereof used to physically separate or screen one Use or property from another so as to visually shield or block noise, lights, or other nuisances. 
"Build-to Standard" means the area of a Lot in which the Primary Façade of the Main Building must be located and is parallel to the Front or Corner Property Line. The Build-To Standard defines the area in which the locations of Building fronts can vary within a specified range. 
"Buildable Area" means the area of a Lot—excluding wetlands, steep slopes, and easements—available for construction after the minimum Yard, parking, and open space requirements of this Title have been met. 
"Building" means any Structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, for the occupancy or enclosure of persons, animals, or chattel. 
"Building, Elevation" means the entire wall surface on one side of a Building, measured as the full horizontal distance of a Façade wall from Grade to the underside of an overhanging eave or cornice. 
"Building Height " means the vertical distance of a Structure measured from the average of the midpoint of the two (2) tallest elevations, as measured from adjacent Grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, the deck line of a mansard roof, or the midpoint between ridge and eaves of a sloped roof. 
"Building, Historic" means any Building or Structure that is historically or architecturally significant according to the requirements found in Section 17.03.160. 
"Building, Main or Primary" means the principal Building, or one of the principal Buildings on a Lot, that contains the Primary Use on the Lot. 
"Building Line" means the line circumscribing the Buildable Area of a Lot in a vertical plane that intersects the ground and the heavens. 
"Building Permit" means a permit issued by the City's Community Development Department authorizing Construction Activity on a Property or Lot. 
"Carport" means a private garage open on two (2) or more sides. 
"Car Wash" means a Building used for washing and cleaning motor vehicles and other light duty equipment 
"Child Care" means the provision, day or night, of supplemental parental care, instruction and supervision for a non-related child or children, on a regular basis, and for less than twenty-four (24) hours a day. Child Care does not include babysitting services on a casual, non-recurring nature or in the child's home, nor cooperative, reciprocal child care by a group of parents in their respective domiciles. 
1.  "Child Care, In-Home Babysitting" means the provision of child care for eight (8) or fewer children within a Dwelling or within a commercial Building outside of residential zoning districts. 
2.  "Child Care, Family" means the provision of child care for up to eight (8) children, including the provider's children who are under the age of eighteen (18), within the provider's primary residence. 
"Child Care Center" means a Building, including outside play areas, used for the provision of Child Care for more than four (4) children for less than twenty-four (24) hours a day, that is not a primary residence. 
"City" means South Salt Lake City. 
"City Building" means any Building or space within a Building that is owned or operated by the City. 
"City Council" means the legislative body of the South Salt Lake City government. 
"Clear View Area" means that portion of a Corner Lot lying within a triangular area formed by a diagonal line connecting lines located at the curb line thirty feet (30') from the projected intersection of such curb lines. Where no curb exists, the Clear View Area shall include that portion of a Corner Lot lying within a triangular area formed by a diagonal line connecting lines located at the Property Line twenty feet (20') from the intersection of said Property Line. Where Property Lines of adjacent properties extend into the Right-of-Way, the calculations shall be made from the edge of the improved Right-of-Way for a distance of thirty feet (30'). 
"Code" means the City of South Salt Lake Municipal Code. 
"Collocation" means locating a wireless communications facility on an existing structure, tower, or Building in a manner that precludes the need for that wireless communications facility to be located on a freestanding Structure of its own. 
"Commercial Repair Services" means a business primarily engaged in the provision of repair services to individuals, households, and/or other businesses, but excluding automotive and equipment repair. 
"Common Wall" means a dividing partition between two (2) adjoining Buildings that is shared by the occupants of each residence or business. Also known as a "party wall." 
"Compatible" or "Compatibility" means the characteristics of different Uses or designs that integrate with and relate to one another to maintain and/or enhance the context of a surrounding area or neighborhood. Elements affecting Compatibility include, but are not limited to, Height, Scale, mass and bulk of Building, pedestrian and vehicular circulation, parking, Landscaping and architecture, topography, environmentally sensitive Areas, and Building patterns. 
"Construction Activity" means (a) all grading, excavation, construction, grubbing, mining, or other Development that materially disturbs or changes the natural vegetation, Grade, or existing Structure; or (b) the act of adding an addition to an existing Structure, or the erection of a new principal or Accessory Structure on a Lot or Property. 
"Condominium" means the ownership of a single unit in a multi-unit project together with an undivided interest in the common areas and facilities of the property. 
"Construction Codes" means the nationally recognized Construction Codes adopted by the state of Utah. 
"Contributory Structure" means a Structure that was built within the historic period (fifty (50) years or older), retains most of its original appearance without major changes to the structure, is eligible for the National Register because of architectural significance, and is deemed to contribute to the Historic and Landmark district by the Historic and Landmark Commission. 
"Convenience Store with Fuel Pumps" means a business that primarily sells petroleum products to consumers as well as incidental and subordinate sales of vehicle-related products, tobacco products, alcohol, food, and/or beverages. 
"Courtyard" means an outdoor area enclosed by a Building on at least two (2) sides and open to the sky. 
"Coverage" means that percentage of the Parcel or Lot Area covered by the Building. This term can also be referred to as "Building Coverage." 
"Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED)" means the set of design principles for creating safer built environments by incorporating natural surveillance, access control, territorial reinforcement, a sense of ownership, management, and maintenance. 
"Crematory/Embalming Facility" means a business, properly licensed by the state, that is devoted to cremation and/or embalming of the dead, but does not include facilities for burial, internment, body viewing, or funeral services. 
"Day Spa" means a business that provides at least four (4) distinct therapeutic and/or personal grooming services—performed by a state licensed barber, cosmetologist, electrologist, esthetician, nail technician, massage therapist, or acupuncturist—and does not provide any service for which a state license is not required. 
"Day Treatment Center" means a state licensed outpatient treatment center that provides care to four (4) or more persons who are unrelated to the Owner or provider and have emotional, psychological, physical, or behavioral dysfunctions, impairments, or chemical dependencies for fewer than twenty-four (24) hours a day. A Day Treatment Center does not include Adult Day Care or a Homeless Shelter. 
"Dedication/Dedicated" means the intentional transfer of land by the Owner to the City for public Use and/or ownership. 
"Density" means the intensity or number of non-residential and Residential Uses expressed in terms of unit equivalents per acre or Lot or units per acre. Density is a function of both the number and type of Dwelling Units and/or non-residential units and the land area. 
"Development" means any Building activity or clearing of land as an adjunct of construction. 
"Drive Aisle" means the area within a Parking Lot, garage, or Structure providing access to and from Parking Stalls. 
"Drive-up Window" means a Building opening, including windows, doors, or mechanical devices, through which the occupants of a motor vehicle receive or obtain a product or service. 
"Dry Cleaning/Laundromat" means a business that launders or dry cleans garments, draperies, etc., that are dropped off directly by the customer, or a business where articles are dropped off, sorted, and picked up, but not where laundering or dry cleaning occurs. 
"Dwelling" means any Building, or portion thereof, that is used for long-term Residential Use. 
"Dwelling, Live/Work" and "Live/Work" means an integrated Dwelling Unit and work space, designed to accommodate joint residential occupancy and work activity, and that is occupied and utilized by the person or Family residing in the attached Dwelling Unit. A Live/Work Dwelling incorporates the Residential Use above the attached work space. A Live/Work Dwelling does not include any work space used for Massage Therapy. 
"Dwelling, Multi-Family" and "Multi-Family" means a Building containing fifty (50) or more independent and individual Dwelling Units, or equivalent residential units, including units that are located one over another. 
"Dwelling, Single-Family" and "Single-Family" means a Building containing one Dwelling Unit occupied by one Family that is not attached to any other Dwelling and is surrounded by open space or Yards. 
"Dwelling, Townhome" and "Townhome" means a Dwelling Unit, located on its own Lot or a Condominium, that shares one or more Common Walls with one or more Dwelling Units, and is accessed through a Front Yard. Townhome Dwellings are individually owned and do not share common floor/ceilings with other Dwelling Units. 
"Dwelling Unit" means a Building or portion thereof, with sleeping and kitchen facilities for the exclusive Use of up to four (4) unrelated persons or one (1) Family. A Dwelling Unit does not include a Hotel, Motel, Lodge, Nursing Home, or Homeless Shelter. 
"Education, After School (Children)" means developmental or educational programs for children that occur outside the typical school day. 
"Education, Elementary or Secondary" means any school, that meets state requirements for Elementary or Secondary Education. 
"Education, Higher (Public)" means a public institution for higher learning—beyond high school—that grants associate's or bachelor's degrees. Public Higher Education includes accredited Community Colleges that grant Certificates of Completion in business or technical fields. 
"Education, Preschool" means a school for the instruction of children prior to entrance into kindergarten. 
"Education, Technical" means a secondary or higher education facility, that meets the state requirements for Technical Schools, that primarily teaches skills that prepare students for jobs in a trade. Technical Education includes trade and vocational schools. 
"Electronic Message Center" means a mechanism or device that uses a combination of lights or lighted panels that are controlled electronically to produce words, symbols, or messages that may flash, travel, or scintillate within a given panel area. 
"Employment Agency/Temporary Staffing" means a commercial organization, located in an office setting, that finds jobs for people seeking them, finds people to fill jobs that are open, or supplies employees to other businesses on a temporary basis. 
"Equestrian Facility" means a commercial horse, donkey, or mule facility consisting of detached Buildings designed and used to care for such animals. An Equestrian Facility includes horse ranches, boarding stables, riding schools, and exhibition facilities. 
"Equipment Sales, Service, and Rental (Heavy and Farm)" means a business primarily engaged in the sale or rental of tools, trucks, tractors, construction equipment, agricultural implements, and similar industrial equipment. Equipment Sales, Service, and Rental includes accessory storage, maintenance, and service for such equipment. 
"Escort Service" means any person who furnishes or arranges for an escort to accompany another individual for: (a) companionship; and (b)(i) a salary; (ii) a fee; (iii) a commission; (iv) for hire; (v) for profit; or (vi) any amount similar to an amount listed in this Title. 
"Façade" means that portion of any exterior elevation of a Structure extending from Grade to the top of the parapet, wall, or eaves, and extending the entire width of the Structure's elevations. 
"Façade, Distinctly Different Primary" means a Primary Façade that materially differs from other Primary Façades in the same Subdivision. Distinctly Different Primary Façades do not include mirror images. 
"Façade, Primary" means the Façade parallel to the Street the Building derives its Street address from and includes the primary entrance for the Building. 
"Family" means (a) one (1) person living alone or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, according to the laws of the state of Utah; or (b) a group not to exceed four (4) unrelated persons living together as a single housekeeping unit for which a lawfully located off-Street Parking Stall is provided for each person. 
"Farmers Market" means the sale of fresh agricultural products directly to the consumer at an open-air market sponsored by the City of South Salt Lake. 
"Final Grading" means the last stage of grading soil or gravel prior to Landscaping, the installation of concrete or bituminous paving, or other required final surfacing material. 
"Financial Institution" means the provision of financial or banking services to consumers or clients. Financial Institution does not include a Non-Depository Institution such as: Check Cashing, Title Loan, Payday Loan, Pawnshop, or Precious Metal Recycling. 
"Fitness Center" means a commercial establishment providing space within a Building, or a portion thereof, for fitness classes, martial arts classes or competition, dance classes, exercise equipment, game courts, swimming facilities, saunas, showers, and lockers. 
"Floor Area" means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of each Story of a Building or Buildings, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of Common Walls. Basements, interior balconies and mezzanines, elevator shafts, stairwells, and enclosed Porches are included in Floor Area. Also referred to as "Gross Floor Area." 
"Food Processing (Large-Scale)" means an establishment containing a full commercial kitchen, where food is processed or otherwise prepared for eventual human consumption. 
"Food Processing (Small-Scale)" means an establishment containing a full commercial kitchen, where food is processed or otherwise prepared for human consumption, within a facility three thousand (3,000) square feet or less in size. 
"Food Truck/Food Trailer " means a fully enclosed food service establishment on a motor vehicle or on a trailer that a motor vehicle pulls to transport and from which a Food Truck Vendor, standing within the frame of the vehicle, prepares, cooks, sells, or serves food or beverages for immediate human consumption. 
"Food Truck Park " means three (3) or more Food Trucks or Trailers that congregate at an established private property location to offer food or beverages for sale to the public. 
"Food Truck/Food Trailer Vendor" means a person who prepares, sells, cooks, or serves food or beverages for immediate human consumption from a Food Truck or Trailer. 
"Frontage" means that portion of a Lot abutting a Right-of-Way that provides access to the Lot and is ordinarily regarded as the front of the Lot. 
"Funeral/Mortuary Home" means a state licensed establishment for the storage of dead human bodies prior to autopsy, burial, cremation, or release to survivors. A Funeral/Mortuary Home also includes the arrangement and management of funerals and may include accessory caretaker facilities. 
"Garage, Attached" means a Building or Structure, or portion thereof, used or designed to be used for the parking and storage of motor vehicles that shares a Common Wall with the Primary Structure and is incidental and subordinate to the Primary Use. 
"Garage, Detached" means a detached Structure that is on the same Lot and incidental and subordinate to a Primary Building or Primary Use, has legal vehicular access from a public Right-of-Way, and is used and designed for the parking and storage of vehicles. 
"Garage, Front Loading" means a Building designed and used for parking vehicles, that is accessed from the front of the Building via a public or private Right-of-Way. 
"Garage, Rear Loading" means a Building designed and used for parking vehicles, that is accessed from the rear of the Building from a Private Street, Alley, or driveway. 
"Good Cause" means providing positive benefits and mitigating negative impacts, determined on a case by case basis to include such things as: providing public amenities and benefits, resolving existing issues and non-conformities, addressing issues related to Density, promoting excellent and sustainable design, utilizing best planning and design practices, preserving the character of the neighborhood and of the City and furthering the health, safety, and welfare of the South Salt Lake community. 
"Grade" means (a) the lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving, or sidewalk between the Building and the Property Line; or (b) when the Property Line is more than five (5) feet from the Building, between the Building and a line five (5) feet from the Building. 
"Grooming Services (Pets)" means a commercial facility where domestic animals are bathed, clipped, or brushed for the purpose of enhancing their aesthetic value or health. 
"Group Home" an establishment that provides residence to individuals with prolonged care needs, is located in a residential area, maintains the residential character of the area, is properly licensed by the state and the City and provides an on-site caregiver for purposes of providing medical and physical assistance due to age and/or disability of the tenant(s). A Group Home does not include a Homeless Shelter or a treatment facility for persons who are actively abusing drugs. 
"Guaranty" means a security to ensure completion of work other than public Landscaping and Infrastructure Improvements. 
"Hard Surface" means a surface covered with concrete, brick, asphalt, or other Impervious Material. 
"Haunted House" means a City licensed business that is advertised to the public as a Haunted House, and for a fee, patrons are directed through a Building, tent, or other similar Structure that contains Halloween-related displays, acts, exhibits, live performances, or other attractions intended to entertain or amuse patrons. A Haunted House does not include a Sexually Oriented Business. 
"Historic Building" means any Building listed in the National Register of Historic Places, the Utah State Register of Historic Sites, or designated as a Historic Building by the City Council. 
"Historic and Landmark Commission" means the Planning Commission. 
"Home Craft Production" means the production of items, materials, or wares, manufactured in a Dwelling or Accessory Structure that does not create an adverse impact on the surrounding neighborhood. Home Craft Production includes but is not limited to: laser engraving, etching and cutting, 3D printing, wood and metal work, jewelry making, textile arts, ceramics, light furniture assembly, and small Cottage Food Production in a Dwelling as defined by the state of Utah and subject to approval by the Salt Lake County Health Department. 
"Home Occupation, Category I" means any business carried on entirely within a Dwelling by occupants of such Dwelling that is clearly incidental and secondary to the Residential Use of the Dwelling, has no outside impacts on the neighborhood in which it is located, and does not change the character of the Dwelling or the neighborhood in which it is located. 
"Home Occupation, Category II" means any business carried on entirely within a Dwelling by occupants of such Dwelling that is clearly incidental and secondary to the Residential Use of the Dwelling, has no outside impacts on the neighborhood in which it is located, and does not change the character of the Dwelling or the neighborhood in which it is located. 
"Homeless Shelter" means a facility that is professionally designed, constructed, and managed to safely provide homeless individuals temporary overnight accommodation, on a site selected by and funded through the Utah Homeless Coordinating Committee, with the concurrence of the housing and community development division of the Department of Workforce Services. A Homeless Shelter is not Adult Day Care or Day Treatment. 
"Horticulture/Produce Sales" means the commercial production of fruits, vegetables, flowers, nursery stock, or cultured sod. 
"Hospital, Specialty" means a business, licensed by the state of Utah, that meets the state definitions for Rehabilitation, Long-Term Acute Care, Orthopedic, or Critical Access Specialty Hospitals. 
"Hotel" means a Building containing fifteen (15) or more sleeping rooms, each accessed from within the Building, for the occupancy of guests on a nightly basis for a fee. A Hotel is not a Homeless Shelter. 
"Hotel, Extended-Stay" means a Building containing fifteen (15) or more sleeping rooms, each accessed from within the Building, for the occupancy of guests on a nightly basis for a fee that also contain kitchen facilities for food preparation including, but not limited to, refrigerators, stoves, and ovens. Extended Stay Hotel does not include a Motel or a Homeless Shelter. 
"Impervious Surface" means concrete or asphalt. 
"Improvement Completion Assurance" means a cash deposit, or other financially equivalent security to ensure the proper completion of public Landscaping or an Infrastructure Improvement required as a condition precedent to: (a) recording a Subdivision Plat; or (b) Development of a commercial, industrial, Mixed-Use, Condominium, or Multi-Family Dwelling project. 
"Improvement Warranty" means an Applicant's unconditional warranty that the Applicant's installed and accepted Landscaping or Infrastructure Improvement: (a) complies with the municipality's written standards for design, materials, and workmanship; and (b) will not fail in any material respect, as a result of poor workmanship or materials, within the Improvement Warranty Period. 
"Improvement Warranty Period" means a period: (a) no later than one year after the City's acceptance of required Landscaping; or (b) no later than one year after the City's acceptance of required infrastructure, unless the City: (i) determines for Good Cause that a one-year period would be inadequate to protect the public health, safety, and welfare; and (ii) has substantial evidence, on record: (A) of prior poor performance by the Applicant; or (B) that the area upon which the infrastructure will be constructed contains suspect soil and the City has not otherwise required the Applicant to mitigate the suspect soil. 
"Impound and Tow Lot" means a Parcel of land or a Structure that is used for the temporary (less than 30 days) storage of motor vehicles awaiting insurance adjustment, transport to a repair shop, or to be claimed by titleholders or their agents. Impound and Tow Lot does not include the permanent storage of motor vehicles. 
"Infrastructure Completion Agreement" means an agreement between the City and a property Owner to install improvements secured by a cash deposit or another financial-equivalent approved method, in an amount corresponding to the City's estimate to install required Landscaping and Infrastructure Improvements. 
"Infrastructure Improvement" means permanent infrastructure that an Applicant must install: (a) pursuant to published installation and inspection specifications for Public Improvements; and (b) as a condition of: (i) recording a Subdivision Plat; or (ii) Development of a commercial, industrial, Mixed-Use, Condominium, or Multi-Family Dwelling project. 
"Jail" means a state licensed facility for judicially required detention or incarceration of people, where inmates and detainees are under 24-hour supervision by professionals, except when on approved leave. 
"Juvenile Detention Facility" means a state operated facility, for judicially required detention of delinquent juveniles. 
"Landscaping" means the finishing and adornment of unpaved Yard areas. Landscaping includes any combination of living elements such as grass, trees, shrubs, and flowers, that are generally not considered to be weeds or noxious plants. Landscaping may also include rocks, water features, benches, Berms, or other similar structural features that create an attractive and pleasing environment. 
"Landscape Plan" means a plan clearly and accurately depicting the proposed location, type, and size of new and existing trees, shrubs, and ground cover to be planted on the site and a complete water efficient irrigation system plan, pursuant to Chapter 17.06 of the Municipal Code. 
"Landscaped Area" means the entire Lot or Parcel, less the Building footprint, driveways, non-irrigated portions of Parking Lots, hardscape (such as decks and patios), and other Impervious Surfaces. Water features are included in the meaning of Landscaped Area. 
"Land Use Decision" means an administrative decision of a land use authority regarding: (a) a Land Use Permit; (b) an Application; or (c) the enforcement of a Land Use Regulation, Land Use Permit, or Development agreement. 
"Land Use Decision, Final" means the written decision of the appeal authority regarding a Land Use Decision. 
"Land Use Map" means the map adopted by the City Council identifying the location of all land use districts within the City. 
"Land Use Matrix" means the table of land use categories and land use districts located within Chapter 17.03 of the Municipal Code. 
"Land Use Permit" means a permit issued by the land use authority. 
"Land Use Regulation" means an ordinance, law, map, resolution, specification, fee, or rule, in any provision of the South Salt Lake Municipal Code, that governs the Use or Development of land, including the adoption or amendment of a Land Use Map. 
"Lattice Tower" means a self-supporting, multi-sided, open steel frame Structure used to support telecommunications equipment. 
"Library" means a public, nonprofit Building constructed to house literary, musical, artistic, or reference materials. 
"Lot" means a tract of land described as such in a recorded Subdivision Plat. 
"Lot Area" means the total area contained within a Lot, typically expressed in square feet or acres. 
"Lot, Corner" means a Lot situated on two (2) or more improved public or Private Streets, the interior angle of such intersection not exceeding 135 degrees (135°). 
"Lot Depth" means the minimum distance measured from the Front Property Line to the Rear Property Line of the same Lot. 
"Lot, Interior" means a Lot that fronts on a Street, other than a Corner Lot. 
"Lot Line" means any line defining the boundaries of a Lot. 
"Lot Line Adjustment" means a relocation of a Lot Line boundary between adjoining Lots or Parcels, whether or not the Lots are located in the same Subdivision, in accordance with UCA § 10-9a-608, with the consent of the Owners of record. A Lot Line Adjustment does not authorize the relocation of a boundary line that: 
1.  Creates an additional Lot; or 
2.  Constitutes a Subdivision. 
"Lot, Through/Double Frontage" means an Interior Lot with Frontage on two (2) approximately parallel public or private Rights-of-Way, excluding an Alley. 
"Low Power Radio Services Facility" means an unmanned Structure which consists of equipment used primarily for the transmission, reception, or transfer of voice or data through radio wave or wireless transmissions. 
"Maintenance Facility, Vehicle/Transit" means any Building, premises, or land upon which a unit of government: (a) services or maintains motor vehicles or transit equipment; or (b) stores vehicles or equipment used for servicing off-site facilities or infrastructure. 
"Manufactured Home" means a transportable, factory-built Dwelling Unit constructed on or after June 15, 1976, in one or more sections, which: (a) in the traveling mode, is eight feet or more in width or forty (40) feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is four hundred (400) or more square feet; and (b) is designed to be used as a Dwelling with a permanent foundation, connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems. 
"Manufactured Home Park" means any area or tract of land used or designed to accommodate two (2) or more Manufactured or Mobile Homes, for Dwelling or sleeping purposes, regardless of whether a fee is paid for such accommodation. 
"Manufacturing, Major" means the manufacturing, fabrication, processing, or assembly of materials in a raw form in a manner that creates greater than usual amounts of smoke, gas, odor, dust, sound, or other objectionable influences that might be obnoxious to persons conducting business on-site or on an adjacent site. Major Manufacturing does not include any business engaged in manufacturing, processing, or packaging alcohol, pharmaceutical drugs, or any Cannabis product. 
"Manufacturing, Minor" means any business engaged in research and development, manufacturing, processing, fabrication, packaging, or assembly of goods that do not create excessive amounts of smoke, gas, odor, dust, sound, or other objectionable influences that might be obnoxious to persons conducting business on site or on an adjacent site. Minor Manufacturing does not include any business engaged in manufacturing, processing, or packaging alcohol, pharmaceutical drugs, or any Cannabis product. 
"Massage Therapy" means a business, located within a licensed Medical Office, where state licensed massage therapists, physical therapists, medical doctors, or chiropractors, perform nonmedical and nonsurgical manipulative exercises on the muscle or tissue of the human body for other than cosmetic or beautifying purposes. Massage Therapy does not include Reiki. 
"Master Plan" means the Site Plan, elevations, and regulations approved by the City for a specific Master Planned Mixed-Use Development. 
"Material, Primary" means any material that occupies at least sixty (60) percent of the exterior Façade(s) of a Building or Structure. 
"Material, Secondary" means any material that occupies no more than twenty (20) percent of the exterior Façade(s) of a Building or Structure. 
"Mixed-Use" and "Mixed-Use Development" means a Development project that includes a Residential Use combined with one or more of the following Uses: Retail, service, or office; that integrates critical massing of physical and functional components into a coherent plan that promotes walkability through uninterrupted pedestrian connections; and reduces traffic and parking impacts. 
"Mobile Home" means a transportable, factory-built Dwelling Unit built prior to June 15, 1976, in accordance with a state mobile home code that existed prior to the HUD code. 
"Monopole" means a single, self-supporting, cylindrical pole that acts as the support Structure for Antennae. 
"Monopole with Antennae and Antenna Support Structures, Major" means a self-supporting Monopole tower on which Antennae or Antenna Support Structures are placed that exceed two feet (2') in width, but not more than 15 feet (15'), with a maximum height of eight feet (8'). 
"Monopole with Antennae and Antenna Support Structure, Minor" means a Monopole with Antennae and Antenna Support Structures not exceeding two feet (2') in width and ten feet (10') in height. 
"Motel" means a Building or series of Buildings in which temporary, over-night accommodation is offered for a fee, that provides direct independent access to, and adjoining parking for, each rental unit. 
"Movie Studio/Sound Stage" means a Building primarily used for motion picture, television, video, sound, computer, and other communications media production, including the construction and use of indoor sets. A Movie Studio or Sound Stage does not include a Sexually Oriented Business. 
"Museum" means a Building or group of Buildings that house objects of cultural, historical, artistic, or scientific interest. 
"Nature Center" means an establishment designed expressly for and used principally to educate and connect visitors with the natural environment. 
"Noncomplying Structure" means a Structure that legally existed before its current land use designation and because of one or more subsequent Land Use Regulation changes, does not conform to Setback, Height restrictions, or other regulations, excluding those regulations that govern the Use of land. 
"Nonconforming Use" means a Use of land that: (a) legally existed before its current land use designation; (b) has been maintained continuously since the time the Land Use Regulations governing the land changed; and (c) because of one or more subsequent Land Use Regulations changes, does not conform to the regulations that now govern the Use of land. 
"Non-Contributory Structure" means a Structure that is not contributing or is ineligible for registry to the Historic and Landmark District, as deemed by the Historic and Landmark Commission, or as a result of a historic survey by a certified architectural historian. Non-Contributory Structure status is typically due to the Structure not being built during the historic period (fifty (50) years or older), having major alterations or additions, and/or the Structure no longer retains historic integrity. 
"Non-Depository Institution" means a business, other than a Financial Institution, that is registered by the state of Utah pursuant to the Check Cashing and Title Lending Registration Act. Included in Non-Depository Institutions: 
1.  "Check Cashing Business" means a person or business that, for compensation, engages in cashing a check for consideration or extending a Deferred Deposit Loan. Check Cashing does not include depository institutions, as defined by the state of Utah, Financial Institutions, or a Retail seller engaged primarily in the business of selling goods or services to Retail buyers that cash checks or issue money orders for a minimum flat fee not exceeding one percent of the check or one dollar ($1.00) as a service fee that is incidental to its main purpose or business. 
2.  "Payday Loan Business" means an establishment providing loans to individuals in exchange for personal checks or assignment of wages as collateral. 
3.  "Title Loan Business" means an establishment providing short-term loans to individuals in exchange for the title of a motor vehicle, motor home, or other motor vehicle as collateral. 
4.  "Deferred Deposit Loans" means a business that conducts transactions where a person presents to a check casher a check written on that person's account or provides written or electronic authorization to a check casher to affect a debit from that person's account using an electronic payment and the check casher provides the maker an amount of money that is equal to the face value of the check or the amount of the debit less any fee or interest charged for the transaction and agrees not to cash the check or process the debit until a specific date. 
"Nursery, Commercial" means a Business that grows and sells trees, shrubs, flowers, ground cover, and other similar plants. A Commercial Nursery also includes the sale of related products, including fertilizers, mulch, and landscape decoration. A Commercial Nursery does not include growing or selling federally controlled substances. 
"Nursing Home" means a long-term, intermediate care/nursing facility, licensed by the state of Utah, for the care of individuals who due to illness, advanced age, disability, or impairment require assistance and/or supervision on a twenty-four (24) hour per day basis. A Nursing Home includes skilled nursing facilities, elderly care facilities, convalescent homes, and rest homes. A Nursing Home does not include: Adult Daycare or a Homeless Shelter. 
"Occupiable Space" means an enclosed space in which individuals congregate for amusement, education, habitation, or similar purposes, or in which the occupants are engaged in labor. 
"Office, Medical, Dental, Health Care" means a Building, or portion thereof containing, offices and facilities for providing medical, dental, or psychiatric services supervised by a licensed M.D./D.O., D.C., D.D.S./D.M.D., N.D./N.M.D., D.P.T., D.P.M., or O.D for outpatients only. A Medical or Dental Health Care Office does not include overnight care of patients. 
"Office, Professional" means a Building or portion thereof that houses firms or organizations providing professional services to individuals and businesses, where a majority of client contact occurs at the office including advertising, accounting, architecture, law, insurance, real estate, investment, engineering, and computer services. A Professional Office does not include technical, medical, dental, or administrative offices. 
"Open Space, Common" means an area of land, including Landscaping, outdoor recreation areas, club houses, private roads, and sidewalks, within a Lot or Parcel that is commonly owned and used by the residents and guests of the Development. 
"Open Space, Public" means an area of land or water that may be used by the public for passive or active recreation, conservation, Landscaped Areas, preserves of the natural environment, or scenic land. 
"Open Space, Usable" means an area of land within a Lot or Parcel, that is intended to be used as outdoor space for the benefit of the Owners or tenants of a Development. Usable Open Space may include Landscaped Areas, shade structures, play equipment, play courts, landscaped plazas, Accessory Structures, and stormwater facilities that function as Usable Open Space. Usable Open Space does not include Setbacks, Buffers, Parking, driveways, or any privately-owned spaces. 
"Overlay District" means an area designated on the Land Use Map, where certain additional requirements or Uses are added to a base zoning district. 
"Owner" means the property owner of record. 
"Owner Occupied Residential Development" means those Developments wherein each Dwelling Unit is Subdivided and recorded with a unique tax Parcel identification number. 
"Parcel" means any real property that is not a Lot or Condominium. 
"Parcel Boundary Adjustment" means a recorded agreement between the Owners of adjoining Parcels adjusting the mutual boundary, either by deed or by a boundary line agreement in accordance with UCA § 57-1-45, if no additional Parcel is created and: 
1.  None of the property identified in the agreement is Subdivided Land; or 
2.  The adjustment is to the boundaries of a single person's Parcels; and 
3.  Does not mean an adjustment that: 
a.  Creates an additional Parcel; or 
b.  Constitutes a Subdivision. 
"Park and Ride" means an off-Street Parking Lot or Parking Structure, owned and operated by Utah Transit Authority, the state, or South Salt Lake City, that is designed for parking automobiles, the occupants of which transfer to public transit to continue their travel. 
"Park Strip" means the Landscaped Area within a public Right-of-Way located between the back of the Street curb and the sidewalk, or, in the absence of a sidewalk, located between the back of the Street curb and the Property Line. 
"Parking Area" means a public or private area, associated with a Building or Structure, that is designed and used for parking motor vehicles. Driveways, Garages, and Parking Lots are Parking Areas. 
"Parking Lot" means an off-Street, paved area, used for parking more than four (4) automobiles at one time, that is available for public Use whether free, for compensation, or as an accommodation for clients or customers. 
"Parking, Public" means a Parking Area designated for public use. 
"Parking, Reciprocal Access" means an off-Street Parking Lot that services two or more commercial properties that share an unobstructed Property Line so that the Parking Areas are accessible to both properties. 
"Parking, Shared" means the Development and Use of Parking Areas for joint Use by two (2) or more businesses or residents of adjacent properties. 
"Parking Stall" means a designated spot within a Parking Area for parking one motor vehicle, that meets the dimensional requirements of this Title. 
"Parking Structure" means a standalone, multi-level Structure designed and used for temporarily parking motor vehicles. 
"Pawn Broker" means a person or business that engages in the following activities: 
1.  Loans money on one or more deposits of personal property; 
2.  Deals in the purchase, exchange, or possession of personal property on condition of selling the same property back again to the pledger or depositor; 
3.  Loans or advances money on personal property by taking chattel mortgage security on the property and takes or receives the personal property into his possession, and who sells the unredeemed pledges; 
4.  Deals in the purchase, exchange or sale of used or secondhand merchandise or personal property; or 
5.  Engages in a licensed business enterprise as a Pawnshop. 
"Pawnshop" means the physical location or premises where a Pawn Broker conducts business. 
"Permanent Supportive Housing" means long term, community-based housing that also provides supportive services for homeless persons with disabilities and enables special needs populations to live as independently as possible in a permanent setting. Permanent Supportive Housing does not include a Homeless Shelter. 
"Petitioner" means a Petition to (a) enact, amend, or repeal a Land Use Regulation; or (b) modify the General Plan. 
"Pharmacy" means any place where a state licensed pharmacist (a) dispenses drugs, (b) provides pharmaceutical care, or (c) processes or handles drugs for eventual use by a patient. A Pharmacy does not include production of federally regulated substances, nor the sale of Cannabis or Cannabis related products. 
"Place of Worship" means a meetinghouse, church, temple, mosque, synagogue, or other permanent Structure used primarily for regular religious worship. 
"Plat" means a map or other geographic representation of land or land and Condominium units that a licensed land surveyor prepares in accordance with UCA § 10-9a-603. 
"Plat, Final" means a Plat approved by the Planning Commission. 
"Plat Amendment" means the combining of existing, properly subdivided Lots into one or more Lots or the amendment of recorded Final Plat notes or other recorded Final Plat elements. 
"Porch" means a roofed area, open on three-sides, that is attached to and derives access from a Building. 
"Portable Container" means a large, durable, reusable receptacle that is typically pre-fabricated for the purpose of transporting or storing freight or other goods and not for human occupancy. 
"Poultry, Urban" means the keeping of up to six (6) hens on a residential Lot or Parcel, by the Owner of such residential Lot or Parcel, for egg harvesting or companionship, and not for on-site slaughter. 
"Precious Metal Recycling" means a business that purchases precious metals from the general public for recycling and refining. Precious Metal Recycling does not include Financial Institutions, a purchaser of precious metals who purchases from a seller seeking a trade-in or allowance, jewelry manufacturers, manufacturers of other items composed in whole or in part of gold, silver, or platinum, or a purchaser of precious metals for his/her own use or ownership and not for resale or refining. 
"Printing, Large Scale" means a business specializing in reproduction of written or graphic materials on a custom order basis for individuals or businesses. Large Scale Printing includes photocopy, blueprint, offset printing, publishing, binding, and engraving. 
"Property Line" means a boundary line of a Parcel or Lot. See also Lot Line. 
"Property Line, Corner" means a boundary of a Lot or Parcel that is approximately perpendicular to the Front Property Line and is directly adjacent to a public Right-of-Way, other than an Alley or railroad. 
"Property Line, Front" means the boundary of a Lot or Parcel abutting a Right-of-Way, other than an Alley or lane, from which the required Setback or Build-to Standard is measured. 
"Property Line, Rear" means the boundary of a Lot or Parcel that is approximately parallel to the Front Property Line. The Rear Property Line that separates Lots from one another or separates a Lot from an Alley. 
"Property Line, Side" means the boundary of a Lot or Parcel that is approximately perpendicular to the Front and Rear Property Lines. 
"Protective Housing Facility" means a facility operated, licensed, or contracted by a governmental entity, or operated by a charitable, nonprofit organization, limited to no more than twelve (12) occupants at any one time, that provides temporary, protective housing exclusively to: 
1.  Abused or neglected children awaiting placement in foster care; 
2.  Pregnant or parenting teens; 
3.  Victims of sexual abuse; or 
4.  Victims of domestic abuse. 
"Public Improvement" means any Structure, Street, curb, gutter, sidewalk, water or sewer line, storm sewer, public Landscaping, flood control facility, and other similar facility for which the City may ultimately assume responsibility, or which may affect a City improvement. 
"Public Utility Easement" means the area on a recorded Plat, map, or other recorded document that is Dedicated to the use and installation of Public Utility Facilities or accessory equipment. 
"Public Utility Facility" means any Structure or Building used by a public utility agency to (a) store, distribute, or generate electricity, gas, or telecommunications, and any related equipment, or (b) to capture, pump, or to otherwise engage in all aspects of treating and distributing water or effluent. A Public Utility Facility does not include storage or treatment of solid or hazardous waste. 
"Recording Studio" means a Building, or portion thereof, used by a Business primarily engaged in production music, publishing music, or other sound recording services. 
"Recreation Center" means an establishment that provides a variety of recreation and fitness activities including activities within a Structure as well as incidental and subordinate outdoor recreational activities on the same Lot. 
"Recycling Collection/Drop-Off Facility" means a facility, entirely contained within a Building, that collects recyclable materials for transport to a separate location for processing and recovery. Recyclable materials include glass, plastic, paper, cloth, and other materials collected for recovery and re-use. This definition does not include two (2) or fewer: a) newspaper recycling bins or b) other similar self-serv ice recycling bins that are not staffed by on-site employees. 
"Rehabilitation Center" means a facility licensed by the state to provide temporary occupancy and supervision of adults or juveniles to deliver rehabilitation, treatment, or counseling services that are overseen by a state licensed practitioner Rehabilitation Centers provide services related to delinquent behavior, alcohol and drug abuse, conditions resulting from alcohol or drug abuse, sex offenses, sexual abuse, or mental health. A Rehabilitation Center does not include a Homeless Shelter or Transitional Care and Rehabilitation. 
"Residential Density" means the average number of Dwelling Units allowed per acre of land in a particular Development. 
"Restaurant" means a business in which food is prepared and sold for consumption on the premises. 
"Retail" means the sale of goods or services directly to the consumer, that generates point-of-sale sales tax revenues for South Salt Lake City. 
"Retail, Accessory" means a business engaged in the selling or rental of goods and/or merchandise. An Accessory Retail business is a maximum of 1,000 square feet and is subordinate and incidental to a Primary Use other than Retail. 
"Retail, General" means a business, that occupies a Building greater than 60,000 square feet, that provides goods, including tobacco products and/or alcohol to other businesses in wholesale trade or directly to the consumer. General Retail includes membership warehouse clubs. 
"Retail, Neighborhood" means a neighborhood-Scale Retail establishment, that occupies a Building, or portion thereof, less than 60,000 square feet, engaged in the selling of goods or merchandise, but not alcohol or tobacco products, to other businesses in wholesale trade or directly to the consumer. 
"Retention Area" means a pond, pool, or basin used for the permanent storage of water runoff. 
"Right-of-Way" means a strip of land acquired by reservation, Dedication, prescription, easement, or condemnation that is intended to be occupied by a Street, trail, sidewalk, Park Strip, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary storm sewer, or other similar uses. 
"Roof-Mounted Antenna" means an Antenna or series of individual Antennae mounted on a roof, mechanical room, or penthouse of a Building. 
"Scale" means the size of a Building, Structure, Street, sign, or other element compared to the proposed and the existing built environment. 
"Screening" means a method of visually shielding or Buffering one abutting or nearby Structure or Use from another by fencing, walls, Berms, or densely planted vegetation. 
"Secondhand Merchandise Dealer" means an Owner or operator of a business, that occupies no less than 3,000 square feet, and that: (a) deals in the purchase, exchange, or sale of used or secondhand merchandise or personal property; and (b) is not a Pawn Broker. Secondhand Merchandise Dealer does not include: 
1.  The Owner or operator of an antique shop; 
2.  Any class of businesses exempt by administrative rule under Section 13-32a-112.5 (Utah Code Ann.) or its successor; 
3.  Any person or entity who operates an Auction House, flea market, or vehicle, vessel, and outboard motor dealer as defined in Section 41-1a-102 (Utah Code Ann.) or its successor; 
4.  The sale of secondhand goods at events commonly known as "garage sales", "yard sales", or "estate sales"; 
5.  The sale or receipt of secondhand books, magazines, or post cards; 
6.  The sale or receipt of used merchandise donated to recognized nonprofit, religious, or charitable organizations or any school-sponsored association, and for which no compensation is paid; 
7.  The sale or receipt of secondhand clothing and shoes; 
8.  Any person offering his own personal property for sale, purchase, consignment, or trade via the Internet; 
9.  Any person or entity offering the personal property of others for sale, purchase, consignment, or trade via the Internet, when that person or entity does not have, and is not required to have, a local business or occupational license or other authorization for this activity; 
10.  Any Owner or operator of a Retail business that contracts with other persons or entities to offer those persons' secondhand goods for sale, purchase, consignment, or trade via the Internet; 
11.  Any dealer as defined in Section 76-6-1402 (Utah Code Ann.) or its successor, which concerns scrap metal and secondary metals; or 
12.  The purchase of items in bulk that are: 
a.  Sold at wholesale in bulk packaging; 
b.  Sold by a person licensed to conduct business in Utah; and 
c.  Regularly sold in bulk quantities as a recognized form of sale. 
"Setback" means the minimum allowable distance between a Structure and the closest Property Line, edge of curb, or platted public or private Right-of-Way. 
"Sexually Oriented Business" means any business defined as such in Chapter 5.01 of the Municipal Code. 
"Sign" means any advertising message, announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration, insignia, surface, or space erected or maintained in view of the observer thereof for identification, advertisement, or promotion of the interests of any person, entity, product, or service. A Sign shall also include the structure, supports, lighting system, and any attachments, ornaments, or other features used to draw the attention of observers. A Sign does not include a flag, badge, or ensign of any government or governmental agency erected for and used to identify said government or governmental agency. 
"Sign, Abandoned/Non-Maintained" means any of the following: 
1.  A Sign that no longer identifies or advertises a current, Active Business located on the property on which the Sign is situated; 
2.  A Sign for which no legal Owner can be found; 
3.  Signs for which required licenses have not been maintained for at least one year; 
4.  A Sign in poor condition displaying peeling paint, rust, and or other evidence of neglect; or 
5.  Signs considered abandoned or non-maintained as defined by the state of Utah. 
"Sign, Animated" means any Sign that uses movement or change of lighting to depict action or to create a special effect or scene (compare with "Flashing Sign"). 
"Sign Area" means the total area of any Sign, excluding the minimum frame and supports. 
"Sign, Attached" means any Sign that is fastened, attached, connected, or supported in whole or in part to a Building or Building component and includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
1.  Awning Signs; 
2.  Canopy Signs; 
3.  Extended Signs; 
4.  Flat Signs; 
5.  Marquee Signs; 
6.  Roof Signs (allowed only as a special exception); 
7.  Window Signs; and 
8.  Painted Wall Signs (allowed only as a special exception). 
"Sign, Detached" means any Sign not attached to a Building or Building component and supported permanently upon the ground by poles or braces. A Detached Sign may consist of more than one Sign panel, provided all such Sign panels are attached to one common integrated Sign structure. The total area of all such panels may not exceed the maximum allowable Sign Area specified for the location for Detached Signs. Detached Signs include but are not limited to: 
1.  Pole Signs; 
2.  Ground Signs; and 
3.  Low-profile Signs. 
"Sign, Directional (Off-Premise)" means a Sign containing no more than a logo, a name, and directions to the institution or business and is located not located on the same property as the institution or business is located. 
"Sign, Incidental " means a small Sign, emblem, or decal informing the public of goods, facilities, or services available on the premises. Examples of Incidental Signs include: a credit card Sign, a Sign indicating hours of business, or residential Signs that are limited and temporary in nature such as "Welcome Home" or "It's a Boy!" 
"Sign, Nonconforming " means a Sign or a Sign Structure or portion thereof lawfully existing at the time this Title became effective that does not conform to all height, location, placement, construction standards, area, and Yard regulations prescribed in this Title and in the district in which it is located. 
"Sign, Roof" means a Sign erected partly or wholly on or over the roof of a Structure, including Detached Signs that rest on or overlap twelve (12) inches or more. 
"Sign, Temporary" means and includes any sign, with or without frames, intended to be displayed out of doors for a short period of time and shall be limited to the following: 
1.  A banner, pennant, valance or advertising display constructed of paper, cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wall board or other light materials; 
2.  Balloons; 
3.  Festoons; and 
4.  Any Sign not permanently attached to a support or Building as required by this Title. 
"Sign, Wall (painted)" means a Sign that is painted on a wall or is painted without a frame or separation from the wall or facing so that it appears to be painted on a wall. 
"Sign, Window" means a Sign that is attached to or painted on a window or door or is located within a Building and is visible from the exterior of the Building through a window or door. 
"Significant Vegetation" means any large tree of six inch (6") caliper or greater, grove of five (5) or more smaller trees each of less than six inch (6") caliper, or clump of oak or maple trees covering an Area of fifty square feet (50ft 2 ) as measured to their canopy driplines. 
"Site Plan" means a plan that outlines the Use and Development of any tract of land within South Salt Lake City for the purposes of determining compliance with this Code. 
"Slaughterhouse/Animal Processing " means any facility where livestock or poultry are slaughtered and prepared for distribution to butcher shops, processing facilities, or Retail sales establishments such as grocery stores. A Slaughterhouse is entirely enclosed with a Building and may include packing, treating, storage, on-site sale of animal by-products, or tanning of animal skins and hides. 
"Solar Energy System" means an energy system that converts solar energy to usable thermal, mechanical, chemical, or electrical energy to meet a Structure's energy demands. A Solar Energy System includes systems that are integrated into a Building or Structure, as well as those that are mounted outside of a Building or Structure. 
"Specialty Recreational Installation" means a Structure dedicated to the support of one or more outdoor recreational pursuits, and is limited to a yoga, meditation, shade, or picnic pavilion, bicycle-share/rental installation, active nature-play structure, and built trail improvement. 
"Storage Facility, Indoor" means a Building used to provide separate, indoor storage areas for individuals or businesses that is designed for direct, private access by the tenant to each unit from an enclosed corridor. 
"Storage Facility, Outdoor" means an outdoor equipment yard, depository, stockpiling or storage of materials and products, or contractor's yard. Outdoor Storage Facilities include the storage of items used for non-Retail or industrial trade, merchandise inventory, or bulk materials such as sand, gravel, and other building materials. Outdoor Storage Facilities do not include the outdoor storage of motor vehicles. 
"Storage Facility, Warehouse" means a Building that is primarily used for the indoor storage of goods and merchandise and includes a distribution facility. A Storage Warehouse does not include outdoor storage of any kind. 
"Story" means the vertical measurement between floors taken from finish floor to finish floor. For the top Story, the vertical measurement is taken from the top finish floor to the top of the wall Plate of the roof. 
"Street" means any improved public Right-of-Way for vehicular traffic or any private Right-of-Way Dedicated and improved to City standards that provides Access to property. 
"Street, Arterial" means a Street designated in the Master Streets Plan as a controlled-access highway or major Street parkway. 
"Street, Cul-de-Sac" and "Cul-de-Sac" means a minor terminal (dead end) Street with a turn-around. 
"Street, Freeway" means a Street with fully controlled access designed to link major destination points. 
"Street, Local" means a Street that is designated as such in the Master Streets Plan. 
"Street, Major Collector" means a Street that is designated as such in the Master Streets Plan. 
"Street, Minor Collector" means a Street, that is designated as such in the Master Streets Plan. 
"Street, Private" means a Right-of-Way that has been improved to City standards and Dedicated by a recorded Plat as a private access, with the right of public use, to serve specific property. 
"Street, Public" means a Right-of-Way that has been Dedicated to the City by Plat, or that the City has acquired by prescriptive right, deed, or other form of legal Dedication. 
"Streetscape" means the visual elements of a Street, including paving materials, adjacent space on both sides of the Street, Landscaping, retaining walls, sidewalks, Building Façades, lighting, medians, Street furniture, and signs that, in combination, form the Street's character. 
"Structure" means anything constructed or erected that is permanently affixed to the ground in any manner. A Structure includes a Building. 
"Structure, Accessory" means a Structure that: (1) is clearly incidental and subordinate to a Primary Building located on the same Lot or Parcel; (2) is operated and maintained under the same ownership as Primary Building and the Primary Use; (3) houses an Accessory Use only; (4) contains no living space; (5) is not attached to a Primary Building; and (6) is at least 200 square feet. Accessory Structures include garages and sheds. 
"Structure, Primary" means a Structure that houses the Primary Use associated with the Lot or Parcel. 
"Structure, Temporary" means any physical space that is constructed without a foundation or footings, or that contains a hitch, wheels, or trailer base, and can be removed from a location when the designated time period, activity, or Use for which the Structure was erected ceases. 
"Subdivided Land" means the land, tract, or Lot described in a properly recorded Subdivision Plat. 
"Subdivision" means any land that is divided, re-subdivided, or proposed to be divided into one or more Lots, Parcels, sites, units, plots, or other division of land for the purpose—whether immediate or future—for sale, lease, or Development. A Subdivision includes the division or Development of residential or non-residential zoned land by deed, metes and bounds description, devise and testacy, map, Plat, or other recorded instrument. 
"Tailoring Shop" means a business that primarily engages in clothing alteration, clothing repair, and made-to measure clothing or other garments. 
"Tattoo Shop/Parlor" means any location, place, area, Structure, or business used for the practice of tattooing or the instruction of tattooing. Tattoo Shop/Parlor does not include businesses that primarily engages in permanent cosmetics application to restore eyebrows or enhance lips or eyelines. 
"Theater, Live Performance" means an establishment for the performance of dramatic, dance, music, or other live performances with fixed seating for audiences. Live Performance Theaters do not include Sexually Oriented Businesses or Movie Theaters. 
"Theater, Movie" means a Building, or portion thereof, devoted to showing motion pictures for a fee. Movie Theaters include Accessory Uses such as food, beverage, and other concession sales. 
"Tobacco Shop" means a tobacco retailer whose business involves the sale of tobacco products and includes the incidental and subordinate sale of related tobacco products. A Tobacco Shop also includes an incidental and subordinate social/lounge room for smoking on the premises. 
"Transitional Housing" means a facility that provides free temporary housing to homeless persons for at least thirty (30) days while they obtain work, job skills, or otherwise take steps to stabilize their circumstances. A Transitional Housing facility does not include: 
1.  A Homeless Shelter; 
2.  A Dwelling Unit provided to a Family for its exclusive use as part of a transitional housing program for more than one hundred eighty (180) days; 
3.  A Residential Facility for Persons with a Disability; 
4.  Permanent Supportive Housing; or 
5.  Assisted Living Facilities. 
"Transitional Care and Rehabilitation" means a facility that provides mental health services or drug rehabilitation and treatment to homeless persons. 
"Turf Grass" means a variety of grasses—such as Kentucky bluegrass or perennial rye grass—grown to form turf, or lawn, as opposed to tufted ornamental grass. 
"Upholstery Shop" means a business that repairs and replaces upholstery for household and office furnishings. Upholstery Shop does not include motor vehicle upholstering or repair. 
"Use" means the purpose or purposes for which land or Structures are approved, occupied, maintained, arranged, designed, or intended. 
"Use, Accessory" or "Accessory" means a subordinate and incidental Use located upon the same Lot, and in the same zoning district, as the Primary Use or Building. 
"Use, Conditional" means a Use that, because of its unique characteristics or potential impact on the City, surrounding neighbors, or adjacent Uses, may not be Compatible in some areas or may be Compatible only if certain conditions are required that mitigate or eliminate the detrimental impacts. 
"Use, Intensity of" means the maximum number of residential units, commercial patrons, or industrial space within a specified land Area designated for that purpose. 
"Use, Primary" means the principal Permitted Use established on a Lot or Parcel. 
"Use, Residential" means any Use that is primarily residential in nature, but where the Primary Use is human habitation. Residential Use includes occupancy of a Dwelling as living quarters and all Accessory Uses but does not include Temporary Structures or unaffixed shelter such as tents, containers, railroad cars, vehicles, trailers, or similar units. 
"Use, Temporary " means a seasonal business, licensed by the City, that engages in the temporary sale of goods, wares, or merchandise from a tent, vending cart, or other area on property owned or leased by the person, firm, or corporation, such as: firework or Christmas tree stands. Temporary Uses are incidental and subordinate to the Primary Use or Structure existing on the property, and not incompatible with the intent of the district. 
"Wall-Mounted Antenna" means an Antenna or series of Antennae mounted to the Façade of a Building or a chimney. 
"Whip Antenna" means an Antenna that is cylindrical in shape. Whip Antennae can be directional or omnidirectional and vary in size depending upon the frequency and gain for which they are designed. 
"Yard" means the portion of a Lot between a Lot Line and its nearest Setback line. 
"Yard, Corner Side" means the Yard space adjacent to a Street that extends from the Front Yard Setback line and the Rear Property Line and between the Corner Side Setback line and the Street Property Line. 
"Yard, Front" means the area that includes the full width of the Lot or Parcel extending from the Main Building to any Lot Line abutting a Street, or private right of access. On a vacant Lot or Parcel, the area that includes the full width of the Lot from the depth of the minimum Setback to any Lot Line abutting any Street. A Corner Lot or a Double Frontage Lot has two Front Yards. 
"Yard, Rear" means the Yard extending across the full width of the Lot between the Rear Lot Line and the Nearest line or point of the Building. The Rear Yard is that portion of the Yard opposite the Front Yard. 
"Yard, Side" means the Yard extending from the Front Yard to the Rear Yard between the Side Lot Line and the nearest line or point of the Building.  
Chapter 17.02 - PURPOSE AND SCOPE 
Sections: 
 
17.02.010 - Short Title. 
This Title shall be known as the South Salt Lake City Land Use and Development Code and may be so cited and plead. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.02.020 - Purpose of the Land Use and Development Code. 
A.  The purposes of this Title are to provide for the health, safety, and welfare, and promote the prosperity, improve the morals, peace and good order, comfort, convenience, and aesthetics of the City of South Salt Lake and its present and future inhabitants and businesses, to protect the tax base, to secure economy in governmental expenditures, to foster and protect both urban and nonurban Development, and to protect and ensure access to sunlight for solar energy devices, to provide fundamental fairness in Land Use Regulation, and to protect property values. 
B.  To accomplish the purposes of this Title, the City may enact all Land Use Regulations, resolutions, and rules and may enter into other forms of land use controls and Development agreements that it considers necessary or appropriate for the Use and Development of land within the City, including ordinances, resolutions, rules, fees, restrictive covenants, easements, and Development agreements governing Use, Density, open space, Structures, Buildings, energy efficiency, light and air, air quality, transportation and public or alternative transportation, infrastructure, Street and Building orientation and width requirements, public facilities, fundamental fairness in Land Use Regulation, considerations of surrounding land uses and the balance of the foregoing purposes with a land Owner's private property interests, height and location of vegetation, trees, and Landscaping, unless expressly prohibited by law. 
C.  This Title is also established to facilitate orderly growth and Development in the City of South Salt Lake and to enhance the lives of the citizens of and visitors to the City. 
D.  This Title establishes a fair and efficient process for Development and Land Use Applications, as accomplished through the delegation of powers among City officials and a transparent review process. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.02.030 - Interpretation. 
A.  Use of Authority. The power granted by this Title and the restrictions contained within this Title shall not be exercised nor applied to: 
1.  Deprive the property Owner or rightful occupant of land or property a lawful Use at the time this Title becomes effective; 
2.  Deny Use and activity of any Structure which was lawfully erected, remodeled, or used under prior ordinances. However, such a Use shall be subject to conditions and restrictions authorized or imposed by health and safety regulations, fit premises ordinances, and building codes. Current zoning requirements shall be applied when a Structure is proposed to be remodeled, reconstructed, added to, or the Use within the Building is intensified; or 
3.  Interfere with or annul any easement, covenant running with the land, or other lawful agreement in force at the time this Title became effective. 
B.  Interpretation. 
1.  Interpretation and application of the provisions and requirements contained within this Title are declared to be the minimum requirements for the purpose set forth, unless otherwise specifically stated. 
2.  The land use authority shall apply the plain language of the Code. 
3.  If a Land Use Regulation does not plainly restrict a land use Application, the land use authority shall interpret and apply the Land Use Regulation to favor the land use Application. 
4.  If in the course of administration hereof, a question arises as to the meaning of any phrase, section, or chapter, or land use district, the interpretation thereof shall be given by the Community Development Director and shall be construed to be the official interpretation thereof. 
5.  In the event that there is a need for further interpretation by any person, firm or corporation, or official of South Salt Lake City, the Applicant shall submit the question to the Planning Commission who, unless otherwise provided, is authorized to interpret the plain meaning of such ordinance. Such interpretation shall be final and appealable to District Court. 
6.  All capitalized proper nouns in the text of this Title are defined terms. Defined terms are located in Chapter 17.01. 
7.  If any Lot or Parcel straddles more than one district, the entire property shall be interpreted to lie within the district that is designated for the majority of the Lot or Parcel. If the Lot or Parcel is divided in half by two districts, the property shall be interpreted to lie within the district with the lower Structure height, the least Density, and the least intensive uses. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.02.040 - Conflict and severability. 
A.  The provisions of this Title are in addition to all other City ordinances, the Laws of the state of Utah, the Laws of the United States, and applicable common law. This Title shall not supersede any private Land Use Regulations in deeds or covenants, which are more restrictive than this Title. Whenever a conflict exists, the more restrictive provision shall apply to the extent allowed by law. The City does not enforce private restrictive covenants, nor shall any such covenant have the effect of modifying the regulations herein. 
B.  If any part or provision of these regulations or application thereof to any Person or circumstances is adjudged invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall be confined in its operation to the part, provision, or application directly involved in all controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered and shall not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of these regulations or the application thereof to other persons or circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
Chapter 17.03 - LAND-USE DISTRICTS AND MATRIX 
Sections: 
 
17.03.010 - Land Use Matrix. 
A.  Any Use not specifically permitted or conditionally permitted in this Land Use Matrix is prohibited. Only the following Uses are allowed: 
1.  Uses indicated by the letter "P" below are Permitted Uses only where designated. 
2.  Uses indicated by the letter "C" are Conditional Uses only where designated. 
B.  All Permitted Uses are subject to the general and specific standards, as applicable, contained in Section 17.04. 
C.  All Conditional Uses are subject to the general and specific standards, as applicable, contained in Section 17.05. 
Land Use Categories 	Commercial Corridor 	Commercial Neighborhood 	Commercial General 	TOD and TOD-Core 	Mixed Use 	Business Park 	Professional Office 	Flex 	Historic and Landmark 	Jordan River 	School 	City Facility 	Open Space 	R1 	Residential Multiple 	Crossing MPMU - Anchor Tenant 	Crossing MPMU - 2100 S/State St. 	Crossing MPMU- Transit District 	Riverfront MPMU - Flex/Office 	Riverfront MPMU - RM1 	Riverfront MPMU - School 	Riverfront MPMU - R1 	Granite MPMU - Townhome 	Granite MPMU - Library 	Granite Lofts Townhome 	Nature Center Pilot Project 	SSLC-PD 
Adult Daycare 	C 		C 	C 	C 																						
Alcoholic Beverage, Banquet and Catering 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 																			
Alcoholic Beverage, Bar Establishment 	C 			C 												C 	C 										
Alcoholic Beverage, Beer Recreational 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 								P 	P 										
Alcoholic Beverage, Beer Wholesaler 								C 																			
Alcoholic Beverage, Hotel 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 																						
Alcoholic Beverage, Liquor Warehouse 								C 																			
Alcoholic Beverage, Local Industry Representative 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 							P 	P 	P 	P 								
Alcoholic Beverage, Manufacturer 	C 			C 				C 																			
Alcoholic Beverage, Off-Premise Beer 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 								P 	P 										
Alcoholic Beverage, Package Agency 	P 		P 	P 	P 			P 								P 	P 										
Alcoholic Beverage, Reception Center 																											
Alcoholic Beverage, Restaurant (Beer Only) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 									P 										
Alcoholic Beverage, Restaurant (Limited Service) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 									P 										
Alcoholic Beverage, Restaurant (Full Service) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 									P 										
Alcoholic Beverage, Special Use (Educational) 	P 			P 				P 																			
Alcoholic Beverage, Special Use (Industrial/Manufacturing) 			P 					P 											P 								
Alcoholic Beverage, Special Use (Scientific) 	P 		P 	P 				P 											P 								
Alcoholic Beverage, Special Use (Religious) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 					P 	P 												
Alcoholic Beverage, Tavern 	C 			C 												C 	C 										
Alcoholic Beverage, State Liquor Store 	C 			C 				C 									C 										
All-Terrain Vehicle (ATV), Motorcycle, Personal Watercraft (PWC), Snowmobile Sales and Service 	P 		P 					P 																			
Amusement Device 																											
Animal Hospital/Veterinary Office (Small Animal) 	P 		P 	P 	P 			P 									P 		P 								
Animal Kennel/Day Care, Commercial 	C 		C 	C 	C 			C 																			
Apiary 										P 				P 													
Art Gallery 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 			P 					P 		P 								
Art Studio 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 			P 					P 		P 								
Assisted Living Facility 	C 	C 		C 	C 										C 												
ATM, Kiosk, Vending Machine (Self-Service, Interactive, Outdoors) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				P 					P 										
Auction House 																											
Auto, Light Truck, RV, Boat, Trailer Dealerships (Sale, Lease, or Rent) 	C 		C 					C 																			
Auto Auction 																											
Auto Body Repair 								P 																			
Automotive Restoration 			P 					P 																			
Automotive Service and Repair 			P 					P 																			
Automotive Service Station (Non-Mechanical) 			P 			P 		P 																			
Aviary 																											
Bail Bonds 																											
Bakery, Commercial 			P 					P 																			
Bakery Neighborhood 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 												P 	P 									
Barber Shop/Hair Salon 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 										P 	P 									
Blood/Plasma Donation Center 																											
Bowling Alley 	P 		P 	P 																							
Car Wash 	C 	C 	C 	C 				C 																			
Child Care Center 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 											C 										
City Building 												P 															P 
City Park 												P 	P 														
Commercial Repair Services 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 		P 																			
Convenience Store with Fuel Pumps 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 			C 																			
Crematory/Embalming Facility 								C 																			
Day Spa 	C 																C 										
Day Treatment Center 			C 																								
Drive-Up Window 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 									P 										
Dry Cleaning/Laundromat 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 									P 										
Dwelling, Live/Work 			C 	C 	C 																						
Dwelling, Multi-Family 	C 			C 	C 										C 		C 	C 		C 							
Dwelling, Single-Family 										P 				P 	P 							P 					
Dwelling, Townhome 		C 		C 	C 										C 		C 	C 					P 		P 		
Education, After School (Children) 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		C 		C 		C 	P 		C 	C 						C 						
Education, Elementary or Secondary 											C 																
Education, Higher (Public) 											C 																
Education, Preschool 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		C 		C 		C 	P 		C 	C 												
Education, Technical 											C 																
Employment Agency/Temporary Staffing 	P 		P 	P 				P 																			
Equestrian Facility 										C 																	
Equipment Sales, Service, and Rental (Heavy and Farm) 																											
Escort Service 																											
Farmers Market 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 				P 			P 	C 														
Financial Institution 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 		P 									P 										
Fitness Center 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 	P 			P 					P 		P 								
Food Truck/Food Trailer 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 		P 	P 												
Food Processing (Large-Scale) 								P 																			
Food Processing (Small-Scale) 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 		P 																			
Food Truck Park 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 																		
Funeral/Mortuary Home 			C 																								
Grooming Services (Pets) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 																			
Haunted House 												P 															
Home Occupation, Category I 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 							P 	P 		P 	P 		P 		P 	P 		P 		
Home Occupation, Category II 	C 	C 		C 	C 		C 							C 	C 		C 	C 		C 		C 	C 		C 		
Homeless Shelter 										C 																	
Horticulture/Produce Sales 		C 	C 					C 	C 	C 		P 															
Hospital, Specialty 	C 			C 																							
Hotel 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 																						
Hotel, Extended-Stay 																											
Impound and Tow Lot 																											
Jail 																											
Juvenile Detention Facility 																											
Library 												P 												P 			
Maintenance Facility, Vehicle/Transit 																											
Manufactured Home Park 																											
Manufacturing, Major 																											
Manufacturing, Minor 			P 					P 											P 								
Massage Therapy 	C 																										
Medical, Dental, Health Care Office 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				P 					P 		P 								
Motel 																											
Movie Studio/Sound Stage 												P 															
Museum 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				P 			P 	C 														
Nature Center 																										P 	
Non-Depository Institution 																											
Nursery, Commercial 			P 					P 		P 																	
Nursing Home 		C 		C 	C 										C 												
Office, Professional 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 					P 	P 	P 								
Park and Ride 	C 			C 																							
Parking Structure 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 				P 			P 												
Pawn Shop 																											
Permanent Supportive Housing 																											
Pharmacy 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 			C 									C 										
Place of Worship 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 					C 	C 												
Portable Container 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 		P 	P 	P 
Poultry, Urban 										P 				P 	P 							P 					
Precious Metal Recycling 																											
Printing, Large-Scale 				P 		P 		P 																			
Protective Housing 				C 																							
Public Utility Facility 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		C 		C 		C 	C 														
Recreation Center 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		C 	C 			P 	C 				C 										
Recycling Collection/Drop-Off Facility 																											
Rehabilitation Center 																											
Restaurant 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 												P 	P 									
Retail, Accessory 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 			P 					P 	P 	P 								
Retail, General 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 				P 				P 	P 		P 								
Retail, Neighborhood 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 			P 					P 										
Secondhand Merchandise Dealer 	P 	P 		P 	P 																						
Sexually Oriented Business 						C 																					
Slaughterhouse/Animal Processing 																											
Storage Facility, Indoor 			C 					P 											P 								
Storage Facility, Outdoor 																											
Storage Facility, Warehouse 								P 											P 								
Tattoo Shop/Parlor 																											
Temporary Use 	C 	C 	C 	C 												C 	C 										
Theater, Live Performance 	C 			C 								P 	P 														
Theater, Movie 	C 																										
Tobacco Shop 																											
Transitional Care and Rehabilitation 																											
Transitional Housing 																											
Upholstery Shop/Tailoring Shop 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 																			
 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.03.020 - R1 District. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the R1 district is to provide for low Density Single-Family, residential housing neighborhoods on Lots not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet in size. 
B.  Uses. No Building, Structure, Site or land shall be used or Developed except in accordance with the adopted Land Use Matrix as found in Section 17.03.010. Uses shall be Compatible with the existing Scale and intensity and shall preserve the existing character of the neighborhood. 
C.  Standards. 
1.  Area. The minimum area of any new Lot in this district is (6,000) square feet. 
2.  Minimum Width. Width regulations are as follows: 
a.  The minimum width of any Lot shall be fifty (50) feet at all points along the length of the property from the Front Property Line to the Rear Property Line. 
b.  The Land Use Authority may decrease the minimum Lot width along the Frontage for residential Parcels accessed from a Cul-de-Sac or turnaround area. The 
3.  Maximum Height. The maximum Height for any Structure is thirty-five (35) feet. 
4.  Required Setbacks. See Chapter 17.07. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.03.030 - Residential Multiple (RM) district. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the Residential Multiple (RM) district is to provide a district where Multi-Family housing may be Developed with varying residential densities. 
B.  Uses. No Building, Structure, Site, or land shall be used or Developed except in accordance with the adopted Land Use Matrix as found in Section 17.03.010. 
C.  Standards. 
1.  Minimum Area. 
a.  The minimum area of any Lot for Multi-Family Development in this district is two (2) acres. 
b.  The minimum area of any Lot for Townhome Development in this district is one (1) acre. 
c.  The minimum area of any Lot for detached Single-Family residential Development in this district is 6000 square feet. 
2.  Minimum Width. Width regulations are as follows: 
a.  The minimum width of any Lot or Parcel intended for a Multi-Family Development shall be two hundred fifty (250) feet at all points along the length of the property from the Front Property Line to the Rear Property Line. 
b.  The minimum width of any new Lot used for Single-Family detached homes is fifty (50) feet at all points along the length of the property from the Front Property Line to the Rear Property Line. 
c.  The minimum width of any Lot or Parcel intended for a Townhome Development shall be two hundred fifty (250) feet at all points along the length of the property from the Front Property Line to the Rear Property Line. The minimum width of any Lot or Unit used for Townhomes shall be twenty-two (22) feet at all points along the length of the property from the Front Property Line to the Rear Property Line. 
d.  The land use authority may decrease the minimum Lot width along the Frontage for Single-Family residential Parcels when accessed from a Cul-de-Sac. 
3.  Maximum Height. The maximum Height for a Multi-Family Structure is sixty-five (65) feet. The maximum height for a Townhome Structure is thirty-eight (38) feet. 
4.  Required Setbacks. See Chapter 17.07. 
5.  Minimum Number of Units. The minimum number of units for any Multi-Family Development shall be fifty (50) units. 
6.  Residential Density. The maximum Density for any Multi-Family residential Development in the RM district shall be twenty-five (25) units per acre. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.03.040 - Jordan River (JR) district. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the Jordan River district is to provide and preserve areas in the City of South Salt Lake for low Density residential Development, together with limited agricultural Accessory Uses associated with a primary Single-Family Use. 
B.  Uses. No Building, Structure, Site, or land shall be used or Developed except in accordance with the adopted Land Use Matrix as found in Section 17.03.010. 
C.  Standards. 
b.  The minimum area required for the raising of animals and fowl for Family food production shall be one-half acre. 
c.  The minimum area for raising or boarding of horses, cattle, sheep, goats or other similar large animals is one acre. 
d.  Requirements for Urban Poultry or an Apiary are detailed in Chapter 6.08. 
2.  Minimum Width. The minimum width of any Lot one-half acre or larger shall be one hundred (100) feet at all points along the length of the property from the Front Property Line to the Rear Property Line. 
1.  Minimum Area. Area regulations are as follows: 
a.  The minimum Lot Area shall be one-half acre. 
4.  Required Setbacks. See Chapter 17.07. 
3.  Maximum Height. The maximum Height for any Structure depends on the Building Form and adjacent Structures, as more completely detailed in Chapter 17.07. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.03.050 - Commercial Corridor (CC) district. 
A.  Uses. No Building, Structure, Site, or land shall be used or Developed except in accordance with the adopted Land Use Matrix as found in Section 17.03.010. 
B.  Standards. Regulations for a corridor commercial district are as follows: 
1.  Minimum Area. 
a.  The minimum area for a new non-residential Lot in the district is one (1) acre. 
b.  The minimum area for any new Multi-Family residential Lot in the district is two (2) acres with a minimum width of 250 feet along any point. 
2.  Maximum Height. The maximum Height for any Structure depends on the Building Form as more completely detailed in Chapter 17.07. 
3.  Required Setbacks/Build-To Standard. See Chapter 17.07. 
4.  Minimum Number of Units. The minimum number of units for any Multi-Family Development shall be fifty (50) units. 
5.  Residential Density. The maximum Density for any Multi-Family residential Development in the CC district shall be twenty-five (25) units per acre. 
6.  All Multi-Family residential Developments in the district shall have a minimum area of 4,000 square-feet of commercial or Retail space on the ground-floor of the Primary Façade. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.03.060 - Commercial General (CG) district. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the Commercial General (CG) district is to allow more intense business activity in order to improve the economic base of the City without detriment to the environmental character and quality of the district. Provide space for the many highly diverse types of commercial activity needed to serve people and industry and to maintain and strengthen the economic base of the City 
B.  Uses. No Building, Structure, Site, or land shall be used or Developed except in accordance with the adopted Land Use Matrix as found in Section 17.03.010. 
C.  Standards. 
1.  Minimum Area. The minimum area for a new Lot in the district is one (1) acre. 
2.  Maximum Height. The maximum Height for any Structure is based on the Building Form as more completely detailed in Chapter 17.07. 
3.  Required Setbacks/Build-To Standard. See Chapter 17.07. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.03.070 - Commercial Neighborhood (CN) district. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the Commercial Neighborhood (CN) district is to provide an area for neighborhood-oriented businesses that support the residential areas surrounding the district. The district may serve as a Buffer between residential and business/commercial districts. The Commercial Neighborhood district designation is intended for commercial Developments that will not generate high vehicle traffic. It is intended that businesses in this district will both enhance and be Compatible with the surrounding residential neighborhoods through architecture, Development, access, and site design. 
B.  Uses. No Building, Structure, Site, or land shall be used or Developed except in accordance with the adopted Land Use Matrix as found in Section 17.03.010. 
C.  Standards. 
1.  Minimum Area. The minimum area of any Lot for Development in this district is one (1) acre. 
2.  Maximum Height. The maximum Height for any Structure is based on the Building Form as more completely detailed in Chapter 17.07. 
3.  Required Setbacks/Build-To Standard. See Chapter 17.07. 
4.  Townhome Developments shall have a minimum Lot or Parcel size of 250 feet in width along any point. Individual Townhome units shall be a minimum of 22 feet wide along the entire length of the unit. 
D.  Regulations. Regulations for a Commercial Neighborhood district are as follows: 
1.  Time Restrictions. Business activities shall not normally be conducted by any of the Permitted or Conditional Uses allowed in this district before six a.m. or after ten p.m. 
2.  Parking. Parking shall only be allowed for passenger-type vehicles or light, vans and trucks that do not exceed one ton in capacity, except for the temporary parking of larger vehicles involved in delivering goods in the area while the goods are being loaded and unloaded. 
3.  Changes of Use. Existing residential Structures or sites may not be used for commercial purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.03.080 - Professional Office (PO) district. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the Professional Office (PO) district is to provide a zone for Uses that are conducted in an office environment. The district is not intended to contain Uses engaged solely in merchandising, retailing, warehousing, or Manufacturing (Major or Minor). Uses within the Professional Office (PO) district shall serve to enhance the vitality of the City and be Compatible with surrounding neighborhoods. The district may act as a Buffer between residential neighborhoods and transit corridors or commercial Uses. Developments adjacent to Residential Uses should be architecturally Compatible with the residential Structures while mitigating impacts on the residential neighborhoods with respect to Height, hours of operation, lighting and traffic. 
B.  Uses. No Building, Structure, Site, or land shall be used or Developed except in accordance with the adopted Land Use Matrix as found in this Chapter. 
C.  Standards. 
1.  Minimum Area. The minimum area for a new Lot in the district is one (1) acre. 
2.  Maximum Height. The maximum Height for any Structure is based on the Building Form and as more completely detailed in Chapter 17.07. 
3.  Required Setbacks/Build-To Standards are detailed in Chapter 17.07. 
D.  Regulations. Regulations for the Professional Office district are as follows 
1.  Time Restrictions. Business shall not normally be conducted before six (6) a.m. or after ten (10) p.m. 
2.  Parking. Parking shall only be allowed for passenger-type vehicles or light, vans and trucks that do not exceed one ton in capacity, except for the temporary parking of larger vehicles involved in delivering goods in the area while the goods are being loaded and unloaded. 
3.  Changes of Use. Changes of Use for existing residential structures into office or Retail Uses are allowed subject to the following standards: 
a.  The residential character of the Building exterior shall be maintained. 
b.  The Front Building Elevation shall contain no more than fifty (50) percent glass. 
c.  Additions and remodels are subject to the South Salt Lake City Residential Design Standards. 
d.  All front and corner side yards shall be fully landscaped subject to the South Salt Lake City Landscape Standards. 
e.  Existing one-way drive approaches may be used for parking serving office or Retail uses, subject to approval by the City Engineer. 
f.  Off-Street parking is prohibited in Front and Corner Side Yards. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.03.090 - Business Park (BP) district. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the Business Park (BP) district is to provide for specific Uses in a business park setting. The Business Park (BP) district will emphasize a high level of architectural and landscape excellence in a park-like atmosphere. The intent is to create an attractive business park that will complement the surrounding land uses. 
B.  Uses. No Building, structure, Site or land shall be used or Developed except in accordance with the adopted Land Use Matrix as found in this Chapter. 
C.  Standards. 
1.  Minimum Area. The minimum area for a new Lot in the district is one (1) acre. 
2.  Maximum Height. The maximum Height for any Structure is based on the Building Form as more completely detailed in Chapter 17.07. 
3.  Required Setbacks/Build-To Standards are detailed in Chapter 17.07. 
D.  Regulations. Time Restrictions. Business shall not normally be conducted before six (6) a.m. or after ten (10) p.m. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.03.100 - Flex district. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the Flex district is to designate appropriate locations where warehousing and industrial Uses with minimal objectionable characteristics may be established, maintained and protected. The regulations of this district are designed to promote a high level of environmental quality by Uses which do not contribute to the deterioration of environmental quality. 
B.  Uses. No Building, Structure, Site or land shall be used or Developed except in accordance with the adopted Land Use Matrix as found in this Chapter. 
C.  Standards. 
1.  Minimum Area. The minimum area for a new Lot in the district is one (1) acre. 
2.  Maximum Height. The maximum Height for any Structure is based on the Building Form as more completely detailed in Chapter 17.07. 
3.  Required Setbacks/Build-To Standards are detailed in Chapter 17.07 
D.  Regulations. Regulations for the Flex district are as follows: Noise and Odor. Uses in the Flex district shall not produce noxious, foul or offensive odors, nor produce smoke or fumes that are injurious or detrimental to the health of the general population or business community. No Use is this district shall produce a noise in violation of adopted noise regulations of the Salt Lake County Health Department or in any other manner constitute or contribute to a public or a private nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.03.110 - Transit Oriented Development (TOD) district. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the Transit-Oriented Development (TOD) district is to encourage property Owners to Develop their property using transit-oriented design principles. 
B.  The TOD district is established: 
1.  To promote new, well-integrated residential, commercial, office, institutional and other employment center Development close to TRAX and transit stations; 
2.  To ensure that new Development takes advantage of Compatible, higher Density, transit friendly, design opportunities in close proximity to transit systems in order to provide options for economic development and diversity; 
3.  To encourage pedestrian orientation and human Scale in new Development and promote public infrastructure that supports transit Use and Mixed-Use Development; 
4.  To manage parking and vehicular access utilizing Shared Parking and driveway access to avoid pedestrian conflicts; 
5.  To promote residential Development that is Compatible with surrounding Uses and that is of sufficient Scale to create functional Mixed-Use neighborhoods near transit; and 
6.  To encourage, through design, configuration, and mix of Buildings and activities, a pedestrian-oriented environment that provides settings for social interaction and active community life. 
C.  Uses. No Building, Structure, Site, or land shall be used or Developed except in accordance with the adopted Land Use Matrix as found in this Chapter. 
D.  Applicability. A property Owner shall follow the provisions of the Transit-Oriented Development district when Developing or changing the Use of property. 
E.  Regulations. Regulations for the Transit-Oriented Development district are as follows 
1.  Minimum Area. 
a.  The minimum area of any Lot for Multi-Family Development shall be two (2) acres. 
b.  The minimum area of any Lot for Townhome Development shall be one (1) acre. 
2.  Minimum Width. Width regulations are as follows: 
a.  The minimum width of any Lot for a Multi-Family Development shall be two hundred fifty (250) feet at all points along the length of the property. 
b.  Townhome Developments shall be at least 250 feet in width along any point. Individual Townhome units shall be a minimum of 22 feet wide along the entire length of the unit. 
c.  The land use authority may decrease the minimum Lot width requirement along the Frontage for residential Lots accessed from a Cul-de-Sac. 
3.  Maximum Height. The maximum Height for any Structure is based on the Building Form as more completely detailed in Chapter 17.07. 
4.  Required Setbacks/Build-To Standards are described in Chapter 17.07. 
5.  Minimum Number of Units. The minimum number of units for any Multi-Family Development shall be fifty (50) units. 
6.  Residential Density. The maximum Density for any Multi-Family residential Development in the TOD district shall be twenty-five (25) units per acre. 
7.  All Multi-Family residential Developments in the district shall have a minimum area of 4,000 square-feet of commercial or Retail space on the ground-floor of the Primary Façade. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.03.120 - Transit Oriented Development Core (TOD-C) district. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the Transit-Oriented Development-Core (TOD-C) district is to encourage property Owners adjacent to or near existing transit stations to Develop their property using transit-oriented design principles. 
B.  The TOD-C district is established: 
1.  To promote new, well-integrated high-Density residential, commercial, office, institutional and other employment center Development close to TRAX and transit stations; 
2.  To ensure that new Development takes advantage of Compatible, higher Density, transit friendly, design opportunities in close proximity to transit systems in order to provide options for economic development and diversity; 
3.  To encourage pedestrian orientation and human Scale in new Development and promote public infrastructure that supports transit Use and Mixed-Use Development; 
4.  To manage parking and vehicular access utilizing Shared Parking and driveway access, and quality design of drive-through areas, to avoid pedestrian conflicts; 
5.  To promote residential Development that is Compatible with surrounding Uses and that is of sufficient Scale to create functional Mixed-Use neighborhoods near transit; and 
6.  To encourage, through design, configuration, and mix of Buildings and activities, a pedestrian-oriented environment that provides settings for social interaction and active community life. 
C.  Uses. No Building, Structure, Site, or land shall be used or Developed except in accordance with the adopted Land Use Matrix as found in this Chapter. 
D.  Applicability. A property Owner shall follow the provisions of the TOD-C district when Developing or changing the Use of property. 
E.  Regulations. Regulations for the district are as follows: 
1.  Minimum Area. 
a.  The minimum area of any Lot for Multi-Family Development shall be two (2) acres. 
b.  The minimum area of any Lot for Townhome Development shall be one (1) acre. 
2.  Minimum Width. Width regulations are as follows: 
a.  The minimum width of any Lot for a Multi-Family Development shall be two hundred fifty (250) feet at all points along the length of the property. 
b.  Townhome Developments shall have a minimum Lot or Parcel size of 250 feet in width along any point. Individual Townhome units shall be a minimum of 22 feet wide along the entire length of the unit. 
c.  The land use authority may decrease the minimum Lot width requirement along the Frontage for residential Lots accessed from a Cul-de-Sac. 
3.  Minimum Number of Units. The minimum number of units for any Multi-Family Development shall be fifty (50) units. 
4.  Maximum Height. The maximum Height for any Structure is based on the Building Form as more completely detailed in Chapter 17.07. 
5.  Required Setbacks/Build-To Standards are detailed in Chapter 17.07. 
6.  All Multi-Family residential Developments in the district shall have a minimum area of 4,000 square-feet of commercial or Retail space on the ground-floor of the Primary Façade. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.03.130 - Mixed-Use district. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the Mixed-Use district is to encourage a mixture of Compatible Uses and Structures that will enhance the vitality and diversity of the area. Development should accommodate and respect surrounding land Uses by providing a gradual transition from more intensive Uses to lower Density Residential Uses that are adjacent to a potential Mixed-Use site. 
B.  Uses. No Building, Structure, Site, or land shall be used or Developed except in accordance with the adopted Land Use Matrix as found in this Chapter. 
C.  Standards. Standards for the district are as follows: 
1.  Minimum Area. 
a.  The minimum area of any Lot for Multi-Family Development is two (2) acres. 
b.  The minimum area of any Lot for Townhome Development is one (1) acre. 
2.  Minimum Width. Width regulations are as follows: 
a.  The minimum width of any Lot for a Multi-Family Development shall be two hundred fifty (250) feet at all points along the length of the property. 
b.  Townhome Developments shall have a minimum Lot or Parcel size of 250 feet in width along any point. Individual Townhome units shall be a minimum of 22 feet wide along the entire length of the unit. 
c.  The land use authority may decrease the minimum Lot width along the Frontage for residential Parcels when accessed from a Cul-de-Sac. 
3.  Maximum Height. The maximum Height for any Structure is based on the Building Form as more completely detailed in Chapter 17.07. 
4.  Required Setbacks/Build-To Standards are detailed in Chapter 17.07. 
5.  Minimum Number of Units. The minimum number of units for any Multi-Family Development shall be fifty (50) units. 
6.  Residential Density. The maximum Density for any Multi-Family Development in the district shall be twenty-five (25) units per acre. 
7.  All Multi-Family residential Developments in the district shall have a minimum area of 4,000 square-feet of commercial or Retail space on the ground-floor of the Primary Façade. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.03.140 - City Facility (CF) district. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the City Facility district is to regulate the Development of City Uses in a manner that is harmonious with surrounding Uses. Such Uses are intended to be Compatible with the existing Scale and intensity of the neighborhood and to enhance the character of the neighborhood. 
B.  Uses. No Building, Structure, Site, or land shall be used or Developed except in accordance with the adopted Land Use Matrix as found in this Chapter. 
C.  Regulations. Regulations for the district are as follows: 
1.  Maximum Height. The maximum Height for any Structure is based on the Building Form as more completely detailed in Chapter 17.07. 
2.  Required Setbacks/Build-To Standards are detailed in Chapter 17.07. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.03.150 - Open Space (OS) district. 
A.  Purpose. The Open Space district is to encourage the preservation of open space. 
B.  Uses. No Building, Structure, Site, or land shall be used or Developed except in accordance with the adopted Land Use Matrix as found in this Chapter. 
C.  Development Review. The Planning Commission shall review requests for Development in the district. During the review process, the Planning Commission shall set appropriate Building Height, size, and Setback requirements for each specific Development proposal. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.03.160 - Historic and Landmark (HL) district. 
A.  Purpose. This Section is enacted and intended to: 
1.  Encourage protection, restoration, and reuse of Structures, Sites, and areas of historic and architectural significance, these being among the City's most important cultural, educational, and economic assets; 
2.  Protect the character of the historic and landmark Structures, Sites, and areas from being lost through expansion or change of commercial, residential, or other activity in the City; 
3.  Preserve historic and landmark Structures, Sites, and areas for the Use, observation, study, education, enjoyment, and general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of South Salt Lake; 
4.  Stabilize and revitalize neighborhoods by creating an environment conducive to reinvestment and continued maintenance; 
5.  Educate citizens about the City's history; 
6.  Protect key elements of the City's history; 
7.  Protect and enhance historic elements that attract residents, tourists, and visitors, and serving as a support and stimulus to business and industry; 
8.  This Section does not prohibit the razing of Structures that pose an immediate hazard to human health and safety, nor preclude ordinary maintenance and repair not otherwise subject to City regulation. 
9.  Preserve structures from deliberate acts of demolition or destruction and deliberate or inadvertent neglect of historic and landmark Structures and Sites within historic districts. 
10.  Serve as a support and stimulus to business and industry. 
B.  Uses. No Building, Structure, Site, or land shall be used or Developed except in accordance with the adopted Land Use Matrix as found in this Chapter. 
C.  Regulations. Regulations for the district are as follows: 
1.  An area, Parcel, or Lot may be designated as within this district if it contains a natural feature, Structure, or Building with historical significance, valued character, interest, or importance as part of the Development, heritage, or cultural characteristics of the community, as measured by falling into one or more of the following categories: 
a.  Historical Significance. 
i.  It is the location of, or is associated in a significant way with, an historic event that had a significant effect upon the City, state, or nation. 
ii.  It is associated in a significant way with the life of a person important in the history of the City, state, or nation. 
iii.  It is associated in a significant way with an important aspect of the cultural, political, or economic heritage of the City, state, or nation. 
b.  Architectural, Landscape Architecture, and Engineering Significance. 
i.  It embodies the distinctive visible characteristics of an architectural style, period, or a method of construction. 
ii.  It is an outstanding work of a designer or builder. 
iii.  It contains elements of extraordinary or unusual architectural or structural design, detail, use of materials, or craftsmanship. 
iv.  It portrays the environment of a group of people in an era of history characterized by a distinctive architectural style. 
v.  It has retained historic integrity, in that there have not been any major alterations or additions that have obscured or destroyed the significant historic features. 
D.  Powers and Duties. 
1.  The Historic and Landmark Commission shall have the following duties: 
a.  Survey and inventory the community's Historic Buildings and landmarks along with contributory and Non-Contributory Structures upon a site. The Commission shall conduct or cause to be conducted a survey of the historic, architectural, and archaeological resources within the community. Survey and inventory documents shall be maintained and open to the public. 
b.  Recommend the designation of areas, Parcels, or Lots as within the district to the City Council in accordance with the procedures adopted in this Title. 
c.  Review and make recommendations related to Applications for a permit for the demolition or relocation of a Building or Structure which is within the district. 
2.  For the purpose of this Section, "Structure" includes all Buildings, exterior walls, fences, signs, utility fixtures, steps, or appurtenant elements. 
E.  Procedures for Land Use Designations and Design Review Certificates. 
1.  Official nominations of properties to be designated within the district must originate with the property Owner, City administration, the Historic and Landmark Commission, or the City Council. Applications shall be filed with the Community Development Department. 
2.  The Historic and Landmark Commission shall review all Applications submitted to the Community Development Director. Approvals shall be consistent with established guidelines. The Historic and Landmark Commission may call upon historic preservation consultants, through the Community Development Director, for professional expertise. 
F.  Design Review Certificate Standards. 
1.  A design review certificate shall be required in any of the following instances involving a Structure within the district: 
a.  All additions, renovation, alterations, exterior remodeling, or major changes in color, material, texture, roofing materials, to the exterior of any improvement which do not constitute demolition; 
b.  Alterations or Development affecting natural features, or site improvements; and 
c.  Any signs placed on any Structure or property. 
2.  Routine maintenance and upkeep, repainting or replacing roofing, shutters, trim, or similar decorative items with similar materials shall not require a design review certificate. 
3.  If the Structure is contributory or non-contributory and the changes involve additions, renovation, exterior remodeling, or major changes in color, material, texture, or size, the project shall be presented to the historic and landmark commission for a design review certificate prior to the issuance of a Building Permit or commencement of work, if no permit is required. 
4.  Establishment of Standards and Guidelines. South Salt Lake standards and guidelines for exterior and site design criteria may be adopted by the Historic and Landmark Commission to aid Applicants in formulating plans for Development relating to sites and Structures within the district. 
5.  Application of Standards and Guidelines. In approving an Application for a design review certificate, the Historic and Landmark Commission shall find that a project substantially complies with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings. The following standards and guidelines shall be applied during reviews by the Historic and Landmark Commission: 
a.  A property will be used as it was historically or be given a new Use that requires minimal change to its distinctive materials, features, spaces, and spatial relationships. 
b.  The historic character of a property will be retained and preserved. The removal of distinctive materials or alteration of features, spaces, and spatial relationships that characterize a property will be avoided. 
c.  Each property will be recognized as a physical record of its time, place, and Use. Changes that create a false sense of historical Development, such as adding conjectural features or elements from other historic properties, will not be undertaken. 
d.  Changes to a property that have acquired historic significance in their own right will be retained and preserved. 
e.  Distinctive materials, features, finishes, and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a property will be preserved. 
f.  Deteriorated historic features will be repaired rather than replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature will match the old in design, color, texture, and, where possible, materials. Replacement of missing features will be substantiated by documentary and physical evidence. 
g.  Chemical or physical treatments, if appropriate, will be undertaken using the gentlest means possible. Treatments that cause damage to historic materials will not be used. 
h.  Archeological resources will be protected and preserved in place. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures will be undertaken. 
i.  New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction will not destroy historic materials, features, and spatial relationships that characterize the property. The new work shall be differentiated from the old and will be Compatible with the historic materials, features, size, Scale and proportion, and massing to protect the integrity of the property and its environment. 
j.  New additions and adjacent or related new construction will be undertaken in such a manner that, if removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be unimpaired. 
G.  Demolition Permit Processing Requirements. 
1.  When any Application is made for a demolition permit for a Structure within the district, the Community Development Director may delay approval of the demolition permit for a period of up to thirty (30) days in order to do the following: 
a.  Make a historical record, both written (history, floor plans and elevations) and photographic, of the Structure and Site. 
b.  Review the condition of the Structure to determine the impact of the demolition upon the neighborhood and the technical feasibility of preservation to the Structure. 
c.  Allow the Historic and Landmark Commission to consider and make recommendations regarding the Application. 
d.  Make the Owner aware of incentives available to rehabilitate historic resources. 
e.  Encourage the property Owner not to demolish the Structure until an attempt can be made to locate either a suitable Use or occupancy to make the preservation of the Structure economically viable or to find a purchaser who is willing to acquire and preserve the Structure. 
2.  Denial. Upon findings of fact by the Historic and Landmark Commission that preservation of the Structure is warranted, leaves the Owner with reasonably beneficial Use of the Property, and is in the best interest of the City, the permit may be denied. 
H.  Appealing Decisions of the Historic and Landmark Commission. Decisions of the Historic and Landmark Commission may be appealed as provided in Chapter 17.12. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.03.170 - Crossing MPMU district. 
A.  Intent and Administration. The Crossing Development is designed as the catalyst for redevelopment of the Central Point Project Area. Since every successful downtown redevelopment area has a grocery component, the Crossing Development includes a regional grocery store to anchor the project's other Retail, commercial, and Multi-Family Uses. 
1.  This Code is adopted in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.03.130 of this Code, regulating the establishment of Mixed-Use districts. This Section, in conjunction with the broader Code regulates Uses, Building forms, architecture, open space, Site Development standards, and parking and access requirements for the Crossing Development. 
2.  The Crossing Master Plan Book of Exhibits (CMPBE), attached hereto and incorporated by reference, is a compilation of exhibits meant to be conceptual in nature unless expressly referenced as regulatory herein. 
3.  Unless stated otherwise in this document, all requirements of this Code apply. 
4.  For the purposes of the Crossing Master Plan, the City Council is the land use authority for Multi-Family Development established as a Conditional Use in this MPMU district. Final approval of Conditional Uses and designs for Multi-Family Development must be preceded by a recommendation from the Planning Commission. 
B.  Subdistrict Designations. Subdistrict boundaries are depicted in the subdistrict designation map of the CMPBE and are incorporated herein as regulatory. 
1.  Anchor Tenant. The Anchor Tenant subdistrict accommodates a large format Retail establishment to anchor the entire Crossing Development. The proposed establishment and associated parking and access must be contained entirely within this subdistrict. 
2.  2100 South Street Frontage. the 2100 South Street Frontage subdistrict allows a variety of Retail, office, and Residential Uses that complement the principal Retail and Residential Uses in the Crossing Development, within an urban-style Multi-Family Building on the corner of Main Street and 2100 South. 
3.  Transit. The Transit subdistrict allows a Multi-Family Development as further conditioned herein. 
4.  State Street Frontage. The State Street Frontage subdistrict allows for Retail Uses within in-line or single-tenant Retail Buildings that are oriented toward State Street. These Buildings will complement the principal Retail and Residential Uses in the Crossing Development, while addressing and activating the State Street corridor. 
C.  Circulation. The Crossing Development shall provide an interior network of pedestrian and vehicular connections to facilitate access among subdistricts and between Uses. 
D.  Open Space and Outdoor Gathering Areas. At a minimum, every Parcel will include open space that is appropriate for the Use, required by the South Salt Lake Municipal Code and integrated into a network of functional open spaces throughout the site. 
E.  Building Types and Design Standards. The Crossing Development is a Mixed-Use district with Building types and design standards required to produce a harmonious mix of commercial Retail/Restaurant and Residential Uses tied to the urban Street network and embracing pedestrian and bike connections to the City and the streetcar. The area shall be organized around Compatible yet eclectic architectural Building statements in terms of character, materials, texture, and color of Buildings. Themed Restaurants, Retail chains, and other franchise-style Structures, signage and designs are prohibited. Themed business Uses must adjust their standard architectural prototype, signage, and designs to be consistent with the district's architectural character. Only the following Building forms and corresponding design standards are allowed within the Crossing Development. 
1.  Anchor Retail. The anchor Retail Building is allowed solely in the Anchor Retail subdistrict and is regulated by the concept plan and elevations described in "Winco Foods Proposed Exterior Design" exhibits of the CMPBE. 
2.  Multi-Family. 
a.  Urban-style Multi-Family Building. The urban-style Multi-Family Building form is allowed in the transit and 2100 South subdistricts. Urban-style Multi-Family Building forms, amenities, and Site Plans shall comply with each provision of the urban-style Multi-Family Building requirements of Chapter 17.07, except: 
i.  No Building shall exceed seventy-five (75) feet in height, as measured from natural grade. 
ii.  In the Transit subdistrict, from former Major Street to State Street, no Building shall not exceed twenty-eight (28) feet in height measured from natural Grade. 
iii.  First level floor-to-floor dimension shall be no less than ten feet. 
iv.  At least seventy-five (75) percent of the units must have either Porches or balconies. 
a)  The average depth of each Porch/balcony must be at least five (5) feet. 
b)  The area of each Porch/balcony must be at least forty (40) square feet. 
v.  Fifty (50) percent of the Street level perimeter of any above-Grade parking garage must be Retail or office Uses permitted in the subdistrict within habitable space that is at least twenty-five (25) deep. 
vi.  For Urban-Style Multi-Family Buildings, the number and character of required amenities from Chapter 17.07 are modified as follows: 
a)  Unit features - 6. 
b)  General amenities - 6. 
c)  Recreation amenities - 2. 
d)  Energy efficiency enhancements - 3. 
b.  Townhome-style Multi-Family Building. 
i.  The Townhome-style Multi-Family Building type is allowed in the Transit subdistrict as an alternative to the urban-style Multi-Family Building form, upon: 
a)  Proof of site-specific soils conditions that render impracticable the construction of an urban-style Multi-Family Building form in the current market; and 
b)  Commencement of project construction prior to October 1, 2018. 
ii.  Townhome-style Multi-Family Building forms, amenities and Site Plans shall comply with each provision in Chapter 17.07, except: 
a)  Any Buildings located between the former Major Street and State Street may not exceed a maximum height of 28' as measured from natural grade. 
b)  First level floor-to-floor dimension shall be no less than ten feet. 
c)  The Common Open Space shall be no less than twenty-five (25) percent. 
iii.  Stoops and Balconies: Each Townhome-style Dwelling Unit must include both a stoop at ground level and a second-floor balcony. The average depth of each balcony must be at least four (4) feet. The area of each balcony must be at least forty (40) square feet. An enclosed stoop may have a wrought-iron or equivalent fence up to four feet in height. All other fencing is prohibited. 
iv.  A "Street-like" presence must be established along both the drive between the Townhome-style Multi-Family Development and the Anchor Tenant subdistrict Parking Area and along former Major Street within the Townhome-style Multi-Family Development. This Street-like presence includes an inviting Streetscape, wide sidewalks, pedestrian Scale lighting, Street furnishings and Landscaping. 
c.  Common Requirements. Regardless of Multi-Family Building form, the following Site-specific requirements and adjustments shall be made for Multi-Family Development: 
i.  Setback requirements for each Multi-Family Development are set forth in Street cross-sections of the CMPBE. 
ii.  Architectural design characteristics and trim treatments are to be consistent with a contemporary form of Building design and details that are expressed in high quality durable materials including wood siding, cementitious fiberboard, brick masonry, split-faced masonry, architecturally finished concrete. Glass, architectural metal panels, or corrugated metal may be used as accent materials and shall not be the dominant materials on any elevation. Stucco, EIFS to be limited to a maximum of ten (10) percent of any Building Elevation. 
iii.  Each elevation of a proposed Building (except a Townhome garage face) shall provide patios, balconies, windows and doors for minimum of twenty (20) percent of the wall area. Windows must be trimmed with finished edges Compatible to the contemporary form of the rest of the elevation. 
iv.  The location of utility metering, electrical cabinets, transformers and other equipment (some of which is existing) must be screened from public view. 
3.  Commercial Retail Buildings. The commercial Retail Building type is allowed in the 2100 South Street and State Street Frontage subdistricts and is designed for small and moderate scale commercial, Retail, and Restaurant Uses that typically accompany large format Retail, housing, and other Uses typically found in Mixed-Use centers. The required Site Plan and Building type provides convenient automobile access from the thoroughfare, while minimizing the negative impacts of Parking Lots upon the pedestrian. Commercial Retail Buildings may be freestanding Structures intended for Use by a single tenant or may be multi-tenant Buildings. Except as modified below and as depicted in the Building Elevation exhibit of the CMPBE, the provisions of this Code, the layout, orientation, Setbacks, and materials intended for Use for commercial Retail Buildings apply: 
a.  Orientation. New commercial Retail Buildings must be oriented to create quality Streetscapes and connected pedestrian pathways within the Development. The anticipated orientation of commercial Retail Buildings is indicated in the "Building Elevation" exhibit of the CMPBE. 
b.  Materials. Primary Materials must consist of glass, integral color CMU, metal panel, tile, metal or cementitious fiber board. EIFS may be used up to seventy-five (75) percent of non-glass areas. An approved palette of materials is referenced in the "Building Elevation" exhibit of the MPBE. 
c.  Primary Façades. Primary Façades on structures using the commercial Retail Building form must incorporate a Building canopy, awning, or similar weather protection along the Building's principal public entrance, projecting at least four (4) feet from the Façade. In addition, Primary Façades incorporate visually prominent Building entrances through the use of at least one of the following features: 
i.  Secondary roof Structures, or a parapet roof with transitions, used to accent the principal public entrance. 
ii.  Outdoor pedestrian features such as seat walls and Landscaping, or permanent landscaped planters with integrated benches. 
iii.  Architectural detailing such as tile, metal, stone, precast or cement board work and moldings integrated into the Building structure. 
d.  Secondary Façades. 
i.  All secondary Façades that face State Street shall include a similar level of architectural detail and treatment consistent with the Primary Façade. Secondary Façade walls must include a window, a functional doorway, or another architectural detail to match the architectural articulation of the Primary Façade. 
ii.  All secondary Façades facing other access roads may include a reduced level of architectural detail and treatment consistent with the Primary Façade. 
e.  Windows. Commercial Retail Buildings shall comply with the following window requirements: 
i.  All Street level windows within twenty (20) feet of the principal pedestrian entrance of a multi-tenant Building shall be visually permeable. 
ii.  Front Façade walls shall include a window or functional general access doorway per the following standard: 
a)  Every twenty-four (24) feet for Structures of forty thousand (40,000) square feet of less in size; and 
b)  Every forty (40) feet for Structures larger than forty thousand (40,000) square feet in size. 
f.  Roofs. Commercial Retail Buildings shall have a flat roof with parapet walls. Parapet walls must feature transitions and articulation to match the architectural articulation of the primary Façade. All rooftop equipment must be screened from view from all Streets, Parking Areas, and drive approaches. 
g.  Side and Rear Loading and Service Areas. Loading, service, and equipment areas must be located in a manner that minimizes their visibility from drive approaches and Streets. Loading, service, and equipment areas must be screened through the use of Architectural Elements and materials that reduce their visibility. 
h.  Drive-through Facilities. Drive through facilities, where permitted as Accessory Uses associated with commercial Retail Buildings, must include a canopy or roof that is architecturally integrated with the Building and that mirrors the roof form of the Primary Structure. Drive-through access is prohibited on Façades that face State Street. 
F.  Crossing Development Sign Standards. Sign locations and details are found in Site Signage exhibit of the MPBE. Signage shall comply with the requirements of the South Salt Lake Municipal Code, except as provided for in this Section and in the exhibits. Signage must be consistent with the theme and unity provisions in the Building design standards. Internally illuminated cabinet Wall Signs are prohibited, except to display a logo or individual alphanumeric characters. 
G.  Crossing Development Landscaping Standards. 
1.  A concept Landscape Plan for the Crossing Development is included in Landscape Area Exhibit of the CMPBE. The Landscape Plan is illustrative in nature. Tree and plant spacing may vary depending on the location of existing utilities and other site conditions. 
2.  Transit District Landscape Standards. All Multi-Family open space areas are to be landscaped with a combination of trees (two-inch minimum caliper), shrubbery, lawn, groundcover, plaza paving, and mulching. Street trees are to be spaced at thirty feet on center on average. Ornamental open space trees are to be planted at a rate of not less than fifteen (15) trees per open space acre. The tree species are to be selected from the following pallet: 
a.  Street trees: 
i.  Green Ash 
ii.  Linden 
iii.  Honey Locust 
iv.  Zelkova 
v.  Tatarian Maple 
b.  Ornamental Open Space Trees: 
i.  Red Bud 
ii.  Crab Apple 
iii.  Flowering Pear 
iv.  Columnar Spruce 
H.  Crossing Development Parking and Access Standards. Parking and access requirements established in Chapter 17.06 apply, unless otherwise provided in specific terms as follows. Pedestrian access to each subdistrict within the Development is required and must include lighted and paved pedestrian pathways connecting Parking Lots, public Rights-of-Way, principal public entrances of each Building, and adjacent public trails and transit. 
1.  Parking for Retail Uses. Parking for Retail Uses must be provided at a standard ratio of four Parking Stalls per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross Floor Area. 
2.  Parking for All Multi-Family Uses. Parking for Multi-Family Uses must be provided in the form of individual garages and on-site Parking Stalls for Townhome-style Multi-Family Buildings and for urban-style Multi-Family Buildings an access-controlled multi-level parking garage incorporated in the overall residential apartment Building. 
a.  Multi-Family Uses require 1.2 Parking Stalls per Dwelling Unit. 
b.  The maximum number of Parking Stalls allowed adjacent to Central Pointe Boulevard shall be 12. These Parking Stalls may be oriented diagonally but must be located on the Multi-Family Development Site. 
3.  Bicycle Amenities. One exterior bicycle parking space is required for each 10 residential units. In the Townhome-style Multi-Family Building, each garage will contain a designated tenant-use bike stall. 
4.  Streetcar Orientation. The Crossing Development must provide Building entrances with direct access to the streetcar station or with direct connectivity to the streetcar station via sidewalks. These areas must be landscaped with paving and planting materials and are to include Site furnishings designed for comfortable use. Benches compliant with the Downtown Furnishings Handbook will be provided on the perimeter of the Crossing Development for public use. Along the perimeter of the Crossing Development landscape areas must be installed and maintained to improve and enhance the Streetscape. The corner of Central Pointe Place and Main Street must be enhanced with a landscaped plaza area and public amenities. 
5.  Pedestrian/Bicycle Rider Connectivity. The following Street improvements are required: wide sidewalks; Street furnishings, Landscaping, a dedicated bike lane located along Central Pointe Place, and all public Rights-of-Way to provide connectivity to community and neighborhood nodes. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.03.180 - East Streetcar Neighborhood (ESN) MPMU district. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the East Streetcar Neighborhood district is to facilitate the redevelopment of the East Streetcar Corridor in a manner compatible with the South Salt Lake City General Plan and the East Streetcar Master Plan. Redevelopment in this corridor will be transit-oriented and will preserve the land values and integrity of surrounding Single-Family neighborhoods. 
Specifically, the East Streetcar Neighborhood district will promote Development that will: 
1.  Protect neighboring homes and property values; 
2.  Be context sensitive through height transitions and Compatible design; 
3.  Improve neighborhood safety and appeal; 
4.  Revitalize or replace neglected properties; 
5.  Increase homeownership of existing homes; 
6.  Build high-quality new housing for a wide spectrum of residents; 
7.  Create a quality urban neighborhood that appeals to new residents; 
8.  Maximize the opportunity to locate housing and jobs adjacent to transit, bike, and pedestrian ways; and 
9.  Complement the City's redevelopment strategy supporting the Development of an urban core in South Salt Lake. 
B.  Uses and Regulations. Land uses and regulations for Buildings and Site Development in the East Streetcar Neighborhood district are established in the East Streetcar Neighborhood Form Based Code. Unless the East Streetcar Neighborhood Form Based Code specifies otherwise, all other City ordinances apply. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.03.190 - Downtown South Salt Lake MPMU district. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the Downtown South Salt Lake district is to facilitate the redevelopment of Downtown South Salt Lake as a regional Mixed-Use center in a manner Compatible with the South Salt Lake City General Plan and the Downtown South Salt Lake Master Plan. Redevelopment in this district is intended to transform the existing Streetscape into a walkable, urban place to serve as a City center of the community. Specifically, the Downtown South Salt Lake district will promote Development that will: 
1.  Act as an icon for South Salt Lake's identity as a City and a destination; 
2.  Function as a destination for urban living; 
3.  Establish a legacy of beautiful civic and public places; 
4.  Provide unmatched access and mobility for all travelers; 
5.  Enable unprecedented and sustained economic growth; 
6.  Support business and job creation; 
7.  Embrace cultural, social, and economic diversity; 
8.  Reduce and eliminate Nonconforming Uses; and 
9.  Complement the City's redevelopment strategy supporting the Development of an urban core in South Salt Lake. 
B.  Uses and Regulations. Land uses and regulations for Buildings and site Development in the Downtown South Salt Lake district are established in the Downtown South Salt Lake Form Based Code and Design Standards. Unless the Downtown South Salt Lake Form Based Code and Design Standards specifies otherwise, all other City ordinances apply. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.03.200 - Riverfront MPMU district. 
Riverfront MPMU Design Guidelines and Regulations subject the Riverfront MPMU to this Title, except as specifically provided herein. The Riverfront MPMU Design Guidelines and Regulations modify City standards, as follows: 
A.  Subdistricts. The Riverfront MPMU consists of the following subdistricts. 
1.  Flex Industrial (R-F/I). 
2.  Multi-Family Garden-Style Building Forms (R-RM1). 
3.  Single-Family Detached Residential (R-R1). 
4.  Elementary School (R-S). 
Figure 1: Subdistricts
 
B.  Uses. Uses within each subdistrict are restricted to only those allowed as specifically designated in this Chapter, 17.03. 
C.  Site Plan and Development Configuration. The Riverfront MPMU Site Plan and Development configuration shall substantially conform to the following: 
Figure 2: Site Plan
 
D.  Street, Pedestrian and Circulation Plan. 
1.  Connection of Blocks, and pedestrian and bicycle paths, Street connectivity and traffic circulation must be Developed and maintained as illustrated in Figure 3. 
2.  Pedestrian and bicycle paths must be Developed and maintained as illustrated in Figure 4. 
Figure 3: Street Blocks, Connectivity and Vehicle Circulation
 
Figure 4: Pedestrian and Bicycle Paths
 
3.  Fine Drive must be Developed and maintained with shared bike and car lanes (shared lane marking or share row) on each side of the Street from 700 West to 900 West. 
4.  An 8-foot wide concrete sidewalk must be provided and maintained along the south side of Fine Drive as the pedestrian component, providing connectivity from 700 West to 900 West. 
5.  Roadway Widths and Design Standard. 
a.  Developer shall install Streets consistent with the Street cross sections described in Figures 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, 5F. 
Figure 5A: Roadway Widths and Design Standards
 
Figure 5B: Roadway Widths and Design Standards
 
Figure 5C: Roadway Widths and Design Standards
 
Figure 5D: Roadway Widths and Design Standards
 
Figure 5E: Roadway Widths and Design Standards
 
Figure 5F: Roadway Widths and Design Standards
 
b.  Required Streets, pedestrian and bicycle path ownership shall be as depicted in Figure 5G. 
Figure 5G: Roadway Ownership
 
E.  Minimum Parking Requirements. 
Riverfront MPMU Subdistrict 	Subdistrict Requirement 
Flex/Industrial (R-F/I) 	1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor space 
Multi-Family Garden-Style Building Forms (R-RM1) 	1.75 per unit (recommended based on the studies) 
School (R-S) 	Elementary through Jr. High: 1 space per teacher and staff plus 1 space per 2 classrooms 
School (R-S) 	High School: 1 space per teacher and staff plus 1 space per 10 students 
Single Family Detached Residential (R-R1) 	2 garage spaces per unit 2 driveway spaces per unit 
 
F.  Open Space. 
1.  Developer and Owners shall comply with the open space and fencing plan as provided in Figure 6A. The figure provides a summary of required open spaces for each subdistrict, together with the percentages of open space relative to the overall acreages within the MPMU. 
Figure 6A: Open Space/Fencing Plan
 
2.  Developer shall provide, and Owners shall maintain, Dedicated trails, open space and open areas within the R-RM1 subdistrict to provide useable gathering and recreational spaces, such as linear parkways and playground areas. 
3.  Developer shall provide, and Owners shall maintain, open spaces along 900 West to provide a greenbelt along the roadway. 
4.  Required ownership of each open space area is designated on Figure 6A. All open space outside of the public Rights-of-Way will be held in private ownership (HOA). All open space within the Right-of-Way shall be Dedicated to public ownership. All open space, both public and private, will be maintained by the governing Owner's association. 
5.  Required Right-of-Way widths are shown on figures 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E. 
6.  Developer shall install, and the Owners shall maintain, all storm water detention systems required on private property within the Riverfront MPMU. 
G.  Fencing. 
1.  Project perimeter fencing is required as shown in Figure 6A. 
2.  Developer shall construct, and Owners shall maintain, an eight-foot high perimeter fence to Buffer the Single-Family residential subdistrict (R-R1) from other adjacent land uses and sub-districts. The developer will work with and the City shall determine the suitable material and fencing type in order to accomplish two objectives: 
a.  The fencing will be constructed to provide an element of Screening/privacy. 
b.  Fencing type, height and materials shall be as indicated in Figure 6A. 
3.  The second type of fencing shall be a four-foot high picket or semi-transparent style. A depiction of this fencing type is illustrated in Figures 6A. Developer shall install, and Owners shall maintain, uniform fencing within each subdistrict. 
4.  Fencing is not allowed within the front set back in the R-R1 subdistrict. 
5.  Chain link fencing is not allowed as a private fencing material within the R-R1 subdistrict. 
H.  Tree Master Plan. Developer shall install, and Owners shall maintain, Landscaping consistent with the Tree Master Plan Figure 6B and the following guidelines. 
Figure 6B: Tree Master Plan
 
1.  Deciduous shade trees shall be a minimum of two-inch caliper. 
2.  Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of eight feet in height. 
3.  Planting will create seasonal interest and species variety, with a mix of deciduous and evergreen trees used where appropriate. 
4.  Provide a proportional and appealing aesthetic. Designed shrub and groundcover plantings will be furnished containing appropriate combinations of woody plants at five-gallon size, and perennials/groundcovers at one-gallon size. 
5.  Where appropriate, (i.e. trail edges or large public spaces, medians, etc.), native grasses/meadow seeding shall be utilized to create a natural, low maintenance appearance. 
6.  Ornamental planting areas may be Developed to provide year-round foliage and seasonal interest. 
I.  District Sign Standards. Only monument style signs are allowed as Detached Signs within the Development as illustrated in Figure 7A. 
Figure 7: Project Signage
 
J.  Attached Building signs shall meet the requirements of Chapter 17.08 of this Code. 
K.  Project Lighting. Figures 8A and 8B provides two section perspectives of required project site lighting, typical Street lighting and typical pedestrian lighting. The sections represent the style of poles and luminaries that are required throughout the entire master-planned Development, creating uniformity throughout. 
Figure 8A: Street Lighting Plan
 
Figure 8B:
 
L.  Pedestrian and Street Lights. 
1.  Lighting fixtures shall be spaced to create continuous and uniform lighting levels. 
2.  Street light poles will not exceed twenty (20) feet in height. 
3.  Street lighting shall be shielded from casting light higher than in a line fifteen (15) degrees below the horizontal plane, as measured from the light sources. 
4.  Lighting shall not be directly cast into adjacent residential windows. 
5.  Lighting color shall be as close to incandescent as possible, including minimum wattage metal halide or color corrected sodium light sources. 
6.  Street light styles and materials must complement the architectural character of the Development. 
M.  Building Lighting. 
1.  Lighting shall be integrated into the architectural design to creatively illuminate pedestrian areas and highlight Building elements. 
2.  Full cutoff or fully shielded light fixtures shall be used in order to avoid light being directed upwards. 
3.  Lighting shall integrate with Retail signage, storefront windows, covered Parking Structures, and other Building elements to enhance visual interest. 
4.  Lighting shall limit glare and minimizing spill light beyond the property boundary. 
5.  Lighting within Parking Lots (particularly within the R-RM1 subdistrict) shall consist of one, or a combination of both, pedestrian lighting and surface mounted lighting. Where Parking Lots are narrow (one hundred twenty (120) to one hundred fifty (150) feet wide) lighting must be directed toward the interior of the Parking Lot from the perimeter to minimize light trespass on adjacent Uses. 
N.  Street Furniture. 
1.  Developer shall install, and Owners shall maintain Street furniture consistent with the style and materials depicted in Figure 9. 
2.  All Street furniture benches shall contain an intermediate arm rest to discourage individuals from sleeping on them. 
Figure 9: Street Furniture
 
O.  Covered Parking (R-RM1). Covered parking is required within the RM1 subdistrict. Two Structure types as shown on Figure 9 (single column covered Parking Structures and double column covered Parking Structures) are permitted within this subdistrict. 
Figure 10: Covered Parking Structures
 
P.  Design Approval Process. Unless otherwise specified in the City Code, the Community Development Department will review and approve Site Plans and Building Elevations in accordance with enacted land-use regulations. In the event that the developer and the Community Development Department dispute the design standards in this plan, the Community Development Director may certify Site Plans and Building Elevations for design review by the Planning Commission. 
Q.  Design Standards Modifications. The following provisions modify conflicting Design Standards in Chapter 17.07 within the Riverfront MPMU: 
1.  Compatibility. Building forms, within the same land use subdistrict, that front across the Street from one another shall be similar in Scale, form, or massing, to the maximum extent possible. 
a.  For Single Family Buildings: 
i.  Structures on Corner Lots shall maintain consistent average front Setbacks with Buildings on either side, to the maximum extent possible. 
ii.  Infill Development (for subsequent Development) shall utilize the same Building form as Development on either side, to the maximum extent. possible. 
iii.  Each roof pitch shall be no less than 4:12. 
iv.  Exterior materials: 
a)  Homes shall use Hardie Board on all sides. 
b)  Homes shall not include stucco. 
c)  The first floor of each road-facing surface shall include two materials. 
v.  Buildings using this form shall be no more than two stories and no higher than thirty-five (35) feet measured from the Grade to the peak of the roof, or flat roofed structures, the top of the parapet. 
b.  For Garden-style Multi-Family Buildings: The garden-style Multi-Family Building includes residential Dwelling Units arranged in a Building in a stacked configuration where units are located side-by-side and one atop another and are served by one or more stairways. The R-RM1 Building design and color scheme shall substantially conform with Figure 11: 
Figure 11: Multi-Family Garden Style Apartments
 
i.  Materials. 
a)  Exterior Building walls of structures using the garden-style Multi-Family Building form shall be composed of one or more of the following Primary Materials: wood clapboard, cementitious fiber board, wood board and batten, wood siding, brick, stone, split-faced masonry bock, one-coat stucco system, architectural metal panels, or similar material. EIFS, glass, smooth-faced masonry block, or wavy corrugated metal may be used as accent materials only and shall not be the Primary Material used on any exterior. 
b)  When stucco is used as a primary exterior Building material, EIFS may not also be used as an accent material. Likewise, if EIFS is used as a primary exterior Building material, stucco may not be used as an accent material. 
ii.  Exterior Staircases and Entry Features. Up to one exterior staircase per seventy (70) feet of Façade is allowed to service the units in each garden-style Multi-Family Building. Exterior staircases shall be incorporated into an exterior entry that is a prominent, architectural focal point directing pedestrians into the Building. The feature shall relate to the architecture of the structure. Exterior entries shall feature a secondary roof structure that is consistent or complementary with the primary roof form. Staircases shall be incorporated according to the following standards: 
a)  Staircases may extend from the Primary Structure. Projected staircases require a minimum three-foot Façade projection. 
b)  Staircases may be recessed from the Primary Façade. Staircases shall be recessed at least three (3) feet from the Primary Façade. 
c)  All exterior entries shall be designed to allow for natural light penetration. 
iii.  Porches, Balconies, and Private Patios. 
a)  Every Dwelling Unit in a garden-style Multi-Family Building that faces a Public Street, a perimeter Street, primary internal Street, park, or Common Open Space shall have one of the following: a Porch, balcony, or private patio. Porches, balconies, and patios shall be a minimum of fifty-eight (58) square feet in area and a minimum of five (5) feet in depth. 
b)  Porches, balconies, and private patios will have railings that consist of materials other than vinyl, such as powder coated steel, or other upgraded material(s). 
iv.  Roofs. All roof vents, pipes, Antennae, satellite dishes, and other roof penetrations and equipment (except chimneys) shall configured to have a minimum visual impact as seen from an adjacent Street, to the extent possible. 
v.  Façades. 
a)  All elevations of structures using the garden-style Multi-Family Building form visible from the Street shall provide doors, Porches, balconies, common staircase entries, or windows in the following amounts: 
I.  A minimum of forty (40) percent of front elevations; and 
II.  A minimum of twenty-three (23) percent of side and rear Building Elevations. 
b)  Façades of Structures using the garden-style Multi-Family Building form facing Streets or containing the Primary Façade(s) to Dwellings shall provide the following design features for each residential unit fronting onto a Street; 
I.  Projections or recesses in the Façade lane every forty-five (45) feet. 
II.  Projections or recesses must have a minimum depth of two feet; 
vi.  Architectural Variability. Architectural Variability Standards must be used from the columns of the following table as indicated. Up to one of the items in the left column may be substituted for one of the items in the right column. 
Required
Architectural
Variability
Standards 
(must choose one) 	Optional Architectural
Variability Standards 
(must choose three) 
The use of different exterior materials or colors 	Variations in the width of the front Façade by two feet or more 
Variation in the location and proportion of front Porches 	Variation of the placement or size of windows or doors on the front Façade 
Variation in trim or quoins 	Variation in rooflines pitches, or the use of dormers 
	Variation in the location or proportion of garages and garage doors 
	* Combining of materials in different configuration. 
 
* Materials for the same or similar elevation shall be combined in different configurations and shall differ in style (such as horizontal siding, shingles, flat panels, and board and batten) and/or differ in locations (horizontal siding at the second floor over stucco at the first floor, or board and batten siding over horizontal siding). 
vii.  Meter and Equipment Placement. Wall-mounted and ground-based meters, HVAC, and utility equipment serving a garden-style Multi-Family Building shall be: 
a)  Screened from view, and 
b)  Placed in close proximity to one another. 
viii.  Required Amenities for Multi-Family Residential Buildings. Buildings using the Townhome-style or garden-style Multi-Family form shall include the following amenities. 
a)  A common social gathering area of at least four hundred (400) square feet for each fifty (50) units, or portion thereof, with the Building or Development. 
b)  Items from the unit features section, general amenities section, recreation amenities section, energy efficiency enhancements section described in the table below and according to the number of items identified for each Building form. 
c)  Table of Required Amenities: 
Unit Features 	General Amenities 	Recreation Amenities 	Energy Efficiency
Enhancements 
Must Choose 9 Items 	Must Choose 6 Items 	Must Choose 6 Items 	Must Choose 3 Items 
Individual garages for at least 50 percent of units 	Exterior social area - at least 400 square feet 	Pool - at least 400 square feet 	Compliance with Energy Star new homes standard for Buildings three stories or fewer 
Washer/dryer 
connections 	Project security— 
Automated 
gate or guard 	Internal fitness facilities 	Compliance with Energy Star Multi- 
Family high-rise program for Buildings four stories or greater 
Private Porches, patio, or balcony - at least 70 square feet 	Enclosed 
parking 	Secured, 
programmed 
children's 
play areas 	Installation of photovoltaic panels, wind turbines, or other electric generating 
renewable energy source to provide at 
least 20 percent of the project's 
estimated electricity demand. 
Upgraded floor coverings, in place of or in addition to carpet 	Secured, 
enclosed storage 
units 	Hot tub 	Design and install required connections for the installation of PV or solar hot water system in the future. 
Visitability features for at least 10 percent of units 	Public transit Use incentive 	Community 
garden 	Electric vehicle charging station 
Nine-foot ceilings for each unit 	Offering of 1 permanent on-site social 
activities: 	Perimeter trail 	Participation in a recycling program as part of a rental agreement or HOA 
Enhanced soundproofing 	• Theatre room 	Sport court 	Installation of tankless hot water systems 
Solid doors throughout unit 	• Business room 	Park benches 	Demonstrated compliance with any of the criteria listed in the site 
improvements, water conservation, or energy efficiency 
sections of the 2011 Enterprise 
Green Communities Criteria. 
Vaulted ceilings on the top floor 	• Club room 	Pavilion 	LED lighting in Building common areas (not including site common areas) 
Washer and dryers in each unit 	• Kids play room 	Pet stations 	Provide Energy star appliances 
Triple play package 	Library, office, or meeting 
ofacilities 	BBQ areas 	
Bike storage/utility closest for each unit 		Child splash pad 	
 
c.  For Flex/Industrial Buildings. The design and color scheme of all Buildings in the Flex/Industrial subdistrict shall substantially conform with Figure 12A and 12B: 
Figure 12A Flex Industrial:
 
Figure 12B: Flex Industrial
 
i.  Orientation. 
a)  Developments composed of a single Structure using the Flex/Industrial Building form shall be oriented such that the Primary Façade faces the Street from which the Building derives its Street address. However, in order to create functional truck loading areas within the limits of the sub-district, Primary Façades may also face customer/Public Parking Lots that have convenient and direct access to the primary Street. 
b)  Development with multiple structures using the Flex/Industrial Building form shall be configured to conceal operations from off-site views directly adjacent to residential Dwellings. 
c)  Accessory Structures or Uses shall be in the rear yard. 
d)  Buildings that have end sections fronting along Fine Drive and 3655 South must have a "store front wrap around" to project the look and feel of a store front appearance. 
e)  Buildings that have end sections fronting along Fine Drive must also incorporate wing walls that extend from the Building to edge of the drive entrance. This will provide Screening of the truck loading docks from the Street. The wing walls must be at least six (6) feet in Height and consist of a material other than wood, vinyl, stucco, or other material that is prone to graffiti vandalism. Wing wall materials shall be composed of concrete, or other material(s) that are complementary to and/or have similar architectural appearance to the Buildings. Wings walls must also be supplemented and maintained with appropriate Landscaping. 
ii.  Architectural Fronts. 
a)  Architectural fronts shall be clearly demarcated through signage, Architectural Elements, or other features, and Building Façades containing customer entrances should be oriented towards the Street from which the Structure derives its Street address when possible. 
b)  Any office portion of a Structure using the Flex/Industrial Building form shall utilize human-Scale design along with a variety of architectural detail to break up large walls or enhance visual quality. 
iii.  Materials. 
a)  Exterior Building materials shall be continued to the Grade on any elevation. 
b)  All exterior wall of a Structure using the Flex/Industrial Building form shall be clad with materials that are durable, economically-maintained, and of a quality that will retain their appearance over time, including, but not limited to: 
I.  Natural or synthetic stone; 
II.  Brick; 
III.  Stucco; 
IV.  Painted, textured, or glazed concrete masonry units; 
V.  High-quality pre-stressed concert systems; 
VI.  Float finish EIFS; 
VII.  Glass; or 
VIII.  Painted metal siding as an accent material. 
iv.  Roofs. Roof-based mechanical equipment shall be screened from Streets and off-site views. 
v.  Compatibility with Single-Family Development: 
a)  Restrict all access to residential Streets. 
b)  Locate service and loading areas as far from Single-Family residential subdistricts as possible. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.03.210 - Granite MPMU district—Townhome subdistrict. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the Townhome subdistrict of the Granite MPMU district is to receive Residential Density from the entire historic Granite High School site within the Granite Master Planned Mixed-Use Development and then concentrate and supplement the existing Residential Density to form a well-planned, condominiumized Townhome community and facilitate the construction and operation of a 29,500 square-foot Library within the companion Library subdistrict. 
Figure 1 — Granite MPMU:
 
B.  Uses. In the Townhome subdistrict, the Buildings, Structures and land shall not be occupied, Used, or Developed except in accordance with the Uses allowed in the Townhome subdistrict found in this Chapter. 
C.  Building and Site Development. In addition to the design standards and review requirements established for this District in Chapter 17.07 of this Code, all Development within the Townhome subdistrict must meet the following minimum standards: 
1.  Minimum Development area: six (6) contiguous acres; 
2.  Minimum Lot width at Street Frontage: 400 feet; 
3.  No Townhome unit or occupied Structure shall be less than 20 feet in width; 
4.  Maximum Building Height: 42 feet; 
5.  Maximum Density: up to 113 Townhome Condominium units, plus common area amenities; 
6.  The proposed Development must include an eight (8) foot Park Strip and a ten (10) foot sidewalk along the 3300 South Right-of-Way: 
 
7.  The project Site Plan and Development must connect each separate Building with internal concrete walkways to provide safe and convenient pedestrian access to common areas and amenities. The width of internal walkways that are adjacent to Parking Stalls shall be no less than five (5) feet. The width of internal walkways that are not adjacent to Parking Stalls shall be no less than four (4) feet. 
8.  Minimum Required Open Space: 20%. Open Space includes hardscape such as sidewalk, plazas, Courtyards, landscaped detention pond, pools, spa, pool deck, and interior spaces available to residents as common area such as a clubhouse; 
9.  Each unit must include enhanced sound attenuation and sound mitigation construction; 
10.  Nine (9) foot ceilings are required throughout the interiors of each unit; 
11.  Upgraded cabinets, stone or quartz countertops, and upgraded cabinet, window, and door hardware are required throughout each unit. At a minimum, such upgrades shall persist within each unit, through the first year of occupancy of each unit; 
12.  A tot lot, common area pool and spa, BBQ area, clubhouse and exercise facility are required common project amenities; 
13.  Elevations. The Townhomes will be constructed in general conformity with the concept designs, front door entrances, and identifiable transitions, depicted below: 
 
a.  Each corner unit on Buildings facing 3300 South and the Library must have at least 4' x 12' of deck space; 
b.  Each designated end unit must have at least 4' x 15' of patio space that wraps around the corner of the unit and includes a pony wall for privacy; 
c.  In addition to the exceptions to Setbacks located in Chapter 17.07.030(C), upper floor balconies may encroach into the Front Yard Setback a maximum of five feet, if each encroaching balcony is at least 10 feet above finished grade; 
d.  Designated end units are depicted in red below: 
 
14.  To implement the Granite MPMU Development, Development within both subdistricts must include cross-access easements. As planned, the Townhome subdistrict shall provide two points of ingress/egress from 3300 South. The westernmost point of ingress/egress shall include of a minimum paved public safety vehicle "pull out" from 3300 South that is at least 26 feet wide and at least 60 feet long. If two points of ingress/egress from 3300 South are provided for the Townhome subdistrict, the Townhome subdistrict shall provide paved emergency egress, at least 26 feet in width, from the Library subdistrict through the Townhome subdistrict. The emergency access may be gated in coordination with South Salt Lake City. If the Townhome subdistrict is unable to gain UDOT approval for two points of ingress/egress into the Development from 3300 South, it shall Develop a second point of ingress/egress through the Library subdistrict to 500 East. The second point of ingress/egress may not be gated; 
15.  Each Building within the Townhome subdistrict shall share the same architectural theme, including, but not limited to colors, materials, rooflines, and entries; 
16.  At a minimum, the first floor of each Townhome shall be brick or stone. No vinyl or aluminum siding is allowed on any exterior portion of any Townhome; 
17.  Stucco may be allowed on structures so long as the stucco meets the following maximum percentages: Front elevation (20%); Side elevation (45%); Rear elevation (36%); and 
18.  Townhome Buildings and required amenities may be configured substantially as depicted below: 
 
19.  All Townhomes shall be subdivided into individual Condominium units prior to issue of a certificate of occupancy. 
20.  Front Yard Park Strip Landscaping is required for a minimum depth of 8 feet. 
D.  Road and Public Access Easements Cross Sections: 
1.  The required cross section of 3300 South UDOT Right-of-Way and SSLC public access easement and improvements is depicted below: 
 
a.  UDOT has sole authority to regulate the specifications for travel lanes within the UDOT right-of-way; and 
b.  The foregoing cross-section notwithstanding, at any time prior to the issuance of the first Certificate of Occupancy within any subdistrict, the owners or its designees within the Granite MPMU Development may elect to: 
i.  Improve the 2.5' gap between the edge of pavement and the southern edge of the 3300 South UDOT ROW, from 500 East to the easternmost edge of the Granite MPMU Development, to the reasonable satisfaction of the City Engineer; and 
ii.  Realign and improve: 
(A)  The 10' wide concrete sidewalk from the southern edge of the SSLC public access and Landscaping easement to the southern edge of the 3300 South UDOT ROW, along the entire length of the UDOT ROW in the Granite MPMU Development; and 
(B)  The 8' wide landscaped Park Strip from the northern edge of the SSLC public access and Landscaping easement to the southern edge of the 10' wide concrete sidewalk, along the entire length of the UDOT ROW in the Granite MPMU Development. 
c.  The owners' election to realign the public sidewalk and Landscaping within the City's public access and Landscaping easement shall not compromise the City's right to align public improvements within the easement as the City may later determine is appropriate. 
2.  Private Roads: The required cross section of private roads within the subdistrict is depicted below: 
 
E.  Storm water management. Site Development must include comprehensive storm water management, including the public Dedication and improvement of public storm water facilities within the subdistrict. 
F.  Parking. The Townhome subdistrict shall meet the following parking requirements: 
1.  For each three (3) bedroom unit—two and one half (2.5) stalls 
2.  For each two (2) bedroom unit—two (2.0) stalls 
3.  Guest parking for each unit—one half (0.5) stalls 
4.  Driveways and garages shall count towards total parking requirements. 
G.  Signage. A monument Sign of up to five (5) feet in height and ten (10) feet in width shall be permitted at each public entrance into the project. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.03.220 - Granite MPMU district—Library subdistrict. 
A.  Purpose. The sole purpose of the Library subdistrict of the Granite MPMU district is to effect the redevelopment of a portion of the historic Granite High School site within the Granite Master Planned Mixed-Use Development into a Library at the corner of 3300 South and 500 East. 
Figure 1: Granite MPMU
 
B.  Uses. In the Library subdistrict, the Buildings, Structures or land shall not be occupied, Used, or Developed except in accordance with the adopted Uses permitted for the subdistrict found in this Chapter. The Library shall be the Primary Use. All other allowed Uses within the district are accessory to the Primary Use. 
C.  Buildings and site Development regulations. In addition to the design standards and review requirements established for this district in Chapter 17.07, all Development within the subdistrict must meet the following minimum standards: 
1.  Minimum contiguous Development area: 4.0 acres; 
2.  Minimum open space required: 30%. Open space includes hardscape such as sidewalk, plazas, and Courtyards; 
3.  A gateway emphasis is required at the corner of 3300 South and 500 East and must include a combination of Landscaping, public art, pedestrian lighting, plaza space, and signage; 
4.  Minimum Floor Area: 29,500 square feet; 
5.  Minimum Lot width at Street Frontage: 300 feet; 
6.  Maximum Building Height: 42 feet; 
7.  Minimum Building Height: 20 feet; 
8.  Architectural design must address the historic character of the site and incorporate familiar design features of the Granite High School architecture and shall display Granite High School Memorabilia that the Granite High School Alumni Association entrusted to the City of South Salt Lake; 
9.  The Building corner facing 3300 South 500 East shall include an architecturally prominent feature; 
10.  Exterior Materials: Primary Materials shall be brick, integral color CMU, stone or marble, EIFS, metal, or composites. Stucco may be used on the Façades as a Secondary Material but may not exceed 20% of any Façade; 
11.  Windows and Doorways: 
a.  At least 40 percent of each Façade along 3300 South and 500 East shall be occupied by windows and glass doorways; and 
b.  All Street-level windows shall have a minimum transparency of 70 percent, measured between two (2) feet and eight (8) feet above Grade. Upper Story windows shall be at least 25 percent transparent. 
i.  All windows along 3300 South and 500 East shall incorporate mullions and/or transoms and at least two of the following standards: 
(a)  Trim or molding at least four (4) inches in width; 
(b)  Canopies or overhangs, proportional to the size of the window; 
(c)  Recessed inset from the Primary Façade by at least two (2) inches; 
12.  Primary Façades. Primary Façades shall incorporate the following design elements: 
a.  Variations in roof form and parapet heights; 
b.  Wall recesses or projections of a minimum depth of two (2) feet at least every 40 feet; 
c.  Distinct changes in texture and color of wall surfaces; 
d.  Vertical accents or focal points; 
e.  All Primary Façades shall incorporate a significant Building arcade or vestibule. In addition, Primary Façades must incorporate visually prominent Building entrances through the use of the following features: 
i.  Outdoor pedestrian features such as seat walls and Landscaping, or permanent landscaped planters with integrated benches; 
ii.  Architectural details such as tile, stone, and moldings shall be integrated into the Building structure with wall plane variation to enhance the Building Façade and to clearly identify each entry location; 
13.  Drive-through drop-off facilities are prohibited along any side with Public Street Frontage; 
14.  Pedestrian Amenities: 
 
a.  At a minimum, the Development must include an 8-foot Park Strip along 3300 South and along 500 East; 
b.  The Development must include 10-foot sidewalks along 3300 South and 500 East; 
c.  The Library must connect to Parking Areas with concrete walkways of no less than five (5) feet in width; 
d.  To the maximum extent possible, all Development activity shall protect existing mature trees on 3300 South and 500 East. If, during construction, the City determines that any trees must be removed, the Applicant shall remove and replace any missing Street trees with trees of a minimum 4" caliper. Tree spacing and species shall meet City requirements; 
e.  Parking and loading are prohibited between the Building and 3300 South and between the Building and 500 East; 
f.  Development shall include an improved, 10-foot wide concrete or asphalt fitness trail around the perimeter of the property; 
 
g.  All Development shall include improved pedestrian access paths and cross-access easements between the Townhome and Library subdistricts: 
 
h.  Pedestrian and overhead lighting that meets the character district standards of the South Salt Lake Lighting Master Plan shall be installed along 500 East and 3300 South; and 
i.  The South Property Line shall include a tree-lined, landscaped Buffer of at least five (5) feet in width and a paved sidewalk width of at least ten (10) feet. 
15.  The design must achieve a nationally adopted standard for sustainable Building construction. 
16.  Access from 500 East shall be located no less than 300 feet from the 3300 South Right-of-Way. 
D.  Road and Public Access Easement Cross Sections: 
1.  3300 South UDOT Right-of-Way and required cross section of SSLC public access easement and improvements: 
 
a.  UDOT has sole authority to regulate the specifications for travel lanes within the UDOT right-of-way; and 
b.  The foregoing cross-section notwithstanding, at any time prior to the issuance of the first Certificate of Occupancy within any subdistrict, the owners or its designees within the Granite MPMU Development may elect to: 
i.  Improve the 2.5' gap between the edge of pavement and the southern edge of the 3300 South UDOT ROW, from 500 East to the easternmost edge of the Granite MPMU Development, to the reasonable satisfaction of the City Engineer; and 
ii.  Realign and improve: 
(A)  The 10' wide concrete sidewalk from the southern edge of the SSLC public access and Landscaping easement to the southern edge of the 3300 South UDOT ROW, along the entire length of the UDOT ROW in the Granite MPMU Development; and 
(B)  The 8' wide landscaped park strip from the northern edge of the SSLC public access and Landscaping easement to the southern edge of the 10' wide concrete sidewalk, along the entire length of the UDOT ROW in the Granite MPMU Development. 
c.  The owners' election to realign the public sidewalk and Landscaping within the City's public access and Landscaping easement shall not compromise the City's right to align public improvements within the easement as the City may later determine is appropriate. 
2.  500 East Right-of-Way and required SSLC public access easement and improvement 
 
* UDOT has sole authority to regulate the specifications for travel lanes within the UDOT right-of-way. 
E.  Storm water management. Site Development must include comprehensive storm water management, including the public Dedication and improvement of public storm water facilities within the district. 
F.  Parking. The following parking requirements apply: 
1.  The base parking requirement shall be 1 stall for every 150 gross square feet of Building. 
2.  A reduction of the parking footprint up to 40% is allowed if measures are provided to encourage carpooling, bike, and pedestrian use. These include providing secure bike racks, pedestrian connections from adjacent properties through the site, and preferred parking for carpools for 5% of the total Parking Stalls after reductions are made from the base ratios. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.03.220 - Granite Lofts Multi-Family Townhome (GLT) district. 
A.  Uses. Uses within this district are described in this Chapter. 
B.  Density. Project Density is limited to residential Development at up to seventeen (17) units per acre in the configuration designated in Subsection C, Site Plan and Unit Configuration. 
C.  Site Plan and Unit Configuration. Upon Subdivision, the project Site Plan and unit configuration shall be: 
 
D.  Development Design Regulations. In addition to Chapter 17.07, the following regulations apply: 
1.  Minimum project area is 1.6 acres; 
2.  The project may not include more than nine Townhome Buildings; 
3.  Only units one through twelve (12) as depicted above may include rooftop access or use; 
4.  Offsite noise projected from rooftop access or use is prohibited from 10:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.; and 
5.  All units must have enhanced sound attenuation from Street noise and from noise between units. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.03.230 - Nature Center Pilot Project (NCPP) Overlay District. 
A.  Purpose. The Nature Center Pilot Project (NCPP) Overlay District provides Development standards for a one-half acre Nature Center within the City, as an interim component of an anticipated, larger, conceptual Nature Center anticipated for future legislative action. 
B.  Establishment. The NCPP Overlay District is established to: 
1.  Provide a tailored Development, design, and Use framework appropriate for a new Nature Center proposed within the City; 
2.  Specifically support and increase the Use, awareness, understanding, appreciation, and stewardship of the natural environment within the City; and 
3.  Facilitate the investment of future legislative appropriations in a manner consistent with state-level directives. 
C.  Applicability. Any Development or Change of Use shall comply with the provisions of this Code. 
D.  Uses. A single Nature Center, of no more than one-half acre, shall be the only Primary Use allowed. 
1.  The Nature Center shall include all of the following: 
a.  A visitor education center; 
b.  Landscaping featuring native, xeric plantings; 
c.  Secured restroom facilities; and 
d.  At least one Specialty Recreational Installation. 
2.  The Nature Center may include any of the following accessory components: 
a.  Protected open space, wildlife sanctuary, or nature preserve; 
b.  Educational exhibits, displays, or dioramas; 
c.  A shade pavilion/plaza; 
d.  Nature Center programming; and 
e.  Early childhood education. 
E.  Standards. 
1.  Operator/manager. The Nature Center shall be operated and managed by a single operating/managing entity for the duration of the NCPP Overlay District. 
2.  No entity other than the Applicant may be substituted for the operator/manager of the Nature Center. 
3.  The Nature Center site: 
a.  The gross project area of the NCPP Overlay District shall not exceed one-half acre, exclusive of parking and generally shall be configured as depicted below: 
 
4.  Nature Center Operations: 
a.  The Nature Center may operate for a maximum of fifteen (15) hours per day, seven (7) days per week—adjusted seasonally to ensure opening occurs during daylight and closure occurs before dark. 
b.  The Nature Center may operate for additional evening hours up to eight (8) times per month, in which cases Nature Center hours may be extended by a maximum of three (3) hours per day, but in no case later than 10:00 p.m. 
5.  Programming. 
a.  The Nature Center shall provide staff-directed experiences and staff-hosted group events for up to 200 individuals at a time (with additional temporary infrastructure, as the City and circumstances require). 
b.  The visitor education center and any Specialty Recreational Installations may include only de minimis Retail sales of concessions and educational materials incidental to the Primary or Accessory Uses permitted onsite. 
c.  Specialty Recreational Installations shall be operated and staffed during all regular open hours and shall exclusively be operated and managed by the Applicant's staff, which may be supplemented by trained volunteers. 
6.  Security and management. In addition to complying with Crime Prevention through Environmental Design (CPTED) principles, any Use shall incorporate plenary operation and management practices to prevent and mitigate adverse onsite behavioral issues, including: 
a.  The operator/manager shall employ private security personnel to ensure that the Nature Center offers the general public welcoming and engaging spaces and that it is not occupied during off-hours. 
b.  Staff. The Nature Center operator/manager shall have at least one (1) of its staff members onsite during operating hours. Only the Nature Center operator/manager's staff or volunteers may use onsite office space. 
c.  Lighting. The Nature Center shall submit a photometric study for the City's review and evaluation. The Nature Center lighting shall feature strategically located light fixtures across the site to maximize dark-sky compliant night-time visibility and illuminated exterior surfaces of the visitor education center, restroom facilities, and Specialty Recreational Installation Accessory Structures. 
d.  Cameras. The Nature Center shall direct appropriate video camera surveillance onto each Building within the site. The operator/manager shall continuously record activity in the vicinity of each Building and its immediate surrounding area to deter vandalism and ensure the protection of the Nature Center property and shall preserve such recordings for a minimum of 30 days. 
e.  Electrical outlets. All power outlets shall be located inside a Structure, to the extent possible; any power outlets located outside shall employ locking covers and shall remain locked when not in use by Nature Center staff or volunteers. 
f.  Fencing and foliage. The Nature Center site shall install and enclose its perimeter with eight-foot (8') climb-deterrent, black, PVC-coated, welded-wire mesh fencing. The fence shall incorporate two (2) gated entry points: one near the Parking Lot and the other near the Jordan River Parkway. These gated entry points shall match the height of the fence and may be open only during permitted operating hours. 
g.  Restroom facilities. Only Nature Center staff and guests shall have access to restrooms; keyed locks or a keypad access control system shall restrict access. 
h.  Anti-graffiti. The Applicant shall apply an anti-graffiti coating on all vertical, exterior surfaces within five (5) feet of the perimeter fence. The Applicant shall promptly remove any graffiti within the NCPP Overlay District. 
i.  Site management. The Nature Center operator/manager shall contract with a licensed and bonded private security company to conduct at least two (2) site visits to the Nature Center per night, at random hours. The operator/manager shall contract with a licensed and bonded private security company, as needed, to provide security for large events and other identified security needs. The operator/manager shall ensure all Structures are reasonably secured against unauthorized access. 
F.  Design and Construction. The following Design Guidelines and construction requirements apply: 
1.  Grading and drainage. Site Development shall be designed and graded to meet MS4 permit standards, all to the City's Engineering standards. 
2.  Architectural standards. 
a.  One (1) visitor education center is permitted and required onsite. 
b.  The visitor education center may have a maximum Gross Floor Area of 1,000 square feet—exclusive of any exterior deck or Porch area—and may feature a learning area, conference room, and office space. 
c.  The visitor education center may be prefabricated and must be affixed to a foundation. 
d.  The visitor education center Structure shall feature a wrap-around deck and entry Porch with a wood and metal railing. The deck and Porch shall feature an overhead timber trellis and an ADA access ramp. 
e.  The primary cladding of the visitor education center shall be wood, and the roofing shall be finished with asphalt shingles. 
i.  The roof shall feature a prefinished metal fascia and coordinating deck-base surround. 
ii.  The glass-to-wall ratio for the Structure shall be at least 15% on the side and rear aspects and 30% on the front aspect of the structure. 
iii.  The visitor education center may have a maximum height of sixteen and one-half feet (16.5'). 
f.  Accessory Structures. 
i.  Structures serving an appropriate Accessory Use under Subsection (D) may be prefabricated—including up to one (1) container structure—or may be constructed onsite. 
ii.  All Accessory Structures shall be affixed to a foundation, as applicable. 
iii.  Any Accessory Structure built from a container Structure shall only be used for indoor storage related to a bicycle-share/rental Specialty Recreational Installation and services in support of the bicycle-share/rental operation. 
iv.  A bicycle-share/rental Specialty Recreational Installation Structure shall: 
a)  Have a maximum Gross Floor Area of 400 square feet, exclusive of any exterior bicycle parking racks. 
b)  Be painted one solid color but may feature nature themed murals on its long sides. 
v.  One (1) Specialty Recreational Installation pavilion/plaza designed primarily to provide shade: 
a)  May be constructed from timber trellis; 
b)  May feature photovoltaic solar collection panels; and 
c)  Shall have a maximum height of eleven feet (11'). 
vi.  No Specialty Recreational Installations may be constructed in addition to the container Structure for the bicycle-share/rental Structure and the shade pavilion/plaza. 
g.  Restroom facilities. The Nature Center shall include restroom facilities with a maximum Gross Floor Area of 200 square feet and a maximum height of ten feet (10'). 
i.  Any restroom facility exterior surfaces shall compliment the exterior finishes of the visitor education center Primary Structure. 
ii.  Any restroom facility shall be ADA accessible and shall feature an ADA-compliant drinking fountain on the facility's exterior. 
h.  Central plaza space. The hardscaped elements of a central plaza space within the Nature Center shall be constructed of a pervious paving system. 
3.  Landscape and Signage. 
a.  The Nature Center may feature one (1) monument sign, with a maximum height of four (4) feet and maximum area of 50 square feet, and one (1) Wall Sign that is limited to 5% of the front Façade area, with alphanumeric character up to three (3) feet in height. 
b.  Any Development shall preserve all existing trees within the site and shall locate each existing tree on an ALTA survey provided to the City during Design and Engineering review before any Building or Grading Permit shall issue for the project. 
c.  Low shrubs and flowers may be planted surrounding the site fencing to the extent such plantings are compatible with CPTED principles. 
d.  Development shall incorporate native, xeric plantings into its landscape. 
e.  The Landscape Plan may include immovable seating areas throughout the site. 
4.  Waste containers. All waste containers shall be emptied regularly into aggregate collection containers to prevent onsite litter and unsightly collection of discarded items. Aggregate collection containers shall be located in screened areas, away from public view. 
G.  Duration or Conversion. The NCPP Overlay District shall expire four (4) years from May 8, 2019. Upon expiration of this pilot project Overlay District, the Property Owner shall restore the Nature Center site to a state substantially the same as it was on the date of the enactment of the district. The Property Owner shall not be required to restore the site to a state substantially the same as at the enactment of the district if the site has been permanently rezoned for a Nature Center (i.e. Nature Center Phase II) prior to the NCPP Overlay District's expiration. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.03.240 - South Salt Lake City Police Department (SSLC-PD) Overlay District. 
A.  Purpose. The South Salt Lake City Police Department (SSLC-PD) Overlay District provides Development standards for specific Accessory Structures necessary for safe City Police Department operations. 
B.  Establishment. The SSLC-PD Overlay District is established to: 
1.  To support appropriate addition of Accessory Structures to City Police Department sites to make additions Compatible with the SSLC Police Department Primary Use and Structures surrounding the site; 
2.  To minimize human interface with hazardous, contaminant, or otherwise unsafe conditions or materials; and 
3.  To facilitate daily SSLC Police Department operations. 
C.  Applicability. A property Owner shall follow the provisions of this Section when Developing or changing the Use of property within the district. 
D.  Uses. In the SSLC-PD Overlay District, Uses, Buildings, Structures or land shall only be used or Developed in a nature accessory to the Primary Use of the subject property. 
E.  Standards. Specific standards for the SSLC-PD Overlay District are as follows: 
1.  Permissible Accessory Structure: One Accessory Structure is allowed in the district to support an Accessory Use to (a) minimize SSLC Police Department personnel interface with hazardous, contaminant, or otherwise unsafe conditions or materials; and (b) facilitate daily SSLC Police Department operations. An Accessory Structure serving an appropriate Accessory Use under this Section may be prefabricated—including a container structure—or constructed on-site. All Accessory Structures shall be permanently affixed to a foundation. An Accessory Structure shall only be used for temporary indoor storage and shall not be used for human occupancy other than for and during incidental processing of custodial property. 
2.  Grading and Drainage: An Accessory Structure shall only be constructed on a site graded and designed to meet MS4 permit standards, all to the City's Engineering standards. 
3.  Maximum Height: Accessory Structure height shall not exceed 11 feet. 
4.  Size and Siting: Accessory Structure Gross Floor Area shall not exceed 420 square feet per Accessory Structure. An Accessory Structure must be located within three (3) feet of a Side Property Line and within three (3) feet of the Rear Property Line, but shall not obstruct a Right-of-Way sight-distance triangle or Drive Aisle, including the Accessory Structure's door-swing paths. 
5.  Construction: An Accessory Structure shall match the exterior color of the primary SSLC Police Department Structure within the district and shall employ an anti-graffiti coating on all vertical, exterior surfaces. An Accessory Structure may incorporate electrical service for lighting, HVAC, and as necessary to support incidental processing of custodial property within the Accessory Structure. All exterior lighting shall be directed downward and away from any adjacent Residential Uses. HVAC equipment shall not emit noise levels in excess of 55dBa at the Property Line. 
6.  Security: Appropriate video camera surveillance shall be directed onto any Accessory Structure. The SSLC Police Department shall continuously record activity in the vicinity of the Accessory Structure and its immediate surrounding area to deter vandalism and ensure the protection of City and custodial property. The Accessory Structure shall be appropriately secured from unauthorized access. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.03.250 - School (S) district. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this zoning district is to allow for schools to operate within the district. 
B.  Uses. No Building, Structure, Site, or land shall be used or Developed except in accordance with the adopted Land Use Matrix as found in this Chapter. 
C.  Standards. Standards for the School (S) district are as follows: 
1.  The minimum area of any Lot for Development is two (2) acres. 
2.  The maximum Height for any Structure is forty-five (45) feet. 
3.  Required Setbacks are detailed in Chapter 17.07. 
D.  Development Review. The Planning Commission shall review requests for Development in the district. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
Chapter 17.04 - PERMITTED USE REVIEW 
Sections: 
 
17.04.010 - Review Process and Requirements. 
A.  A person seeking approval of a Permitted Use must file a Complete Application, using the forms established by the Community Development Department, and include payment of all fees. For any Application to construct a Building or other Improvement to Property for a Use that is defined by this Code as allowed in the zoning district in which the Building is proposed, the Community Development Department and the City Engineer must review the Application to determine whether the proposal: 
1.  Is allowed within the district where it is proposed; 
2.  Is proposed for Development on a legally subdivided Lot; 
3.  Can be adequately serviced by Dedicated roads, improved to City Standards and existing or proposed utility systems or lines; 
4.  Complies with all applicable Development requirements of that district, including Building Height, Setbacks, and Lot Coverage; 
5.  Meets the applicable Development Standards requirements; 
6.  Conforms to the Design Guidelines and the design review process established for that district; 
7.  Requires conditions of approval; 
8.  Complies with the Construction Codes; and 
9.  Pertains to land for which all tax assessments have been paid. 
B.  The Community Development Department staff shall notify the Applicant of any specific deficiencies in the proposal and whether the project must further be reviewed as a Conditional Use for that district. 
C.  No permit or license issued shall be valid if any of the criteria listed in this Section have not been met. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.04.020 - Standards Applicable to all Permitted Uses. 
A.  The outdoor display of goods or merchandise is prohibited unless expressly allowed elsewhere in this Title. 
B.  The outdoor storage of any goods or merchandise is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.04.030 - Permitted Uses with Specific Standards 
The Uses listed below require compliance with the following standards in addition to any other applicable requirements of this Code. 
A.  Alcoholic Beverage Uses. All Alcoholic Beverage Uses designated as "P"—Permitted Uses—in the Title 17 Land-Use Matrix are subject to the following restrictions: 
1.  Alcoholic Beverage, Banquet and Catering; Alcoholic Beverage, Beer Recreational; Alcoholic Beverage, Hotel; Alcoholic Beverage, Off-Premise Beer; Alcoholic Beverage, Package Agency; Alcoholic Beverage, Restaurant (Beer Only, Limited Service, and Full Service); and Alcoholic Beverage, Special Use (Educational, Scientific, and Industrial/Manufacturing) Uses may not be located (a) any closer to a residential district than six hundred (600) feet, as measured at the closest Property Lines, (b) any closer to a community location than permitted under section 32B-1-202 of the Utah Code, as amended, (c) nor any closer to a Homeless Shelter than two thousand six hundred forty (2,640) feet, as measured at the closest Property Lines. 
2.  Such Uses shall incorporate plenary operational and management practices, including the use of properly licensed, bonded, and insured security personnel, as warranted, to prevent and mitigate adverse on-premises and offsite behavioral and safety impacts. 
3.  Such Uses shall maintain throughout all areas of the subject premises during all business hours a minimum of one candle power light measured at a level five feet above the floor. 
B.  ATM, Kiosk, Vending Machine (Self-Service, Interactive, Outdoors). This Use shall be located in a manner that does not interfere with or cause difficulty in the safe movement of pedestrians. Machines and Kiosks shall be located: 
1.  Next to a Primary Building on the property; and 
2.  In a manner that will not: 
a.  Reduce required Landscaped Areas; 
b.  Cause customers to wait in vehicle Drive Aisles or Parking Areas; or 
c.  Create a public nuisance or a hazard to public safety. 
C.  Auto Body Repair. This Use shall comply with the following criteria: 
1.  All wrecked or inoperable vehicles must be stored within the Primary or Accessory Structure. Only operable vehicles used by the business, customers, and employees may be parked outdoors. 
2.  This Use may use only high-volume, low-pressure, spray guns in painting operations. 
3.  Within two hundred (200) feet of a residential district, hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
D.  Automotive Restoration. This Use shall comply with the following criteria: 
1.  Every vehicle associated with Automotive Restoration shall be an Antique or Classic Automobile. 
2.  All vehicles and parts must be stored within the Primary or Accessory Structure. Only operable vehicles used by the business, its customers, and its employees may be parked outdoors. 
3.  This Use may use only high-volume, low-pressure, spray guns in painting operations. 
4.  Within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a residential district, hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
E.  Automotive Service and Repair. This Use shall comply with the following criteria: 
1.  An eight-foot solid wall is required along all Property Lines shared with another property Owner. 
a.  Required construction materials for all walls shall be brick, ceramic tile, stone, precast concrete panel, concrete block, or other masonry materials of equivalent quality and durability; 
2.  All drives, parking, storage and maneuvering areas shall be paved with concrete or asphalt. 
3.  Storage areas are restricted as follows: 
a.  Storage is prohibited in the front and side yard areas. 
b.  All vehicle parts or accessories must be stored indoors and may not be stored in any vehicle storage area. 
c.  No vehicle may be stored outdoors for more than seventy-two (72) hours. 
d.  All outside storage facilities shall be located on a properly drained site that is graded to ensure rapid drainage and to ensure that the site remains free from stagnant pools of water. 
e.  An Applicant must submit a Site drainage and grading plan that demonstrates adequate facilities to dispose of any storm water runoff and prevent contaminants from migrating from the Site. 
f.  The Applicant shall maintain the Property and all Buildings free of insect and rodent infestation. 
g.  Stored vehicles shall be organized in a unified manner in Parking Stalls (no double-stacking). 
h.  The Use shall not add to the contamination of the soil, alter ground water flow, create additional drainage runoff, or alter topography in such a way that creates hazards to the proposed site, other properties, or the City. 
i.  The Applicant shall provide the City with a drainage collection and disposal plan for vehicle fluids that complies with all federal, state and local standards. 
F.  Employment Agency and Temporary Staffing. This Use is limited to the placement of patrons in "office-only" jobs. Where the Use requires patrons to come to the location to view job opportunities and/or receive wages, the following additional requirements apply: 
1.  The Use must be located at least three hundred (300) feet away from any Residential Use, as measured at the closest Property Lines. 
2.  An indoor waiting area, or sufficient size to accommodate all patrons, must be provided. 
G.  Food Processing (Large-Scale). This Use is limited to on-site food preparation for off-premise consumption and sales. A Facility housing this Use: 
1.  Must be greater than three thousand (3,000) square feet in size; 
2.  Must only be used by a single food-processor/food-preparer; 
3.  Must use an in-ground grease trap system meeting City Engineering requirements; and 
4.  May not be used by Food Truck/Food Trailer operators or have Food Truck/Food Trailers parked on the Lot or Parcel. 
H.  Food Processing (Small-Scale). This Use is limited to on-site food preparation for off-premise consumption and sales. 
1.  A de minimis onsite Retail component is allowed. 
2.  A Facility housing this Use: 
a.  May be shared among various food processors or food preparers; and 
b.  Is limited in size to three thousand (3,000) square feet or less. 
3.  Each instance of the Use must have: 
a.  Designated Parking Stalls for all Food Trucks/Food Trailers located to side or rear of Building; 
b.  A maximum of 15 Food Truck/Food Trailer operators working out of each location; 
c.  Outdoor electrical outlets (one per Food Truck/Food Trailer) located in Landscaped Area; 
d.  An onsite operator sign-in roster and require the use of such sign-in roster; 
e.  A full commercial kitchen (no exceptions); and 
f.  Use an in-ground grease trap system meeting City Engineering requirements. 
I.  Food Truck/Food Trailer. 
1.  Special Events. Food Trucks or Food Trailers on public property must have a City special event permit, for the Use, on file with the South Salt Lake City Recorder. 
2.  Licensing. Food Truck or Food Trailer Vendors must meet all applicable state and City Code licensing requirements. 
3.  Permitted Vehicles. All mobile food vending business shall take place in either a Food Truck or a Food Trailer. 
4.  Food Trucks or Food Trailers on private property as an Accessory Use. 
a.  Food Trucks or Food Trailers that comply with the standards outlined in this Section are allowed on private property. 
b.  Food Trucks or Food Trailers that are Accessory Uses shall not use parking that is required for the Primary Use during business hours; 
c.  Excluding private events, Food Trucks or Food Trailers within one hundred (100) feet of any Single-Family Use in the R-1, or RM districts are subject to the following conditions: 
i.  Hours of operation are limited to 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.; 
ii.  Must comply with all Salt Lake County Health Department noise regulations; and 
iii.  Lights attached to the Food Truck or Food Trailer or portable lights must not allow light spillover onto abutting Residential Uses. 
d.  For private properties without a Primary Use, such as a Parking Lot or vacant Parcel, Food Trucks or Food Trailers may be permitted by meeting the requirements of this Section. 
5.  Food Truck Parks on private property as a Primary Use. 
a.  Food Truck Parks are allowed in specific districts as outlined in Chapter 17.03 and are subject to Infrastructure Improvements being completed. Required Infrastructure Improvements include paving, parking, drainage, Landscaping, lighting, and Buffering requirements as found in Title 17. 
b.  All Food Trucks and Food Trailers must be separated by a minimum of ten feet (10') between vendor walk up windows 
c.  All Food Trucks Parks shall provide one on-site Parking Stall per Food Truck or Food Trailer for customer parking. 
6.  Food Trucks and Food Trailers on public property. 
a.  Two (2) Food Trucks or Food Trailers per City Block may operate in the Right-of-Way on the following Streets and subject to the following conditions: 
i.  Permitted Areas: 
a)  City-owned Streets abutting Downtown District, East Streetcar Neighborhood, Commercial Corridor, Commercial General, Transit Oriented Development, Mixed-Use, Flex, City Facility, Historic, and Master Planned Mixed-Use districts. 
b)  City-owned Streets abutting parks. 
c)  To be located on another agency's roads, agency consent is required prior to operation. All roads must abut Downtown District, East Streetcar Neighborhood, Commercial Corridor, Commercial General, Transit Oriented Development, Mixed-Use, Flex, City Facility, Historic, and Master Planned Mixed-Use districts. 
ii.  Food Trucks or Food Trailers located within one hundred (100) feet of any Single-Family Use in the R-1, or RM districts are subject to the following conditions: 
a)  Hours of operation are limited from 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.; 
b)  Must comply with all Salt Lake County Health Department noise regulations; and 
c)  Lights attached to the Food Truck or Food Trailer or portable lights must not allow light spillover onto abutting Residential Uses. 
iii.  Food Trucks or Food Trailers operating in the Right-of-Way must comply with all applicable parking and traffic regulations. No operation shall extend into vehicle travel or bicycle lanes. 
iv.  Food Trucks or Food Trailers operating in the Right-of-Way must orient the vending window to face away from the Right-of-Way. 
v.  All Food Trucks or Food Trailer must maintain liability insurance as determined by South Salt Lake City Attorney's Office. 
b.  All Food Trucks or Food Trailers must contain no fixed infrastructure or accessory infrastructure in the Right-of-Way. Any mobile food vending infrastructure outside of the Food Truck or Food Trailer must be located on private property. 
7.  Specific Requirements. All Food Trucks or Food Trailers shall meet the specifications set forth in this Subsection. 
a.  Mobility. All Food Trucks or Food Trailers shall be constructed in a way that they may be easily removed on a daily basis. All Food Trucks or Food Trailers must have functioning wheels. 
b.  Food Trucks or Food Trailers shall not be left overnight or stored on the subject property or in a Right-of-Way. 
c.  Design. All Food Trucks or Food Trailers shall not have a Drive-Through Window and shall be kept in good operating condition. 
d.  Limits by Location. To assure public safety and limit restrictions or impediments to traffic flow, Food Trucks or Food Trailers are only allowed in areas specified in this Section: 
i.  No Food Truck or Food Trailer shall conduct business in the Right-of-Way within fifty (50) feet of a minor arterial intersection or one hundred (100) feet of a major arterial intersection. 
ii.  All Food Trucks or Food Trailers must comply with Clear View Area requirements. 
iii.  All Food Trucks or Food Trailers shall be parked on asphalt, concrete, or an engineered dustless surface. 
e.  Umbrellas, Canopies and Other Coverings. Each Food Truck or Food Trailer may have one umbrella or canopy. Tents or other coverings with opaque walls are not allowed. Alternate shading systems may be proposed to the City and are subject to approval by the Community Development Department. 
f.  Trash Receptacles. All Food Trucks or Food Trailers shall provide at least one trash receptacle meeting Salt Lake County Health Department standards. The trash receptacle shall be removed with the Food Truck or Food Trailer on a daily basis. 
g.  Clean Area. All Food Trucks or Food Trailers are required to clean the area occupied by the Food Truck or Food Trailer and the surrounding 50-foot area on a daily basis. 
h.  Hours of Operation. All activity related to Food Trucks or Food Trailers shall be temporary. Food Truck or Food Trailer operation shall not exceed eighteen (18) hours within a twenty-four (24) hour period at any one location. 
i.  Provisions. The sale of any products other than food and beverages for human consumption is prohibited. 
8.  Prohibited Activities. Any violation of the following activities shall be subject to loss of City business license and other penalties of law. 
a.  Food Trucks or Food Trailers shall not include the sale or provision of alcoholic beverages of any kind. 
b.  Amplified music and the use of any amplified sound system is prohibited. 
c.  Business operations shall not create any public nuisance, including: (1) noises audible from within an enclosed vehicle or from within an enclosed Building; (2) accumulations of litter; (3) obstruction of pedestrian and vehicle access or travel areas; (4) reduction in required Parking Stalls or other similar activities; and (5) any violation of City or state regulations. 
9.  Review Standards. The Community Development Department shall apply the following review standards: 
a.  The arrangement of the Site including access, Buildings, Parking Areas, Landscaping, and other facilities. 
b.  Any reduction in Parking Stalls resulting in insufficient spaces for existing businesses and the Food Truck or Food Trailer's customers would result in the location being unsuitable. 
c.  Other Site and area-specific items as outlined in Title 17. 
10.  Signs and Advertising. Food Truck or Food Trailer may have one Sign that meets the requirements of Chapter 17.08. Vinyl wraps are permitted. 
11.  Lighting. Food Trucks or Food Trailers operating in evening hours may use battery-powered low voltage lighting systems for safety and convenience. All lighting systems shall only be for the purpose of continued operation. Moving, flashing, or other advertising-oriented lights are prohibited. 
J.  Home Occupation, Category I. 
1.  Regulations. 
a.  Category I Home Occupations generate no off-site impacts and have no more than de minimis customer or delivery traffic. 
b.  Category I Home Occupations must be clearly incidental and subordinate to the Primary Use of the Dwelling for residential purposes and shall not change the character of the Dwelling or the neighborhood in which it is located. If at any time it is determined that a Home Occupation has altered the character of a Dwelling or neighborhood, the Home Occupation license will be revoked, and the character of the Dwelling must be restored. 
c.  A Category I Home Occupation shall not occupy more than twenty (20) percent of the Dwelling's Floor Area. 
d.  An Accessory Structure separate from the Dwelling may be used for a Category I Home Occupation as long as: (i) the Accessory Structure remains incidental and subordinate to the Dwelling; (ii) no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the Floor Area of the Accessory Structure is used for the Home Occupation; and (iii) the land use authority approves the use of the Accessory Structure for the Home Occupation. 
e.  No employee, other than one living at the Dwelling, is allowed at the Dwelling for any business purpose. 
f.  No business Sign is allowed. 
g.  Explosive or combustible materials shall not be stored in a Dwelling with a Category I Home Occupation. 
h.  Yard and garage sales associated with a Home Occupation are prohibited. 
i.  Home Occupations shall only be conducted between the hours of seven (7) a.m. and eight (8) p.m. 
j.  Category I Home Occupations shall comply with all pertinent City, county, and state regulations, including business license regulations. Home Occupation licenses may be revoked upon any valid unresolved complaint. Inspections by the City may occur as necessary to assure conformance with conditions and regulations. 
k.  Category I Home Occupations shall meet all licensing requirements of the City, county, and state. 
K.  Home Occupation, Category II. 
1.  Regulations. 
a.  Category II Home Occupations must be clearly incidental and subordinate to the Primary Use of the Dwelling for residential purposes and shall not change the character of the Dwelling or the neighborhood in which it is located. If at any time it is determined that a Home Occupation has altered the character of a Dwelling or neighborhood, the Home Occupation license will be revoked, and the character of the Dwelling must be restored. 
i.  A Home Occupation that changes the outside appearance of the Dwelling, architecturally or otherwise, to accommodate the Home Occupation Use on the property is prohibited. 
ii.  A Home Occupation may include the sale of goods produced on the premises and goods produced elsewhere as long as goods are not displayed where they may be seen from the outside of the property and as long as the sale of goods are limited to no more than two (2) customers per hour. 
iii.  A Home Occupation shall not occupy more than twenty (20) percent of the Dwelling's Floor Area. 
iv.  Except for an enclosed outdoor play area for Child Care, a Home Occupation shall not involve the use of any yard area or activity outside a Building. 
v.  An Accessory Structure separate from the Dwelling may be used for a Home Occupation as long as: (i) the Accessory Structure remains incidental and subordinate to the Dwelling; (ii) no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the Floor Area of the Accessory Structure is used for the Home Occupation; and (iii) the land use authority approves the Use of the Accessory Structure for the Home Occupation. Home garden produce sales shall follow the requirements in Subsection (1)(b). 
vi.  No employee, other than one living at the Dwelling, is allowed at the Dwelling for any business purpose. 
vii.  All signs shall meet the requirements of Chapter 17.08 of this Code. 
viii.  Explosive or combustible materials shall not be stored for a Home Occupation. 
ix.  Home Occupations shall not disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood with noise, vehicles, odor, dust, vibrations, parking, obstructions, or other matters related to the business. 
x.  Yard and garage sales associated with a Home Occupation are prohibited. 
xi.  Home Occupations shall only be conducted between the hours of seven (7) a.m. and eight (8) p.m. 
xii.  Home Occupations shall comply with all pertinent City, county, and state regulations, including business license regulations. Home Occupation licenses may be revoked upon any valid unresolved complaint. Inspections by the City may occur as necessary to assure conformance with conditions and regulations. 
xiii.  Home Occupation shall meet all licensing requirements of the City, county, and state. 
b.  Category II Home Occupations shall meet the standards of this Subsection and Subsection (1)(d): 
i.  Home office Uses that require a customer to come to the home in order to conduct business. 
ii.  Home garden produce sales. Home garden produce sales must have sufficient Frontage or driveway space for the parking of vehicles. In order to avoid damage to adjacent Uses or property, all Temporary Structures shall be properly secured or anchored to the ground to prevent the Structure from being moved. The City may require additional securing or anchoring upon finding that the method of securing is inadequate. 
iii.  Barber Shop or Hair Salon. 
iv.  Home Craft Production and sales, where no machinery is used to create or construct the item produced. 
v.  Music, tutoring, and general education instruction limited to no more than two (2) students at a time. 
vi.  Dressmaker, seamstress, or tailor who has no assistants. 
vii.  Similar Uses as deemed appropriate by the land use authority. 
c.  The following Category II Home Occupations shall be permitted, following a public meeting, if the listed conditions of this Subsection and Subsection (1)(d) are met: 
i.  Home Craft Production and sales, where machinery is used to create or construct the item produced and does not involve reportable or regulated quantities of hazardous or flammable substances, and such operations will not generate noise, dust or odors. 
ii.  Dance instruction, limited to no more than two (2) students at a time or no more than twenty percent (20%) of the Dwelling's Floor Area, whichever is greater. 
iii.  Family Child Care, provided the care is provided only by those residing within the home, is limited to no more than eight (8) children at a time, and complies with the requirements of all regulating agencies. 
iv.  Pet Grooming Services, limited to two (2) animals on-site at any one time; or 
v.  Wholesale or Retail sales of goods, except as incidental to a permitted Home Occupation. 
d.  Conditions for Uses listed in Subsections (b) and (c): 
i.  Exception for home garden produce sales, customer traffic is by appointment only with no walk-ins. 
ii.  All Category II Home Occupation shall be limited to two (2) individual customers on the premises at a time. 
iii.  Hours of operation shall be limited from seven a.m. (7 a.m.) to eight p.m. (8 p.m.). 
iv.  No person, other than the Applicant/resident, shall work at the Home Occupation. 
v.  No more than two (2) customer vehicles may be parked on-site at any time. 
vi.  Category II Home Occupations may use available on-Street parking abutting the Dwelling. 
vii.  Required off-Street parking for the Residential Use shall not be interrupted for the Home Occupation. 
viii.  If a commercial vehicle is used in conjunction with a Home Occupation, it must (1) be parked off-Street on an approved Impervious Surface; (2) not exceed one ton in capacity; and (3) not be operated from the property between the hours of eight p.m. (8 p.m.) until seven a.m. (7 a.m.). Should a commercial vehicle create a nuisance regarding parking, noise, odor, hazardous substances, etc., the vehicle may be barred from the residential district by action of the Planning Commission. 
e.  Category II Home Occupations do not include: 
i.  Equestrian Facility; 
ii.  Commercial Animal Kennel or Commercial Animal Day Care; 
iii.  Real estate office other than an individual agent or broker in his own home; 
iv.  (Minor or Major) Manufacturing; 
v.  Indoor Storage Facility, Outdoor Storage Facility, or Warehouse Storage Facility; 
vi.  Auto-related uses; 
vii.  Massage Therapy; or 
viii.  Any Use not specifically listed as permitted in this Section. 
L.  Portable Container. This Use shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  A Portable Container shall only be Accessory to a Primary Use. 
2.  Portable Containers may not be Used as a Dwelling or living quarters, nor for camping, cooking, or recreational purposes for any amount of time in any district. 
3.  Portable Containers must be kept in good repair (capable of being moved intact, free of holes, rust, graffiti, or other damage, and free of vermin or other pest infestation, etc.), be secured against unauthorized entry, comply with health regulations, and be stored on a Hard Surface. 
4.  Portable Containers may not be stacked or have any materials stacked on top of them. 
5.  Portable Containers shall not be stored in Rights-of-Way, fire access lanes, landscaped Front Yard areas, or in an area visible from the Street along the Primary Building's Primary Façade. 
6.  In residential districts the following additional standards apply: 
a.  Only one Portable Container is permitted on a Lot or Parcel for a maximum of 90 days in any twelve-month (12) period. 
b.  Unless a Building Permit has been issued, Portable Containers are not permitted on vacant Lots or Parcels. 
c.  If a Building Permit has been issued, the Portable Container of the permitted construction must be removed within ten-days of the completion of construction or final Building inspection, whichever is sooner. 
d.  Portable Containers must be located on an approved driveway or behind the Primary Building's Primary Façade. 
7.  In non-residential districts the following additional standards apply: 
a.  Portable Containers shall only be used for: 
1.  Shipping and receiving of merchandise and goods, provided that the Portable Container is removed within 30 days; 
2.  Storage of merchandise or goods, provided that the Portable Container is properly located according to the requirements of this Title; 
3.  If a Building Permit has been issued, storage Accessory to construction or remolding of a Structure located on the same Lot, provided that the Portable Container is removed within 180 days. The Community Development Department may approve 30-day extensions when construction or remolding is ongoing, and the Building Permit remains valid; or 
4.  A licensed firework stand limited to the times the fireworks stand may lawfully occupy a space as described in Chapter 8.18 of this Code. 
b.  Portable Containers shall not be located in designated Parking Areas. 
c.  Portable Containers shall not be located on Lots or Parcels that abut a residential district. 
M.  Wireless Communications Facilities. All commercial and low power radio services and facilities, such as "cellular" or "PCS" (personal communications system) communications and paging systems shall comply with the following criteria: 
1.  Site Location Priorities. Except as otherwise provided in this Subsection, all wireless communication facilities shall be subject to the provisions of Table below. 
a.  Providers of wireless telecommunications services will first seek to locate facilities on existing City structures, such as Buildings, communication towers, water tanks and smokestacks; provided, however, that if existing structures owned by the City are not available, or do not meet the system design needs of the provider, as determined by the provider, or would impose excessive costs in comparison to other alternatives, providers will then attempt to locate their facilities on privately owned structures, such as Buildings, communication towers, water tanks or smokestacks. 
b.  If providers are unable to locate on existing structures, and a Monopole is necessary, providers will first seek to locate their Monopoles on City-owned property; provided, however, that if City property is unavailable, or does not meet the system design needs of the provider, as determined by the provider, or would impose excessive costs in comparison to other alternatives, providers will then seek to lease property for the Monopole from a private property Owner. 
c.  To encourage the location of wireless facilities on City-owned Structures and property and privately-owned existing Structures, wireless telecommunication facilities are Permitted Uses in all districts of the City if the land or existing Structures are owned or leased by the City. Except in low Density residential districts, facilities located on any existing Structure are also an allowed Use. 
d.  Wireless providers will agree to locate their facilities on City-owned or leased property only when the provider and government entity agree on the terms and conditions of the Site lease, including fair and reasonable compensation for the Use of the property. If no agreement can be reached, the provider will locate its facilities on privately owned property. 
2.  Regulations. The following shall apply to all wireless communication facilities: 
a.  In addition to the regulations provided in this Section, all low power radio services facilities shall comply with all other ordinances of the City, and with all applicable regulations of the Federal Communications Commission and the Federal Aviation Administration. All facilities shall be subject to design review standards of this Title. 
b.  Low power radio services facilities are characterized by the type or location of the Antenna structure. There are five general types of such Antenna structure: wall-mounted Antennae; Roof-Mounted Antennae; Monopoles with Antennae and Antenna support Structure less than two feet in width; Monopoles with Antennae and Antenna support Structure greater than two feet in width; and Lattice Towers. If an Antenna Structure is allowed under this Section either as a Permitted or as a Conditional Use, the minimum standards for the installation of each type of Antenna are as follows: 
i.  Wall-Mounted Antenna. 
a)  Wall-mounted Antennae may not extend above the wall line of the Building or extend more than four (4) feet horizontally from the face of the Building. 
b)  Antennae, equipment and the supporting Structure shall be painted to match the color of the Building or Structure or the background against which they are most commonly seen. Antennae and the supporting Structure on a Building shall be architecturally Compatible with the Building. Whip Antennae are not allowed on a wall-mounted Antenna Structure. 
c)  Antennae mounted directly on existing parapet walls, penthouses or mechanical equipment rooms are considered a wall-mounted Antenna if no portion of the Antenna extends above the roof line of the Building. 
ii.  Wall-Mounted Antennae. 
a)  Roof-Mounted Antennae shall be constructed, painted or fully screened to match as closely as possible the color and texture of the Building and wall on which it is mounted. 
b)  Roof-Mounted Antennae may be mounted on the top of existing penthouses or mechanical equipment rooms if the Antennae and Antenna support structures are enclosed or visually screened from view. The Screening Structures may not extend more than eight (8) feet above the existing roof line of the penthouse or mechanical equipment room. 
c)  Antennae not mounted on a penthouse or mechanical equipment room shall be mounted at least five (5) feet back from the exterior wall of the Building. The maximum Height of an Antenna mounted between five (5) and ten (10) feet back from the exterior wall shall be directly proportional to the Setback distance and may not exceed ten (10) feet above the roof line of the Building. Antennae shall be mounted at least five (5) feet behind any parapet wall. The maximum Height of an Antenna mounted between five (5) and ten (10) feet behind a parapet wall shall be directly proportional to the Setback distance and may not exceed a Height of ten (10) feet above the top of the parapet wall. An Antenna may not extend more than fifteen (15) feet above the roof line of the Building itself except as allowed as a Conditional Use. Similarly, a Roof-Mounted Antenna may not extend above the roof line of a penthouse or mechanical equipment room except as allowed as a Conditional Use. 
iii.  Monopole with Antennae and Antenna Support Structure less than two (2) feet in width. 
a)  The entire Antenna Structure mounted on a Monopole may not exceed two (2) feet in width. The maximum height of this Antenna may not exceed ten (10) feet in Height. 
b)  A Monopole described in this Subsection may not be located in or within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a residential district, except as allowed under a Conditional Use permit. 
iv.  Monopole with Antennae and Antenna Support Structure greater than two (2) feet in width. 
a)  The maximum visible width of Antennae and Antenna mounting structures on a Monopole may not exceed eight (8) feet in height or fifteen (15) feet in width as viewed looking directly at the Monopole at same elevation as the Antennae and Antenna mounting structure. 
b)  A Monopole classified under this Subsection may not be located in or within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a residential district, except as allowed under a Conditional Use permit. 
v.  Lattice Towers. Except as provided in this Subsection, Lattice Towers may not be located within three hundred thirty (330) feet of a residential district. 
a)  A Lattice Tower maybe located closer than three hundred thirty (330) feet from a residential district if the Planning Commission finds that the tower's apparent height would not exceed the apparent height of any public utility poles, wires, cables, or similar structures located in the same vicinity as the proposed tower, when viewed from a height of six (6) feet at the nearest adjacent residential district boundary. 
b)  Lattice Towers may not exceed a Height equal to ninety (90) percent of the tower's distance from nearest adjacent residential district boundary, and in any case the height may not exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
c.  Location on Parcel. Generally, Monopoles and Lattice Towers should be located only in the Rear Yard area of the affected Lot or Parcel, though a different location may be approved by the Planning Commission in compelling circumstances to carry out the intent and purpose of these regulations. These Structures may not be located in a required Landscaped Area, Buffer area or required Parking Area. 
d.  Area Limitations for Wall- and Roof-Mounted Antennae. A combination of both roof- and wall-mounted Antennae are allowed on a Building. Except as allowed under a Conditional Use permit, the total area for all wall- and Roof-Mounted Antennae and supporting structures combined shall not exceed the lesser of sixty (60) square feet or five (5) percent of each exterior wall of the Building. The total area is the sum of the area of each individual Antenna face and the visible portion of the supporting Structure as viewed when looking directly at the face of the Building. The total area for a Roof-Mounted Antenna shall apply to the closest exterior wall. 
e.  Height Regulation—Monopoles with Antennae. The height of Monopoles with Antennae and Antenna support Structures is restricted or regulated according to Table. 
f.  Wall- and Roof-Mounted Antennae on Noncomplying Buildings that Exceed the Maximum Height Limit of the Zoning District. Wall-mounted Antennae which otherwise are permitted or approved under this Chapter may be mounted on noncomplying Buildings that exceed the maximum Height limit of the zoning district in which they are located. Roof-Mounted Antennae which are mounted on a Noncomplying Structure above the maximum Height limit of the zoning district require Conditional Use approval. 
Table 
Zoning District 	Wall-Mounted Antenna 	Roof-Mounted Antenna 	Monopoles/ 
<2 ft. structure, >60 ft. tall or exceeding max. height for district 	Monopoles 
/<2 ft. structure, >60 ft. tall or exceeding max. height for district 	Monopoles/ 
>2 ft. structure, <60 ft. tall or exceeding max. height for district, if less 	Monopoles/ 
>2 ft. structure, >60 ft. tall or exceeding max. height for district 	Lattice Tower Antenna 
Jordan River 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
R-1 	C 	C 	C 	N 	C 	N 	N 
RM 	P 	C 	C 	N 	C 	N 	N 
Commercial 	P 	P 	C 	C 	C 	C 	N 
Flex 	P 	P 	P 	C 	P 	C 	C 
Open Space 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	N 
 
KEY: N = Not Permitted P = Permitted C = Conditional Use 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
Chapter 17.05 - CONDITIONAL USE REVIEW 
Sections: 
 
17.05.010 - Review Process and Requirements. 
A.  A person seeking approval of a Conditional Use must file a Complete Application, using the forms established by the Community Development Department, and include payment of all fees. For any Application to construct a Building or other improvement to property for a Use that is defined by this Code as allowed in the zoning district in which the Building is proposed, the Community Development Department and the City Engineer must review the Application to determine whether the proposal: 
1.  Is allowed within the district where it is proposed; 
2.  Is proposed for Development on a legally subdivided Lot; 
3.  Can be adequately serviced by Dedicated roads, improved to City Standards and existing or proposed utility systems or lines; 
4.  Complies with all applicable Development requirements of that district, including Building Height, Setbacks, and Lot Coverage; 
5.  Meets the applicable Development Standards requirements; 
6.  Conforms to the Design Guidelines and the design review process established for that district; 
7.  Requires additional conditions of approval; 
8.  Complies with the Construction Codes; and 
9.  Pertains to land for which all tax assessments have been paid. 
B.  The Community Development Department staff shall notify the Applicant of any specific deficiencies in the proposal. 
C.  No permit or license issued shall be valid if any of the criteria listed in this Section have not been met. 
D.  The land use authority is the Planning Commission for Conditional Use Applications. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.05.020 - General Conditional Use Standards. 
In reviewing an Application for a Conditional Use Permit, the land use authority shall consider whether the Application: 
A.  Identifies the maximum intensity of the proposed Development and Use; 
B.  Complies with all provisions of the Code; and 
C.  Compared to Permitted Uses and Development within the district, substantially mitigates the adverse impacts that are reasonably anticipated from the magnitude and intensity of the Development and Use, as proposed, considering: 
1.  The size and location of the site; 
2.  Traffic generation, timing, and nature of traffic impacts and the existing condition and capacity of the Streets in the area; 
3.  Utility demand and available capacity, including storm water retention; 
4.  Emergency vehicle access and anticipated average and peak day demand; 
5.  Location and amount of off-Street parking; 
6.  Internal vehicular and pedestrian circulation system, including delivery vehicles, loading and unloading; 
7.  Fencing, Screening, and Landscaping to separate the Conditional Use from adjoining property and Uses; 
8.  Building mass, bulk, design, and orientation, and the location of Buildings on the site including orientation to Buildings on adjoining Lots or Parcels; 
9.  Usable open space; 
10.  Signs and lighting; 
11.  Physical design and Compatibility with surrounding structures in terms of mass, Scale, style, design, and architectural detailing; 
12.  Noise, vibration, odors, steam, or other factors that might adversely affect people and property off-site; 
13.  Control of delivery and service vehicles, loading and unloading zones; 
14.  Generation and Screening of waste; 
15.  Recycling program and pickup areas; 
16.  The potential adverse impacts arising from the conduct of patrons, guests, employees, occupants, or their affiliates; 
17.  Within and adjoining the site, the impacts of the Use on public property and environmentally sensitive lands; 
18.  Hours of operation, delivery, and activity; 
19.  Special hazards arising from the Use or from its reasonably anticipated secondary effects, including its potential to attract criminal behavior; and 
20.  Demand for public infrastructure or services. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.05.030 - Standards Applicable to all Conditional Uses. 
A.  The outdoor display of goods or merchandise is prohibited unless expressly allowed elsewhere in this Title. 
B.  The outdoor storage of any goods or merchandise is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.05.040 - Conditional Uses with Specific Standards. 
The Conditional Uses listed below require compliance with their corresponding specific standards in addition to any other applicable requirements of this Code, including the General Conditional Use standards in Section 17.05.020 and applicable Chapter 17.04 requirements. 
A.  Adult Daycare. An Adult Daycare Use shall not include any overnight Residential Use and shall not be located within two thousand six hundred forty (2,640) feet of any Homeless Shelter Use. The distance shall be measured at the closest Property Lines. 
B.  Alcoholic Beverage Uses. All Alcoholic Beverage Uses designated as "C"—Conditional Uses—in the Title 17 Land-Use Matrix are subject to the following, additional standards: 
1.  Alcoholic Beverage, Bar Establishment; Alcoholic Beverage, Beer Wholesaler; Alcoholic Beverage, Liquor Warehouse; Alcoholic Beverage, Manufacturer; Alcoholic Beverage, Tavern; and Alcoholic Beverage, State Liquor Store Uses also may not be located (a) any closer to a residential district than six hundred (600) feet, as measured at the closest Property Lines, (b) any closer to a community location than permitted under section 32B-1-202 of the Utah Code, as amended, (c) nor any closer to a Homeless Shelter than two thousand six hundred forty (2,640) feet, as measured at the closest Property Lines. 
2.  All such Uses shall incorporate plenary operational and management practices, including the use of properly licensed, bonded, and insured security personnel, to prevent and mitigate adverse on-premises and offsite behavioral and safety impacts. 
3.  All such Uses shall maintain throughout all areas of the subject premises during all business hours a minimum of one candle power light measured at a level five feet above the floor. 
C.  Animal Kennel/Day Care, Commercial. All instances of this Use shall comply with the criteria specified in Title 6 of this Code. Additionally, all outdoor play areas shall be located a minimum of one hundred fifty feet (150') from any residential district. 
D.  Assisted Living Facility. All instances of this Use shall comply with and provide, as applicable, the following: 
1.  Proof of state licensure for Assisted Living Facility; 
2.  A design, residential in character and architecturally Compatible with the neighborhood, which adequately screens the Use from neighboring Lots and complies with Utah Department of Health standards; 
3.  An outdoor lighting plan which adequately screens lighting to mitigate its impact on surrounding Uses; 
4.  A Sign plan which includes no more than two (2) square feet of signage for facilities on Public Streets smaller than Collector Streets, and monument signs not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet for facilities on Public Streets considered Collector Streets or larger; and 
5.  A delivery, traffic, and parking plan which adequately mitigates the adverse impacts of increased traffic generation on the neighborhood in which the proposed Use is located. The parking plan must propose parking appropriate for the proposed Use of the facility. 
6.  An Applicant for this Use acknowledges: its responsibility for each unlawful request for emergency services at the facility, under Chapter 8.34 of this Code; that it is the recipient of all emergency services under Section 2.40.060 of this Code; and shall reimburse the City for the costs of all emergency services rendered at or to residents of the facility under Section 2.40.270 of this Code. 
E.  Auto, Light Truck, RV, Boat, Trailer Dealerships (Sale, Lease, or Rent). In addition to being subject to the Design Review process, all instances of this Use (including change of a prior instance of this Use) shall comply with the following criteria: 
1.  Landscaping shall be required along any Street Frontage and shall be subject to the Development Standards of Chapter 17.06 of this Code. 
2.  Buildings must meet the minimum Setback requirements of their respective districts. 
3.  Designated customer parking must be provided at a ratio of one (1) space for every twenty (20) vehicles displayed, with a maximum of fifteen (15) spaces required. A minimum of three employee Parking Stalls must be provided. Off-Street customer and employee Parking Stalls must be identified. 
4.  All Buildings other than sales offices only must provide additional designated Parking Stalls at a ratio of one (1) space per five hundred (500) square feet of floor space. 
5.  All businesses adjacent to residential districts shall require design review approval from the Planning Commission. 
6.  Where any business is adjacent to a Residential Use, a Buffer between the Residential Use and the business shall be required. Walls, Landscaping, special Setbacks, other elements, or a combination of these items must be used, as appropriate, to mitigate the impact upon the adjacent Residential Use. The City shall consider the visual appearance of the site, the traffic flows, noise, light and the size and purpose of adjacent Streets or Alleys, the extent of the business operations, and other factors in determining the Buffer sufficiency. 
7.  Outside loudspeakers, lighting which intrudes into adjacent properties, deliveries before 7:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m., the use of Public Streets for loading and unloading, repair work outside of a Building, and any other public nuisance conduct shall be prohibited. 
8.  For the purposes of maintaining safe access and to promote uncluttered and attractive displays, all outdoor Auto, Light Truck, RV, Boat, and Trailer displays must be done in a manner consistent with Parking Lot requirements and such that all individual units can be relocated without the necessity of first relocating others. 
9.  All Auto, Light Trucks, RVs, Boats, and Trailers displayed shall meet all requirements of law at all times, shall be in operating condition, shall not have flat tires or broken windows, and shall be capable of being licensed and registered without additional repair or alteration. 
10.  The minimum outdoor display lot area, not including any Buildings, for any Auto, Light Truck, RV, Boat, Trailer Dealerships (Sale, Lease, or Rent) Use shall be one (1) acre. The one (1) acre of required display lot area shall be located in the front and side yard areas. Lot area behind a Building shall not be counted as required display lot area. All vehicle display areas shall be Hard-Surfaced as established in the City's parking, access, and circulation requirements. When a Development is larger than one (1) acre and contains more than (1) business, an Auto, Light Truck, RV, Boat, Trailer Dealerships (Sale, Lease, or Rent) Use may be located within that Development if all requirements of this Title are met, including: 
a.  Parking requirements; 
b.  Site and Landscaping requirements; 
c.  Ingress and egress points are provided for the other businesses; and 
d.  The devoted outdoor display lot area is a minimum of one (1) acre in area. 
11.  The minimum Lot Frontage shall be two hundred (200) feet in width. The Frontage of Corner Lots shall be determined by the Street on which the property is addressed. 
12.  Auto, Light Truck, RV, Boat, Trailer Dealerships (Sale, Lease, or Rent) Uses are exempt from the minimum outdoor display lot area and Lot Frontage requirements of this Section if all inventory is stored and displayed indoors. Indoor-only Auto, Light Truck, RV, Boat, Trailer Dealerships (Sale, Lease, or Rent) Uses are subject to all other applicable requirements of this Section, and the following additional standards: 
a.  Sales of vehicles must be conducted entirely within a fully-enclosed Building consisting of a showroom with an area no smaller than three thousand (3,000) square feet. 
b.  Showroom spaces shall be visible from the exterior of the Building, through the use of windows, storefronts, or other Architectural Elements using either a Single-Story Commercial or Flex Building form. 
c.  Outdoor sales, display, and storage of Autos, Light Trucks, RVs, Boats, and Trailers is prohibited. 
d.  Parking associated with indoor-only Auto, Light Truck, RV, Boat, Trailer Dealerships (Sale, Lease, or Rent) Uses shall only be used for customers and employees. 
F.  Child Care Center. All instances of this Use shall comply with and provide, as applicable, the following: 
1.  Proof of state licensure; 
2.  A design which precludes a front yard playground and signage in excess of a two square foot nameplate; and 
3.  A delivery, traffic, and parking plan which adequately mitigates the adverse impacts of increased traffic generation in the neighborhood where the Use proposed to be located. 
G.  Convenience Stores with Fuel Pumps. 
1.  The pump islands of the convenience store may be erected in the Front Yard area provided the pumps are set back at least twenty-four (24) feet from the Right-of-Way of any Street. 
2.  Hard-Surfaced driveways leading to and from a pump island and other properly located service facilities permitted on the property shall be allowed in the Front Yard area provided that the driveways shall be defined by the construction of a concrete curb on the side adjoining the sidewalk. The area between the curb and the sidewalk shall be landscaped to comply with Chapter 17.06. 
3.  A ten-foot distance shall be maintained between a driveway and the Property Line with which it is parallel or approximately parallel. 
4.  All Parking Areas on the convenience store Lot shall maintain the required landscaped Front Yard as required in Chapter 17.06 and shall be bordered by concrete curbing. 
H.  Day Treatment Center. All Day Treatment Center Uses shall be outpatient only with no inpatient residential component. Day Treatment Center Uses shall not be located any closer to residential districts, Parks, or Schools than six hundred (600) feet, nor within two thousand six hundred forty (2,640) feet of any Homeless Shelter Use, as measured at the closest Property Lines. 
I.  Funeral/Mortuary Home. This Use cannot share space or any Common Wall with another Use. 
J.  Homeless Shelter. Any Homeless Shelter Use shall: 
1.  Comply with the urban-style Multi-Family design standards; 
2.  Conduct all operations within an enclosed structure; 
3.  Serve only registered, overnight guests; 
4.  Provide 24-hour, on-site management and security; 
5.  Provide, implement and maintain a comprehensive design and management plan to prevent the deterioration of public health and public safety, the potential for loss of community, the deterioration of public assets and the devaluation of private property that Utah has recently experienced as a result of the opioid crisis, incomplete criminal justice reform, the lack of long term affordable housing, a lack of qualified and affordable long term treatment facilities and a poorly managed concentration of homeless individuals housed in overcrowded and understaffed facilities by demonstrating: 
a.  Effective measures to: 
i.  Minimize neighborhood disruption associated with the Use and the potential for excessive demands for City services; 
ii.  Adequately and professionally staff the facility; 
iii.  Prevent the spread of disease both on and off-site; and 
iv.  Ensure the safety and convenience of public safety personnel; 
b.  Adequate resources and commitment to promptly reimburse the City for: 
i.  The disproportionate cost or consumption of City services resulting from the use; 
ii.  Each unlawful request for emergency services associated with the Use of the facility, under Section 8.34.020; 
iii.  The costs of all emergency services rendered at the facility as the designated "recipient" under Section 2.40.070; 
iv.  Implementation of specific objective, and accountable security and operations measures to prevent and eliminate: 
a)  Criminal activity on-site, including policies to safely store all guest weapons in a secure location, to securely store and dispense all prescribed medication, to prohibit on-site illegal drug possession or use and possession or storage of any stolen property; 
b)  Proliferation of crime off-site that is associated with the use; 
c)  Potential for the facility to support/attract/compound the adverse impacts of an off-site homeless population within a one-mile radius of the facility; 
d)  Best management practices to minimize the production, accumulation, disposal and transportation of solid waste; 
e)  Enforcement of quiet hours to protect neighboring properties; 
f)  A transparent and effective guest screening system to promptly refer and transfer applicable guests to off-site rehabilitation and detoxification or mental health programs; 
g)  Specific processes and objective commitments to regularly address ongoing operational complaints; 
h)  Comprehensive guest registry system that is maintained for a minimum of two years and is readily available to public safety personnel; 
i)  Detailed plan to transition guests from shelter within 90 days of initial registry; 
j)  Coordination with public safety regarding notice of any registered sex offender within the facility; 
k)  A reasonable code of guest conduct, including the prohibition of pan handling within the City; 
l)  Best practices to minimize vehicular and pedestrian traffic generation to and from facility. 
K.  Movie Theater/Live Performance Theater. Such Uses shall not be located any closer to residential districts than three hundred (300) feet, as measured at the closest Property Lines. 
L.  Sexually Oriented Business. All shall comply with the criteria specified in Title 5 of this Code. 
M.  Temporary Use. 
1.  Use Limitations. 
a.  Temporary Uses include firework stands, Christmas tree lots, and other similar seasonal Uses. 
b.  Temporary Use Permit. Temporary Uses shall obtain a separate business license and Conditional Use permit for each Use and location. 
c.  Time Limitations. Use permits may be allowed for up to a six (6) month period with the following exceptions: 
i.  Firework Stands. Restrictions shall follow the public sales and display limitations found in state code. 
ii.  Christmas Tree Lots. Shall only be permitted from November 1 through December 31. 
d.  Hours of Operation. Temporary Uses may be open from eight (8) a.m. to ten (10) p.m. unless provided otherwise under state code. 
e.  Signage. Permanent signs are prohibited for Temporary Uses. All Signs shall follow the requirements of Chapter 17.08. 
f.  Regulations by Other Agencies. This Section does not exempt the Applicant or operator from acquiring any other required permit for operation. 
g.  Liability Insurance. The Applicant must obtain adequate liability insurance to cover all activities related to the Use for the duration of the permit, prior to issuance of the Temporary Use permit. A copy of the liability insurance policy shall be submitted to the City with the business license Application. 
2.  Site Improvements. 
a.  Temporary Uses shall meet the following requirements: 
i.  If the Temporary Use is located on an unimproved Parcel, the following shall apply: 
a)  Based on the scope of the operation, the land-use authority may require the installation of a minimum road base or gravel surface for parking, to assure the safe passage of vehicles on adjacent roadways, and the safety of patrons. 
b)  Sufficient off-Street parking shall be provided to meet the needs of the operation and of any existing Uses on the property. 
c)  Structures, displays, and other activities must be located sufficient distance from any Street to provide for public safety and Clear View Area requirements as found in Chapter 17.07. 
d)  If any part of the Temporary Use becomes a nuisance or safety hazard, the land-use authority may require changes or discontinuance of the operation. 
e)  All activities and displays shall take place in accordance with the standards for outside business activities found elsewhere in this Title. 
i.  If the Temporary Use is located on an improved Lot or Parcel, the following shall apply: 
a)  Sufficient off-Street parking shall be provided to meet the needs of the operation and any existing Uses on the property as determined by the land use authority. 
b)  Structures, displays, and other activities must be located sufficient distance from Streets to provide for public safety and Clear View requirements as found in Chapter 17.07. 
c)  If any part of the operation becomes a nuisance or safety hazard, the land use authority may require changes to or discontinuance of the operation. 
d)  In addition to the foregoing, all activities and displays shall take place in accordance with the standards for outside business activities found elsewhere in this Title. 
e)  Permanently located businesses that operate a Temporary Use shall meet the design standard and site improvement requirements found in Chapter 17.06 and 17.07. 
3.  Site Restoration. The site must be restored to its original condition upon expiration of the Temporary Use permit. The site may not be used for storage of any Temporary Use or Structures. 
4.  Temporary Structures. All Temporary Structures must be approved by the land-use authority. In order to avoid damage to adjacent Uses or property, all Temporary Structures shall be properly secured or anchored to the ground to prevent the Structure from being moved. The City may require additional securing or anchoring upon finding that the method of securing is inadequate. 
N.  Wireless Communication Facility. 
1.  In addition to the existing Conditional Use standards, the following factors shall be considered by the planning commission: 
a.  Compatibility of the proposed Structure with the height and mass of existing adjacent Buildings and utility structures; 
b.  Whether Collocation of the Antenna on other existing structures in the same vicinity with such Uses as other towers, Buildings, utility poles and similar structures is possible, and practical, as demonstrated by the Applicant, without significantly affecting the Antenna transmission or reception; 
c.  The location of the Antenna in relation to existing vegetation, topography, and Buildings to optimize visual Screening; 
d.  Whether the spacing between Monopoles creates detrimental impact on adjacent properties; 
e.  The willingness of the Applicant to allow Collocation on its facility in the future for a reasonable compensation, as provided in sub (1)(b) of this Subsection. 
2.  The planning commission may, as a condition for approval, impose a requirement that the Structure be designed and engineered to reasonably allow Collocation by a subsequent provider of low power radio communication services, if Collocation is feasible and consistent with sound engineering principles. Nothing herein shall be construed to deny the Owner of such a Structure from the right to receive a reasonable compensation from that subsequent collocating provider for the Use of the structure. 
3.  Accessory Buildings for Antenna Structures. Accessory Buildings to Antenna structures must comply with the required Setback, height and Landscaping requirements of the zoning district in which they are located. Monopoles shall be fenced with a six-foot chain-link fence and the climbing pegs removed from the lower twenty (20) feet of the Monopole. 
4.  Abandoned Facilities. The Community Development Department is empowered to require an abandoned low power radio services Antenna be removed from the Building or premises when that Antenna has not been put into use by the Owner, the person having control, or the person receiving the benefit of the Structure within thirty (30) calendar days after notice is given to the Owner, the person having control, or the person receiving the benefit of the structure. Notices required by this Section may be given by personal service, or by certified mail addressed to the person's last known address. 
5.  Where Allowed. A low power radio service facility which is not otherwise classified in this Section shall be considered as a Conditional Use as outlined herein. A Conditional Use permit for a Monopole may be granted in a residential district only if the planning commission finds that: 
a.  The Monopole Antenna otherwise meets the requirements of Subsection (D) and does not exceed sixty (60) feet in height; 
b.  The Antenna tower will be placed on a Parcel occupied by non-Residential Uses, such as a school, church, or other non-Residential Use which is otherwise legally located in that residential district; 
c.  The Antenna tower will be located no closer than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the nearest residential structure; and 
d.  The Antenna and supporting Structure will be disguised as, or otherwise integrated with, a light pole, Billboard, utility Structure or similarly Compatible and useful Structure located on the Parcel in a way that minimizes and mitigates the visual impact of the Antenna. 
6.  Controlling Chapter. Notwithstanding the various descriptions of land uses listed in the ordinances of the City relative to communication facilities, and the manner in which those various Uses are listed as Permitted or Conditional Uses in the respective chapters of this Title, the provisions of this Section and the accompanying Wireless Communication Facility chart in Chapter 17.04 shall prevail in governing the placement of wireless communication facilities, low power radio services facilities, and appurtenant facilities in the City, including the designation of Permitted and Conditional Uses in the various land-use districts. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.05.050 - Conditional Use Permit Standards. 
Upon review and consideration of the criteria identified in this Chapter, as compared to the impacts of Permitted Uses in the district, the proposal must: 
A.  Be Compatible in intensity of Use, Scale, and design with Permitted Uses in the district; 
B.  Not compromise the health, safety, or welfare of: 
1.  Persons employed within or using the proposed Development; 
2.  Those residing or working in the vicinity of the proposed Use or Development; or 
3.  Property or improvements in the vicinity of the proposed Use or Development; 
C.  Not impose disproportionate burdens on the citizens of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.05.060 - Conditional Use Permit Determination. 
A.  The land use authority shall issue a Conditional Use Permit, describing the scope of the permit and all reasonable conditions of approval if the Application complies with Code and the Applicant has proposed, or the land use authority has required, conditions to substantially mitigate the reasonably anticipated detrimental effects of the proposed Use. 
B.  If the land use authority determines that the Application does not comply with the standards and criteria of this Chapter and the Applicant has not proposed or the land use authority cannot impose additional, reasonable conditions of approval to that would bring the proposal within the standards and criteria of this Code, the land use authority may deny the Conditional Use Permit Application. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.05.070 - Modification of Conditional Use Permit. 
A.  The land use authority may reasonably modify the conditions of a Conditional Use Permit if the actual detrimental effects of previously identified adverse impacts are greater than anticipated, or the proposed mitigation has been unsuccessful at mitigating those actual detrimental effects to comply with the standards of this Code. 
B.  Modification proceedings may be initiated by the Applicant, the City, or an injured party with standing. The party seeking the modification must pay the costs associated with the modification proceedings and file a petition for modification with the City. Modification proceedings are conducted in the same manner as an initial review. 
C.  The Conditional Use permit holder is a necessary party to these proceedings and shall be afforded due process. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.05.080 - Expansion or Growth of Conditional Use. 
A.  A Conditional Use may not be expanded without first undergoing modification proceedings, as provided in Section 17.05.060, and obtaining a Conditional Use Permit that addresses and allows the proposed expansion of the Conditional Use. 
B.  Expansion of a Conditional Use occurs if the square footage of a Structure on a property subject to a Conditional Use Permit or associated with a Use listed as "Conditional" in this Title's Land Use Matrix will be increased by greater than ten (10) percent of the square footage existing at the time of the initial Conditional Use Application. 
C.  A Conditional Use has grown if any of the following occurs: 
1.  The pedestrian or vehicle traffic has increased by greater than twenty (20) percent than was anticipated at the time of the initial Conditional Use Application, and the increased traffic is a result or impact of the Use; 
2.  Off-Street parking has become inadequate due to the number of customers, employees, or occupants associated with the Conditional Use; or 
3.  Other detrimental effects, such as noise, odor, or light pollution, have increased beyond what was reasonably anticipated at the time of the initial Conditional Use Application. 
D.  The City may initiate modification proceedings if a Conditional Use has grown to the extent provided in this Section. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.05.090 - Revocation of Conditional Use Permit. 
A.  A Conditional Use permit may be revoked or suspended if any of the following occur or are found to have occurred: 
1.  The Conditional Use Permit was obtained by fraud or misrepresentation; 
2.  One or more of the conditions of the Permit have not been met; 
3.  The holder or user of the permit has failed to comply with any local, state, or federal laws governing the conduct of the Conditional Use; 
4.  The holder or user of the Permit has failed to construct or maintain the site as shown on the approved plans; or 
5.  A Conditional Use has been expanded or grown and cannot mitigate the detrimental effects of that expansion or growth. 
B.  Revocation is appropriate when the Applicant has knowingly engaged in conduct that violates the Conditional Use Permit, or when the holder or user has previously had the Permit suspended. Notice shall be given of a pending revocation and the Property Owner will be given a reasonable opportunity to cure the violation in the same manner as provided for other violations of ordinances in this Title. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.05.100 - Building Permits. 
The issuance of a Conditional Use Permit does not excuse an Applicant from applying for and obtaining Building Permits for the location, unless Building Permits are not required for the approved Conditional Use. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.05.110 - Conditional Use Permit Expiration. 
A.  Conditional Use Not Implemented. A Conditional Use Permit expires if the Permit has not been implemented within one (1) year from the date of approval. The Permit is considered implemented if the holder of the Permit engages in the Conditional Use or completes substantial construction on the site for which the Permit was granted. 
B.  Conditional Use Abandoned. If the approved Conditional Use or activity ceases for any reason for a continuous period of six consecutive months or more, the Conditional Use Permit shall automatically terminate without further notice, as having been abandoned. A person may only reinstate the Conditional Use after applying for and receiving a new Conditional Use Permit. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
Chapter 17.06 - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
Sections:  
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
 
17.06.010 - Site Development Plan and Development Lot Required. 
No Building Permit shall be issued for the construction of any Building or Structure located on a Lot or Parcel that does not conform to these regulations. 
A.  The Applicant shall prepare Site Development plans consistent with the standards contained herein and shall pay for the design, evaluation, construction and inspection of any Public Improvements required. 
B.  No one shall alter any terrain or remove any vegetation from the proposed Development Site or engage in any Site Development until an Applicant has obtained the necessary Development Permits. 
C.  The Community Development Department shall review submitted plans for: 
1.  Design; 
2.  Conformity to the Master Plans; 
3.  Compliance with this Title; 
4.  Adequacy of Public Improvements serving the Lot; and 
5.  Environmental quality of the Development Design. 
D.  Plans of proposed Developments may be referred by the Community Development Department to any City department, special district, governmental board, bureau, utility company, and other agency that will provide public or private facilities and services to the Development for their information and comment. The Community Development Department shall coordinate comments received from public and private entities and share such comments with the Applicant. 
E.  The City Engineer shall review and comment on the engineering plans and specifications for the improvements required for Site Development consist with this Title, the Construction Standards and Specifications for Public Improvements and other applicable ordinances and shall be responsible for determining the appropriate amount of an Infrastructure Improvement Assurance, Improvement Warranty, and any Guaranty should be, and for inspecting the required improvements for compliance with this Title. 
F.  The City Attorney shall verify that the Infrastructure Improvement Assurance, Warranty and any other Guaranty provided by the Applicant is acceptable. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.06.020 - Payment of fees. 
No permit shall be issued unless the Applicant has first paid to the City all applicable fees required and, as applicable and has reimbursed the City for all out of pocket costs incurred in review and enforcement of the Application. The amounts of all fees shall be listed in the fee schedule which may be amended from time to time by the City Council. Payment of fees does not affect the Applicant's obligation to construct and Dedicate Public Improvements or meet other obligations of Development approval. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.06.030 - Review required. 
Each person who proposes to Develop land shall first request a concept review from the Community Development Department. No Development shall be considered for approval until a written concept plan has been received from the Community Development Department. This provides the Applicant with an opportunity to consult with and receive assistance from the City regarding the regulations and design requirements applicable to the Development of property before submitting a complete Application. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.06.040 - General Site Development Standards. 
A.  For all Development, prior to issuance of a Building Permit, the Development Site must meet the following criteria: 
1.  The proposed Development is on a legal Lot. 
2.  All required curb and gutter must be installed unless the City allows such installation to be deferred until a later stage of the Development; if deferred, then the location and elevation of curb and gutter must be clearly marked in a manner acceptable to the City and the Applicant must have posted a Site Development Guaranty to secure installation of curb and gutter before a date certain; 
3.  All underground utilities located under the Street or access way surface are installed and accepted by the City and appropriate agencies; 
4.  Fire hydrants are fully operational in the area of the Development where permits are requested, with adequate culinary water lines fire flow to meet the demands of all properties served by the line; 
5.  Streets or access ways are rough graded and provided with an all-weather surface acceptable to the City; and 
6.  Continuous access to the area of the requested permit through the project is provided by an access, approved by the City, and improved with an all-weather surface. 
B.  Limits of Disturbance/Vegetation Protection. A plan for vegetation protection during construction and for revegetation after construction is required. A security will be required to be posted to ensure compliance with the Limits of Disturbance plan. 
1.  All Construction Activity must be contained within the Limits of Disturbance line, with the balance of the Property remaining undisturbed. Access to the Limits of Disturbance Area should be along the planned driveway. 
2.  Building Pad lines may be specified on some Plats instead of Limits of Disturbance. If Building Pad lines are designated, no part of the new construction may lie outside of the Building Pad line. 
3.  Limits of Disturbance must be designated in the field prior to commencement of excavation with temporary fencing approved by the Building Department. 
C.  Final Grading Required. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued until Final Grading has been completed in accordance with the civil engineering plans approved with the final Subdivision Plat and the Lots recovered with top soil with an average depth of at least six inches (6") which shall contain no particles over two inches (2") in diameter over the entire Area of the Lot, except that portion covered by Buildings or included in Streets, or where the Grade has not been changed or natural vegetation damaged. 
D.  Revegetation, Seed and Sod. All disturbed Areas on Lots shall be covered with topsoil and landscaped in accordance with Section 17.06.200. 
E.  Debris and Waste. Unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer and Building Official, no cut trees, timber, debris, earth, rocks, stones, soil, junk, rubbish, or other waste materials of any kind shall be buried in any land, or left or deposited on any Lot or Street at the time of issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, and removal of same shall be required prior to issuance of any Certificate of Occupancy in a Subdivision, nor shall any be left or deposited in any Area of the Subdivision at the time of expiration of the Infrastructure Improvement Assurance or acceptance of Dedication of Public Improvements, whichever is sooner. 
F.  Maintenance. Until the Site Development is completed and accepted by the City and all appropriate agencies, the Owner/Applicant shall be responsible for the following in the area where Building Permits have been issued: 
1.  Maintaining roads and access ways in a manner that allows continuous access for emergency vehicles; and 
2.  Maintaining continuous flow capacities to all relevant hydrants in the Development. 
G.  Guaranty. The Applicant shall issue a Guaranty to the reasonable satisfaction of the City Attorney that shall include an amount to ensure completion of all requirements contained in these regulations including, but not limited to, soil preservation, Final Grading, Lot drainage, Landscaping, lawn-grass seeding, removal of debris and waste, Fencing, and all other required Lot improvements. 
1.  Governmental units to which a Guaranty applies may file in lieu of said contract or guaranties a certified resolution or ordinance from officers or agencies authorized to act in their behalf, agreeing to comply with the provisions of this Title. 
17.06.050.  Site Development/Occupancy. 
Property Access Requirements. No Building Permit shall be issued on a Lot or Parcel that is not an improved Lot. There shall be no human occupancy of any Building until all required Infrastructure Improvements have been completed and an occupancy permit has been issued. 
A.  Disclosure Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to transfer any portion of an approved Development prior to certificate of occupancy unless that person has advised the prospective buyer that occupancy permits will not be issued until all required improvements are completed. 
B.  Occupancy Restrictions. Occupancy will not be allowed until the following conditions are met: 
1.  All necessary utilities are installed: e.g., culinary water lines, sanitary sewer, quad duct, flood control facilities, electric power, natural gas, and telephone transmission lines; 
2.  Finished road surfaces and pedestrian safety infrastructure are installed. 
3.  All building code requirements are met as confirmed by the City Building Official. 
4.  Public Safety and Utility Access. Throughout construction and occupancy, all land Uses and Structures shall maintain unobstructed public utility and safety vehicle access in accordance with Appendix D of the International Fire Code in effect in the state of Utah. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
ARTICLE II. - PARKING, ACCESS, AND CIRCULATION REQUIREMENTS 
 
17.06.110 - Purpose. 
Off-Street Parking Areas and access management are an integral part of all land use categories in the City of South Salt Lake. Vehicle and bicycle parking, access, loading and circulation requirements are established to reduce Street congestion, traffic hazards, vehicle and pedestrian interaction and to develop standards for organized off-Street parking. The regulations in this Section are intended to complement design and Use standards found elsewhere in this Title. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.06.120 - General provisions. 
A.  Parking Area Development. The minimum off-Street Parking Stalls with adequate provisions for ingress and egress shall be provided at the time when one or more of the following improvements occur: 
1.  New site Development. 
2.  Structure Additions or Expansions. If a Building Permit is issued for an addition or expansion of a non-residential property that would increase the number of stalls required for the land Use. 
3.  Parking areas, driveways, or drive lanes are expanded to include additional property or land area that was not included when the Development was originally approved. 
4.  Change of Use to a more intensive Use of a Building through the addition of Dwelling Units, Floor Area, or seating capacity. When the Use of an existing Building or Structure is changed to a different type of Use, parking shall be provided in the amount required for such new Use. 
5.  Shared Parking is proposed by two or more land Uses that have different parking patterns and peak parking demand hours. 
6.  Existing hard surfacing is removed from the Parking Area and replaced with new hard surfacing as per Section 17.06.140(B). 
B.  Existing parking and loading areas. If existing nonconforming parking and loading facilities are below the requirements as established in this Chapter, they shall not be further reduced. 
C.  Floor Area. For the purposes of parking requirements, Floor Area shall be defined as the gross footage of the Building measured from the exterior corners. Parking ratios more than one-half will be rounded upward to the next highest whole number. Ratios less than one-half will be disregarded. 
D.  Shared Parking. Property Owners and developers are encouraged to work out Shared Parking agreements with adjacent users wherever possible according to the provisions for Shared Parking contained in Section 17.06.160(F). 
E.  Continued obligation to provide Parking Stalls. Compliance with this Chapter is a continuing obligation so long as the Use continues. It shall be unlawful for any Owner of any Building or for any person responsible for providing parking to discontinue, eliminate or reduce a required Parking Area without providing some other approved vehicle Parking Area that meets the requirements of this Chapter, unless approval of the land use authority is obtained for the change in Parking Area. 
F.  Nonconforming Parking Areas. The area and number of available Parking Stalls in nonconforming parking facilities shall not be further reduced. Any reconstruction, alteration or other change in Use shall be subject to the provisions of this Chapter. 
G.  Parking for persons with disabilities. Parking Stalls for persons with disabilities shall meet the ADA and Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards, shall be provided in off-Street Parking Lot areas, and shall count towards fulfilling the minimum required automobile parking. 
H.  Storage. All areas designated for off-Street parking, maneuvering, loading or Site Landscaping shall not be used for outdoor storage of materials, repair, dismantling or inventory. 
I.  Nonconforming, unused or abandoned drive approaches. When the requirements listed in Subsection (A) are met, nonconforming, unused or abandoned curb cuts and other drive approaches serving property within any land use district shall be brought into compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
J.  Shared drive approaches. Shared driveways between and among Lots or Parcels are allowed only if both Owners execute and record an easement in a form approved by the City to ensure access in perpetuity for both Lots or Parcels. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.06.130 - Residential parking requirements and regulations. 
A.  Vehicles must be parked on a Hard Surface. All areas used for parking shall be paved with a Hard Surface of concrete or asphalt material. 
B.  Trailer and recreational vehicle parking surface. All approved areas for parking trailers and recreational vehicles shall be accessed from an approved driveway and shall be paved with a Hard Surface of concrete or asphalt material. 
C.  Commercial vehicle parking. The following vehicles are prohibited from parking in an R-1 land Use district, except for commercial vehicles making or receiving deliveries or vehicles engaged in active permitted Development activities: 
1.  Commercial truck, trailer, or construction vehicle exceeding one ton in capacity. 
2.  Truck-tractor. 
3.  Semi-trailer. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.06.140 - Commercial Parking Lot design criteria. 
A.  Parking plans. Parking Development plans for any proposed Parking Area or facility shall be submitted to the land use authority. For Parking Lot areas that are not associated with new Building construction or redevelopment, the property Owner or its designated agent shall submit a parking Development plan to the City for review. Work shall not commence on Parking Lot improvements until the City has approved such improvements and issued a permit. The parking Development plan shall indicate the following proposed improvements with accurate measurements, including, but not limited to: 
1.  Parcel size and dimensions. 
2.  Building layout. 
2.  Curb cuts for ingress and egress. 
3.  Parking dimensions and configuration. 
4.  Striping and traffic control markings. 
5.  Landscaping as required in this Chapter and other relevant sections. 
6.  Lighting. 
7.  Drainage calculations and facilities for on-site detention and introduction into the storm sewer. 
8.  Traffic or parking study if requested by the City or other government agency. 
9.  Any necessary agreements with adjacent property Owners for Shared Parking, ingress and egress, drainage or utilities. 
10.  Prior approvals from other government agencies which require approval for ingress or egress. 
B.  Parking Area surfacing. Every Lot or Parcel of land used for a vehicle Parking Area or facility shall be paved with impervious asphalt or concrete surfacing. 
C.  Parking Area lighting. When an existing Parking Area is proposed for redeveloped, or for additional lighting, an Applicant must submit proposed lighting plans to the City and a photometric study showing the following items: 
1.  Location and description of each outdoor lighting fixture, aiming angle and mounting heights. 
2.  Description of the outdoor light fixture including specifications of lamp optics and cutoff angles. 
3.  A schedule providing for the reduction of on-site lighting during the hours when the facility is not in operation while still providing for levels necessary for security purposes. 
4.  All new and replacement lighting shall have directional shields or control devices to reflect light trespass away from adjacent Uses and roadways. 
5.  To control light trespass onto adjacent properties or Streets, the maximum illumination, when measured at the Property Line at a height of five feet and facing the light fixture(s), shall be no greater than 0.5 foot-candles. 
6.  All Parking Lot lighting shall use a down lit fixture in order to encourage the practice of "dark sky" friendly practices. 
 
D.  Curb. The perimeter of all paved surfaces shall be finished with a six-inch high curbing with ADA ramps where necessary. Bumper curbs shall be installed where appropriate to keep property and vehicles from being damaged and to prevent vehicles from over-hanging sidewalks. Where such curbs serve as a wheel stop for Parking Stalls, not less than thirty-six (36) inches shall be provided in the planting area as overhang clearance for tree locations. Curbs shall be designed to allow storm water to enter Landscaped Areas. 
 
E.  Landscaping. Parking Lot Landscaping shall meet the requirements as found in Chapter 17.06.300. 
F.  Drainage. Parking Lots shall be graded and drained to detain and dispose of all surface water as required by the City. The introduction of storm water into the storm sewer system shall meet minimum retention requirements as approved by the City. 
G.  Parking Area location. See Chapter 17.07 Design Standards. 
H.  Nonconforming driveways. Existing, nonconforming driveways and Parking Lots shall be reconstructed or removed upon Development of a new Building or other substantial site improvement. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.06.150 - Access management. 
A.  Ingress and egress for non-residential Development. 
1.  All Parking Areas shall be designed to provide ingress and egress from a Public Street. Development shall not include parking that would require that a vehicle back onto a Right-of-Way. 
2.  All off-Street Parking Lots shall have access to a Public Street by means of a paved driveway. 
3.  There shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet of driveway length between the public Right-of-Way and the nearest Parking Stall, with no parking allowed within this area. 
4.  Parking Stalls located at the end of a dead-end Drive Aisle shall have a minimum of a five-foot (5') back-up area. 
 
5.  Parking Lots shall be designed to include the necessary dimensions and circulation for the on-site maneuvering of fire and refuse trucks as determined by the City Engineer and the Fire Marshal. Fire access shall be continuously maintained for all driveway access and Parking Areas 
6.  As a condition of issuance of each Building Permit, any unused or abandoned drive approaches or portions thereof shall be restored to the original curb and gutter section by the removal of the drive approach and replacement of improvements required for the applicable road profile (i.e. curb, gutter, Park Strip, Landscaping, sidewalk, etc.) designated in this Chapter and the Streets Master Plan. 
B.  Driveway Access and separation. 
1.  Residential driveways. 
a.  Single Family Residential Driveways Located on Local Streets. 
i.  Each Parcel shall have one permitted driveway with a maximum width of twenty (20) feet as measured at the flare of the driveway. A second driveway may be allowed for a residence located on a Corner Lot to access a garage or Carport Parking Area in the rear yard. 
ii.  Circular driveways may be allowed in required Front Yard area, along with a second drive leading from the circular driveway to a garage or Carport. Such driveways shall not exceed than twelve (12) feet in width. To qualify for a circular driveway: 
I.  A Lot shall be a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet in width; 
II.  The Owner shall maintain approved Landscaping at least fifteen (15) feet in depth from the Front Property Line to the closest edge of the drive. 
iii.  Driveways on neighboring Lots shall be separated by a minimum of six feet (6'), as measured at the flare of the adjacent driveways. 
iv.  For Corner Lots, no driveway shall be located closer than thirty (30) feet from on another at the point of curb intersections. 
v.  Clear View Areas shall be unobstructed as depicted below: 
 
 
2.  Multi-Family, commercial and industrial driveways. 
a.  Lots with fewer than one hundred (100) feet of Frontage on Arterial or Collector Streets shall have only one approach. The maximum approach width is 30 feet. Shared common drive approaches are encouraged in order to reduce the number of entrances on the Street and to support efficient travel of vehicles. 
 
b.  Lots that have Frontage greater than one hundred feet (100') may have one additional drive approach every two hundred feet (200'). Drive approaches shall not be greater than 30 feet (30') in width, as measured from the flares on each approach. 
c.  Driveways adjacent to intersections on Corner Lots shall meet the following minimum distance requirements as measured from the flare of the drive approach to the point of the corner intersection. 
i.  Major/Minor Arterial: One hundred (100) feet. 
ii.  Major Collector: One hundred (100) feet. 
iii.  Minor Collector: Fifty (50) feet. 
 
d.  Driveways on abutting commercial Lots shall be separated a minimum of twenty (20) feet and no driveway shall be located closer to a Property Line than seven (7) feet unless jointly shared (by recorded easement) by adjoining properties. 
e.  The City Engineer or designee may approve a modification to the separation requirements from an intersection based upon a site visit and review of relevant factors, including, but not limited to: 
i.  Safety. 
ii.  Alternative access points and potential for reciprocal or shared accesses. 
iii.  Sight lines. 
iv.  Impact on traffic flow. 
3.  The following shall be considered when reviewing driveway access points: 
a.  The movement of vehicular traffic; 
b.  Public Improvements; 
c.  Alternative access points and shared access; and 
d.  Clear View Area regulations and safety. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.06.160 - Parking Stall requirements. 
A.  Parking requirements for specific Uses. Off-Street parking shall be provided for Uses as indicated in the following matrix. 
1.  Uses Not Specifically Listed. Parking requirements for Permitted or Conditional Uses not specifically listed in the following matrix shall be provided in the same ratio as the Use most closely approximating the characteristics of the unlisted Use, as determined by the Community Development Director. 
2.  Employee parking for Uses with an employee component shall be determined using the maximum number of employees working on the largest shift. 
3.  Uses located in the Transit Oriented Development district and Commercial Neighborhood district that have a bicycle parking requirement shall provide 1 bicycle parking space per every 15 vehicle Parking Stalls. This requirement supersedes those ratios established in the matrix below. 
4.  Matrix of Parking Requirements by Use. Uses are grouped into categories that have similar parking requirements. The following matrix indicates the required parking for Uses in the City: 
Parking Requirements by Use 
Land Use 	Number of Stalls Required 	Number of
Public Bicycle 
parking spaces
Required 
Adult Daycare; Child Care 
Center 	1 stall per 5 guests, plus 
unloading area 	N/A 
Alcoholic Beverage—Bar 
Establishment; Alcoholic 
Beverage—Tavern 	3.5 stalls per 1,000 square feet 	N/A 
Art Studio (Light Industry) 	1 stall per 500 square feet 	1 per 50 stalls 
Assisted Living Facility; Nursing Home 	.50 stalls per bedroom plus 1 stall per employee 	1 per 15 bedrooms for visitors 
Auto Body Repair; Automotive Restoration; Automotive Service and Repair; Automotive Service Station (Non-Mechanical) 	1 stall per employee, 1 stall per 200 square feet of office, and 1 stall per 500 square feet of shop area 	N/A 
Auto, Light Truck, RV, Boat, Trailer Dealership (Sale, Lease, or Rent); All-Terrain Vehicle (ATV), Motorcycle, Personal Watercraft (PWC), Snowmobile Sales and Service 	1 stall for every 20 vehicles displayed with a maximum of 15 stalls. A minimum of three employee Parking Stalls provided. Off-Street customer and employee Parking Stalls shall be identified. 	N/A 
Bakery, Commercial; Manufacturing; Alcoholic Beverage—Manufacturer 	1 stall per employee 	1 per 50 stalls 
Barber Shop/Hair Salon; Day Spa 	1 stall per 250 square feet 	1 per 15 stalls 
Bowling Alley 	2 stalls per lane 	1 per 50 stalls 
Crematory/Embalming Facility; Funeral/Mortuary Home 	1 stall per 100 square feet of assembly area plus one per employee 	N/A 
Dwelling, Multi-Family; Dwelling, Townhome 	.5 stalls guest parking per unit; 1.2 stalls per unit in TOD-C district Development; 1.5 stalls per studio or one-bedroom unit; 2 stalls per duplex or two-bedroom unit; 2.5 stalls per three+ bedroom unit 	1 per 15 units for visitor and .25 secure spaces per unit 
Dwelling, Single-Family 	2 stalls per Dwelling Unit, with at least 1 stall located in an enclosed garage 	N/A 
Education, Elementary or Secondary 	1 stall per teacher and staff, plus 1 additional stall per every 2 classrooms for elementary or middles schools or plus 1 additional stall for every 10 students for high schools 	1 per 25 stalls 
Education, Higher (Public); Education, Technical 	1 stall for every 3 classroom seats 	1 per 25 stalls 
Fitness Center 	1 per 5 students plus 1 per employee; 1 stall per 300 square feet for Recreation Centers; 1 stall per 100 square feet for dance halls 	1 per 15 stalls; 1 per 25 stalls for dance halls 
Homeless Shelter 	.25 stalls per bed plus 1 stall per employee 	
Hospital, Specialty 	1 stall per every 2 beds 	1 per 50 stalls 
Hotel 	1 stall per unit plus 1 stall per 200 square feet of office, meeting, assembly, conference or banquet stall 	1 per 50 stalls 
Laundromat 	1 stall per 3 machines 	1 per 15 stalls 
Library 	4 stalls per 1,000 square feet 	1 per 25 stalls 
Medical, Dental, Health Care Office; Massage Therapy 	5 stalls per 1,000 square feet 	1 per 25 stalls 
Museum 	2 stalls per 1,000 annual visitors 	1 per 25 stalls 
Nature Center 	2 stalls per 1,000 annual visitors 	1 per 25 stalls 
Office, Professional 	4 stalls per 1,000 square feet (5.0); for data processing or telemarketing Uses, 1 stall per employee 	1 per 20 stalls (or 1 per 25 employees for data processing or telemarketing Uses) 
Place of Worship 	1 stall for every 4 seats in the Place of Worship 	1 per 25 stalls 
Restaurant (fast-food) 	1 stall per 100 square feet of Floor Area 	1 per 20 stalls 
Restaurant (sit-down) 	1 stall per 3 seats plus .50 stall per employee 	1 per 25 stalls 
Retail; Alcoholic Beverage—Package Agency 	4 stalls per 1,000 square feet 	1 per 15 stalls 
Storage Facility, Warehouse; Alcoholic Beverage—Beer Wholesaler; Alcoholic Beverage—Liquor Warehouse 	1 stall per 1,000 square feet 	1 per 50 stalls 
Storage Facility, Indoor 	1 stall per employee, 2 stalls per care taker, 3 stalls conveniently located at the registration area 	1 per 50 stalls 
Temporary Use 	1 stall for every 3 patrons to the event 	N/A 
Theater, Movie; Theater, Live Performance 	1 stall for every 3 seats 	1 per 30 stalls 
 
B.  Parking Stall Configuration. The minimum Parking Stall and Drive Aisle configurations are provided in the following table and illustration. 
Parking Stall Dimension Table * 
Angle of Parking 	Stall Width 	Stall Depth 	Curb Length 
Per Vehicle 	Minimum Drive 
Aisle Width 
(One Way) 	Minimum Drive 
Aisle Width 
(Two Way) 
Parallel along the curb - 0 degree 	9 ft. 	23 ft. 	23 ft. 	12 ft. 	24 ft. 
45 degree 	9 ft. 	18 ft. 	12.6 ft. 	15 ft. 	22 ft. 
60 degree 	9 ft. 	18 ft. 	10.4 ft. 	18 ft. 	24 ft. 
90 degree 	9 ft. 	18 ft. 	9 ft. 	24 ft. 	24 ft. 
 
*Drive Aisle widths may be increased when required by the City Fire Marshal or City Engineer. 
 
C.  Vehicle stacking capacity in drive-thru lanes. The following table shall be used when determining stacking capacity for the following drive-thru Uses: 
Vehicle Stacking Capacity in Drive-Thru Lanes 
Use 	Minimum Stack 	Measured From 
Automated teller machine (ATM) 	3 per machine 	Teller machine 
Car Wash 	3 per lane 	Wash bay entrance 
Dry cleaner 	2 per lane 	Drive-up Window 
Financial Institution with teller lane 	3 per lane 	Teller or Drive-up Window 
Pharmacy 	3 per lane 	Drive-up Window 
Restaurant with drive-thru 	5 per lane 	Order box 
 
D.  Tandem Parking. Tandem Parking Stalls shall only be counted as required Parking Stalls where approved by the land use authority in the following instances 
1.  Single-Family Dwellings with garages. 
2.  Multi-Family Dwellings with garages where both stalls are under the same lease agreement. 
3.  Where valet parking services are approved by the land use authority. 
E.  Transit Oriented Development Modification Plan. The land use authority may approve a modification in the number of off-Street Parking Stalls required for a land use in the Transit Oriented Development—Core district in accordance with the ratios established in this Section. 
1.  Residential Parking in the Transit Oriented Development—Core district: 
a.  All Developments must submit a parking and traffic study performed by a licensed transportation engineer with a detailed description of the proposed Use, hours of operation, and anticipated parking demand. 
b.  The Applicant must submit evidence that the proposed Development meets two (2) of the following standards: 
i.  The Development is located within a quarter (1/4) mile of a light rail station; 
ii.  The Development is designed to be walkable and is located in an area of the City where pedestrian connectivity has been established; 
iii.  The Development provides a car or van pool program; 
iv.  The Development provides secure bike parking facilities; or 
v.  The Development provides transit subsidies to tenants and employees. 
c.  Site Plan Approval Required. If the Applicant complies with Section 17.06.160(E)(1)(b), a Site Plan demonstrating parking quantities, design, and layout shall be submitted to the Community Development Department and must comply with all applicable standards contained this Chapter with the following exception: 
i.  The standard requirement for residential parking is 1.5 stalls per unit. 
ii.  The land use authority may consider increases or reductions to standards outlined in the accompanying table. The maximum decrease from any standard parking rate for a Residential Use shall be 20%. 
iii.  Dedicated visitor parking. Developers shall clearly indicate the location of dedicated visitor parking through directional signage, marked stalls, or other means to be determined in Site Plan review. 
d.  The following table provides all eligible parking rate reductions available in the TOD and TOD-Core district: 
Eligible Parking Rate Reductions 
Amenity 	Recommended Reduction
(Stalls/Unit) 
Car share (limit 1 car/100 units) 	0.05 
Unbundled parking (100% of units) 	0.1 
Bike share 	0.05 
Bike lockers/storage 	0.05 
Development supplied transit passes to 100% of units 	0.15 
Senior housing 	0.2 
Student housing (< .25 miles from campus) 	0.1 
 
2.  Commercial Parking. 
a.  Commercial Use transit-oriented Developments may receive up to a twenty percent (20%) reduction in parking when located within the Transit Oriented Development-Core District. A Development must comply with at least two (2) additional requirements below to qualify for the parking reductions: 
i.  Shared Parking. The Development consists of two (2) or more land Uses that have different parking patterns and peak parking demand hours. Regulations for Shared Parking can be followed as found in Subsection (F) of this Section except for the following additional provisions: 
a)  In Mixed-Use Developments, no one Use may consist of less than twenty percent (20%) of the Building square footage; and 
b)  Mixed-Use Buildings must be comprised of at least 50% Residential Use. 
ii.  Transit passes are provided to 100% of employees at the Development. 
iii.  Provisions are made for long term bicycle storage for residential tenants or business employees. Long term storage shall consist of facilities such as lockers, indoor Parking Areas, or other secure areas designated for parking. 
iv.  Alternative proposals approved by the land use authority that will encourage and provide for increased transit ridership. 
C.  Excessive parking. Commercial Developments shall not have parking in excess of that required by this Chapter, without prior written approval of the land use authority. If more Parking Stalls are requested, written justification of the specific need for more Parking Stalls than the provisions of this Chapter allow may be required. The land use authority may require a parking and/or traffic impact analysis by a licensed traffic engineer when the request exceeds twenty (20) stalls or an increase of ten percent. 
D.  Shared Parking. Flexibility through Shared Parking may be allowed when two (2) or more Uses have different parking patterns and peak parking demand hours. These Uses shall be able to use the same off-Street Parking Areas throughout the day to reduce the total demand for Parking Stalls. The following schedule of Shared Parking is provided to indicate how Shared Parking for certain Uses might be used to reduce the total parking required. Refer to the appendix for an illustrative Shared Parking table. 
Schedule of Shared Parking 
General Use 
Classification 	Weekday 	Weekend1 
	Midnight—7:00 a.m. 	7:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m. 	6:00 p.m.—Midnight 	Midnight—7:00 a.m. 	7:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m. 	6:00 p.m.—Midnight 
Residential 	100% 	50% 	80% 	100% 	75% 	75% 
Office 	5% 	100% 	20% 	5% 	20% 	10% 
Retail/Commercial 2 	5% 	80% 	100% 	5% 	100% 	90% 
Hotel 	100% 	65% 	100% 	100% 	65% 	100% 
Light industrial 	10% 	100% 	10% 	10% 	50% 	10% 
Entertainment 3 	10% 	50% 	100% 	10% 	50% 	100% 
Places of worship 	5% 	30% 	50% 	5% 	100% 	75% 
Community centers 	5% 	75% 	85% 	5% 	100% 	100% 
 
1. For Shared Parking purposes weekend shall begin on Friday at 6:00 p.m. 
2. Provision shall be made between shared Uses for typical design day for commercial Uses to ensure sufficient parking. 
3. Percentage of Shared Parking reduction for entertainment Uses may be increased by the land use authority depending on the intensity of the Use and Compatibility with Shared Parking uses. 
1.  To qualify for approval of Shared Parking, Applications shall contain the following: 
a.  Location and identity of each Use that will share the Parking Area. 
b.  Total parking requirement for each use. 
c.  The projected hours of operation of each Use and the hours during which the peak parking demand will be experienced. 
d.  The number of proposed Parking Stalls. 
e.  A Site Plan showing that the furthest Parking Stall is no greater than three hundred (300) feet from the nearest entrance of each Use intended to share the parking. 
f.  A Site Plan showing that the proposed Shared Parking Area will comply with all standards required by this Chapter for Parking Area Development. 
g.  Pedestrian circulation plan that shows connections and walkways between Parking Areas and land uses. 
h.  No one single Use may be less than ten percent of the overall Building square footage. 
2.  Other Uses. If one or more of the land Uses intended to share parking facilities does not conform to the general land use classifications in the Shared Parking matrix, an Applicant may submit data to specify the principal operating hours of the uses. The land use authority may also take this information into account in determining the appropriate Shared Parking accommodation, if any, for such Uses. 
3.  Shared Parking Among Lots Under Different Ownership. When a Shared Parking reduction is to be applied to Uses on several Lots under different ownership, the following shall be provided: 
a.  A plan that provides for interconnected Lots; 
b.  Recorded easements that provide, at a minimum, for: 
i.  Cross-access for both vehicles and pedestrians among the Parking Areas and connections; 
ii.  Allocation of maintenance responsibilities; 
c.  Parking for all Uses shall be located within three hundred (300) feet from the nearest entrance of each Use intended to share the parking. 
d.  Shared Parking among Lots under different ownership may be approved by the land use authority following submittal of a parking Development plan Application and compliance with the provisions detailed above. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.06.170 - Loading areas. 
A.  All Buildings with loading docks or loading areas shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  All loading and unloading areas must be located behind the Primary Façade and must not be visible from a Right-of-Way. 
2.  All loading and unloading associated with the Use shall be performed on-site. Such on-site loading area shall be in addition to required off-Street parking and shall not be located within driveways or Drive Aisles. 
3.  All loading docks and unloading areas shall be located so that no delivery vehicle will be parked or require maneuvering within the public Right-of-Way. Maneuvering and backing space to the loading dock shall be accommodated on-site. 
4.  Public Rights-of-Way shall not be used for loading or unloading. 
5.  Each loading area shall not be less than thirty-five (35) feet in length and twelve (12) feet in width. Enclosed or covered loading and unloading areas shall have an overhead clearance of not less than fourteen (14) feet. 
6.  Off-Street loading areas shall not block use of required Parking Stalls areas on the Site or adjacent Sites. 
7.  Loading/unloading areas shall be asphalt or concrete and constructed to drain and dispose of surface water on-site, away from the Building. 
B.  Standing and Passenger Loading Areas. Uses such as daycares, schools, hotels, and places for public assembly shall provide at least one safe off-Street passenger loading/unloading area that is adequately signed and striped. Such passenger loading/unloading areas shall be located at the point of primary pedestrian access from the Parking Lot area to the adjacent Building, or Buildings, and shall be designed in such a manner that vehicles waiting in the loading area do not impede vehicular or pedestrian circulation in the Parking Area. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.06.180 - Temporary event parking. 
Temporary Parking Lot may be approved by the City for a special event if the following conditions are met: 
A.  Compacted road base, gravel, or recycled asphalt is used; 
B.  Signage is provided that designates the temporary Parking Area; and 
C.  Use of the Parking Lot is limited in duration, which Use shall not exceed thirty (30) days in any 365-day period. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.06.190 - Bicycle parking standards. 
All new Development or change of Use must install parking for bicycles as required in the parking matrix. Required bicycle parking areas shall comply with the following standards: 
A.  Bicycle parking shall be provided with racks that allow the frame and one wheel to be locked to the rack with a high security, U-shaped or chain/cable lock. 
B.  Racks shall be clearly visible and accessible yet should not interfere with pedestrian traffic or other site furnishings. 
C.  Parking areas shall be well-lit for theft protection, personal security and accident prevention. 
D.  Location of bicycle parking shall be separated from vehicle parking and roads with space and physical barriers in order to prevent potential damage to parked bikes or vehicles. Bicycle parking shall not be located on sidewalks or in areas that obstruct pedestrian traffic flow. 
E.  Parking areas shall be located within one hundred (100) feet of the primary Building entrance. 
F.  Where feasible, the use of existing overhangs or covered areas are encouraged to provide weather protection for bicycle parking areas. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.06.200 - Parking Lot maintenance. 
A.  Designated Parking Areas shall be continually maintained to properly function for the intended vehicle parking Use. 
B.  When surfacing materials are removed, changes are made to the Grade, or changes that would require a review by the City, the property Owner or agent shall submit a parking Development plan as outlined in Section 17.06.140, and obtain a permit from the City to ensure that the replaced surfacing and drainage meets current City regulations. 
C.  Parking Lot striping for stalls and pedestrian crossings shall be maintained on a regular basis so that striping is visible. 
D.  Slurry seals, seal coating, overlays, patching or crack sealing does not require a permit for maintenance unless such work changes the Grade or Retention Areas of the Site. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.06.300 - Landscaping. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this Chapter is to outline Landscaping requirements that establish minimum standards to: 
1.  Improve the City's image and identity; 
2.  Increase the Compatibility of adjacent Uses and minimize the harmful impacts of noise, dust, debris, and light pollution; 
3.  Enhance the visual appearance of Streetscapes; 
4.  Encourage innovation and design; 
5.  Establish opportunities for sustainable storm water management; 
6.  Encourage water conservation; 
7.  Support a diversity of plants suited to local conditions; and 
8.  Sustain and improve the City's urban forest. 
B.  Applicability. This Chapter applies to all new Development and Structure additions. 
1.  Wherever Landscaped Areas are required by this Chapter, a Landscape Plan shall be submitted to the City. 
2.  A Landscape Plan is required for any Application for a Building Permit or certificate of occupancy. A Building Permit will not be issued without submission and City approval of a Landscape Plan. 
3.  The Landscaped Areas as required by this Section shall be installed on property where Landscaped Areas are not in place or are non-conforming when: 
a.  New construction occurs on undeveloped, vacant, or cleared property. 
b.  A Conditional Use permit is issued, or a change of Use occurs. The land use authority shall make installation of Landscaping a condition of approval. 
c.  A Building Permit is issued for any addition, expansion, or intensification of any property other than an existing Single-Family home that increases the Floor Area of a Building and/or the parking requirement by fifty (50) percent or more. 
d.  A Building Permit is issued for any addition to a Single-Family residence that increases the Floor Area of the residence by seventy-five (75) percent or more. This standard does not apply to expansion or addition of accessory Buildings on residential properties. 
e.  A change of Use occurs. 
f.  A Parking Area is expanded by fifteen (15) percent, or a minimum of seven stalls. 
g.  An existing property is re-landscaped. 
Public parks, recreation facilities, and open spaces in any district are exempt from the provisions of this Chapter. 
C.  Modification. Existing Structures shall comply with the standards contained in this Chapter, to the maximum extent possible. 
D.  General Landscape Requirements. 
1.  At a minimum, Landscaping is required in all Yard areas, along the perimeter of Parking Areas, in front of Buildings, and in the Front Setback of any improved property not used for parking, driveways, walkways, or approved display areas. 
2.  General Design Standards. 
a.  Landscape Plans shall be prepared and approved based on design standards in this Chapter and other applicable City requirements. 
b.  Tree and Shrub Requirements. 
i.  Not less than seventy-five (75) percent of the trees specified on the Landscape Plan shall be water conserving species. 
ii.  Deciduous and ornamental trees shall have a minimum two-inch caliper trunk size at the time of installation. 
iii.  Evergreen trees shall have a minimum height of six feet at the time of installation. Evergreens shall be incorporated into a Site where a Buffer is required between adjacent Uses or busy roadways. 
iv.  Shrubs shall have a minimum height or spread of eighteen (18) inches at the time of installation, depending on the plant's natural growth habit (after two years of growth). Plants in five-gallon containers will generally comply with this standard. 
v.  Existing trees that are non-invasive and not noxious and that are preserved and incorporated into the Landscape Plan shall be credited toward the minimum number of trees required by this Chapter. Trees must be in healthy condition and free of injury to receive this credit. Any credited tree that is not preserved or is significantly damaged during construction shall be removed and replaced with four trees, each with a minimum caliper of four inches. Tree replacement shall conform to the tree and shrub requirements. 
c.  Plant and Turf Grass Requirements. 
i.  Annual and perennial plants shall be installed from transplants, and not seeded on site. 
ii.  Only water conserving varieties of Turf Grass shall be used in South Salt Lake. 
iii.  Turf Grass may be seeded on site. 
iv.  Turf Grass shall comprise no more than eighty (80) percent of the total Landscaped Area for all properties other than Single-Family residential. 
v.  Turf Grass shall comprise at least 80 percent of the total Landscaped Area of a Single-Family residential Lot or Parcel, but not more than ninety (90) percent. 
vi.  Turf Grass shall provide cover 100% of the seeded or sodded area within one year. 
d.  Mulch and Decorative Rock Requirements. 
i.  Landscaped Areas may include mulch and decorative rock in accordance with Park Strip requirements and specific Use requirements specified in this Chapter. 
ii.  If ornamental gravel is utilized, it must be contained within durable borders or edging. 
e.  Swales and Detention or Retention Basins. 
i.  Swales and detention or retention basins required for storm water management shall be landscaped with suitable trees, shrubs, groundcover, perennials, or other Landscaping materials, and/or decorative paving. 
ii.  Plants shall cover at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the area of the swale or detention or retention basin. 
iii.  Swales located along a Right-of-Way shall not be deeper that 1.5 feet. 
f.  Berming is prohibited. 
g.  Irrigation. Permanent irrigation systems are required wherever Landscaping is required by this Chapter. 
h.  Clear View Requirements. All landscape elements are subject to the Clear View Area requirements. 
E.  Landscape Plan Requirements. 
1.  Content of Landscape Plan. All Landscape Plans submitted for approval shall be drawn in accordance with the South Salt Lake Community Development Department's plan submittal requirements. The Landscape Plan shall include: 
a.  The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed Structures, Property Lines, easements, planting areas, Buffers, Parking Lots, driveways, roadways and Rights-of-Way, sidewalks, bicycle paths, freestanding signs, waste enclosures, bicycle parking areas, fences, walls, ground level utility equipment, recreational facilities, and any other freestanding Structure. 
b.  The location, spacing, quantity, size, and common and botanical names of all proposed plants. 
c.  The location, size, and common and botanical names of all existing trees and other plants on the property and in the Park Strip, either to be retained or removed. 
d.  Existing and proposed grading of the site at one-foot contour intervals including any proposed landscaped Berms. 
e.  Elevations for fences and retaining walls proposed for location on the site. 
f.  Elevations, cross sections, and other details as determined necessary by the land use authority. 
g.  The irrigation plan, drawn on a separate sheet. 
h.  Summary data indicating the area of the site in the following classifications: 
i.  Total area and percentage of the site in Landscaped Area. 
ii.  Total area and percentage of the site in Turf Grasses. 
iii.  Total area and percentage of the site in water-efficient plant species at mature growth. 
3.  Landscape Maintenance Standards. 
a.  Responsibility. The property Owner shall be responsible for the maintenance, irrigation, repair and replacement of all plants, turf, trees, and Landscaping materials required in this Chapter. The property Owner shall also keep their property free of uncontrolled weed and volunteer plant growth. 
b.  Landscaping Materials. Landscaping shall be maintained in good condition in a healthy, neat, and orderly appearance. Plants and trees that are dead or dying shall be removed and replaced. Landscaped Areas shall be regularly irrigated, mowed and pruned as needed, be kept free of weeds, dead plants, garbage, and debris. 
c.  Pruning Required. Trees, hedges, shrubs, and plants near public sidewalks and roads shall be pruned and maintained so that the public Right-of-Way is unobstructed. Shade trees or other plantings that project over any sidewalk shall be maintained clear of all branches between the ground and a height of seven (7) feet for that portion of the plant located over the sidewalk. Shade trees and plantings that project over any Street or access road shall be maintained free of any plant material extending over the Street to a height of fourteen (14) feet from the Grade of the Street or access road. 
d.  Irrigation Systems. Irrigation systems shall be maintained in good operating condition to promote the conservation of water. 
4.  Landscape Requirements for Park Strips. 
a.  Intent. The intent of the Park Strip Landscaping standards is to enhance the aesthetics of City Streets, to increase safety along roadways, to prohibit materials that may cause harm or injury to pedestrians and vehicles, to provide safe and convenient access across Park Strips to and from parking and pedestrian access, to allow access for repair and maintenance of public utilities, and to uphold Clear View Area requirements. 
b.  Applicability. Park Strip standards apply to all properties in the City, including vacant Lots that have curbs and/or gutters along Street Frontages. Owners of property on Streets that lack curb and gutter are not required to maintain formal Landscaping within the public Right-of-Way, unless new curb and gutter is required as new Development occurs. 
c.  Installation. All Park Strips shall be landscaped and continuously maintained by the abutting property Owner. For permits involving new construction or a change of Use, Park Strip Landscaping shall be shown on the required Landscape Plan. 
d.  Park Strip Design Standards Table: 
Street 
Profile 	Park Strip Width 	Paving
Materials 	Inorganic Materials 	% Allowed 	Planting Materials 	Min. Live Plant Material Coverage 	Street Trees 
Urban 
Corridor 

2100 South 
2700 South 
3300 South 
3900 South 
700 East 
300 West 
State Street 
Main Street 	Less than 3' 		Mulch, gravel, stone, and concrete 	100 	
Hardy groundcover * 	75% coverage 	Street trees not allowed 
	3' to 5' 		Mulch, gravel, and stone 	100 	Groundcover 

Annual or perennial plants 	75% coverage 	30' interval 

2" caliper minimum 
	More than 5' 		Mulch, gravel, and stone 	100 	Groundcover 

Annual or perennial plants 	75% coverage 	30' interval 

2" caliper minimum 

tree grates or tree wells with decorative gravel are required ** 
Residential 	Less than 2' 		Concrete, gravel, stone, and mulch 	100% 	Groundcover 

Annual or perennial plants 

Turf 	75% 	Street trees not encouraged. 
	2' to 3' 		Gravel, stone, and mulch 	100% 	Groundcover 

Annual or perennial plants 

Turf 	75% 	Street trees not encouraged. 
	More than 3' 		Gravel, stone, and mulch 	100% 	Groundcover 

Annual or perennial plants 

Turf 	75% 	30' interval 

2" caliper minimum 
Commercial 
or 
Flex 	Less than 2' 	
Pavers - brick, stone, or concrete 	Gravel, stone, and mulch 	100% 	Groundcover 

Annual or perennial plants 	75% 	Street trees not encouraged 
	2' to 3' 	
Pavers - brick, stone, or concrete 	Gravel, stone, and mulch 	100% 	Groundcover 

Annual or perennial plants 	75% 	Street trees not encouraged 
	More than 3' 		Gravel, stone, and mulch 	100% 	Groundcover 

Annual or perennial plants 

Turf 	75% 	30' interval 

2" caliper minimum 

tree grates or tree wells with decorative gravel are required** 
 
* Hardy groundcover my be any type of groundcover that is capable of withstanding snow and heat. 
** Tree grates or tree wells shall be a minimum of five feet in radius measured from the center of the tree trunk. 
F.  Landscape Requirements Along Urban Corridor Streets. 
1.  Applicability. The Landscaping standards in this Section shall be required for all properties with Frontage along State Street, 2100 South, 3300 South, 3900 South, 900 West, 300 West, 700 East, and Main Street. 
2.  Design Standards. 
a.  Area. Installation of a minimum of fifteen (15) feet of Landscaping along the entire length of the property between the back of the sidewalk along the urban corridor Street and any fence, Parking Area, or Structure on the Site is required. 
b.  Prohibited Uses and Activities. Parking, display, sales, storage, Structures, or temporary signage are not allowed in the Landscaped Areas. 
c.  Approved access driveways and walkways are allowed to cross the landscape area. 
d.  Outdoor seating areas up to three hundred (300) square feet in area for Restaurants and similar public Uses are allowed in the landscape areas. 
e.  Live plant material coverage of at least 75%. 
f.  A minimum of one tree is required for every one-thousand (1,000) square feet of Landscaped Area. 
G.  Landscape Requirements for Parking Lots. 
1.  Intent. Landscaping is required for Parking Areas in order to break up large expanses of pavement, to provide relief from reflected glare and heat, to guide vehicular and pedestrian traffic, and to efficiently and sustainably retain storm water. 
2.  Applicability. All Hard-Surfaced Parking Areas, including those for vehicle sales, with fourteen (14) or more Parking Stalls shall provide Landscaping in accordance with the provisions of this Section. Smaller Parking Areas shall not be required to provide Landscaping other than Landscaping required for Park Strips, Buffers, and front yards. 
3.  Parking Lot Landscaping Standards. 
a.  General Requirements. 
i.  Site Plan Required. 
ii.  All Landscaping shall meet Clear View Area requirements. 
iii.  Landscaped Areas shall be protected by concrete vertical curbs. Curbs shall be designed to allow storm water to enter the Landscaped Area. Where such curbs serve as a wheel stop for Parking Stalls, not less than thirty-six (36) inches shall be provided in the planting area as overhang clearance for tree locations. 
iv.  Pedestrian paths in Parking Lots, with the exception of crosswalks, shall be bordered by landscaped Park Strips with a minimum width of three feet, in accordance with the commercial or industrial Park Strip standards of this Chapter. 
b.  Interior Landscaping. 
i.  Area. Not less than five percent (5%) of the interior of a Parking Area shall be devoted to Landscaping. 
ii.  Interior Landscaping Design Standards. 
a)  Interior Parking Lot Landscaping islands shall separate every seven (7) Parking Stalls. 
b)  Interior Parking Lot Landscaping areas shall be a minimum of one hundred twenty (120) square feet in area and shall be a minimum of three feet in width, as measured from back of curb to back of curb 
c)  Landscape islands with Shade Trees. Shade trees shall be provided at no less than one tree per seven Parking Stalls. Tree wells shall be a minimum of five feet in radius measured from the center of the tree trunk 
iii.  Perimeter Landscaping. Where a Parking Lot is located within a required yard area or within twenty (20) feet of a Lot Line, perimeter Landscaping shall be required along the perimeter of the Parking Lot. Perimeter Landscaping must be at least seven (7) feet in width, as measured from the back of the Parking Lot curb. 
H.  Landscape Requirements for Buffers. 
1.  Intent. Buffers are used to mitigate the transition between Development types and incompatible Uses. 
2.  Applicability. All Buffers required by other sections in this Code shall be landscaped. 
3.  Buffer Design Standards. Landscape Buffers shall be reserved for planting and fencing. No parking, driveways, or Accessory Structure shall be permitted, unless specifically authorized through the Site Plan review process. Landscape Buffers may be located within required Setbacks. Where both landscape Buffers and Parking Lot Landscaping is required the more restrictive shall apply. 
a.  A minimum of one tree for each four hundred (400) square feet of the landscaped Buffer shall be planted. 
I.  Specific Landscape Standards. 
1.  Design Standards. 
a.  Single-Family Buildings. 
i.  Front yard and corner side yard Landscaped Areas required to be landscaped shall be landscaped with suitable trees, shrubs, groundcovers, perennials, or other Landscaping materials. Plants, not including tree canopies, shall cover at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the front and/or corner side yard area at maturity. 
ii.  Each front yard shall contain at least two (2) trees. 
iii.  Water features, landscape boulders, decorative rocks, gravel, and organic mulch are permitted but shall not be considered a substitute for plants. 
b.  Multi-Family Developments. 
i.  Landscaped Areas. Yards, Setbacks, Park Strips, required Buffers, required open space, and Parking Areas shall be landscaped as required in this Chapter. Landscaping shall be used to screen ground level utility equipment from view of Streets, sidewalks, or walkways to the greatest extent possible. 
ii.  Plant Coverage. All required Landscaped Areas shall be landscaped with suitable trees, shrubs, groundcovers, perennials, or other Landscaping materials. Plants, not including tree canopies, shall cover at least seventy-five percent (75%) of required Landscaped Areas. 
iii.  Site Trees. A minimum of two (2) trees per one thousand (1,000) square feet of Landscaped Area is required, in addition to requirements for Yards, Setbacks, Park Strips, required Buffers, and Parking Areas described in this Chapter. 
iv.  Water features, landscape boulders, decorative rocks, gravel, and organic mulch are permitted but shall not be considered a substitute for plants. 
v.  If ornamental gravel is utilized, it must be contained within durable borders or landscaped edging. 
c.  Commercial and Flex. 
i.  Landscaped Areas. Landscaped Areas shall comprise not less than fifteen (15) percent of a commercial or professional office site. Landscape requirements for Buffers, Parking Areas, Park Strips, and additional Landscaping along urban corridor Streets as required in this Chapter may be included as part of the overall site requirement. Landscaping shall be used to screen ground level utility equipment from view of Streets, sidewalks, or walkways to the greatest extent possible. 
ii.  Plant Coverage. All required Landscaped Areas shall be landscaped with suitable trees, shrubs, groundcovers, perennials, or other Landscaping materials. Live plants, not including tree canopies, shall cover at least seventy-five percent (75%) of required Landscaped Areas. 
iii.  Site Trees. A minimum of two (2) trees per one thousand (1,000) square feet of Landscaped Area is required, in addition to requirements for Yards, Setbacks, Park Strips, required Buffers, and Parking Areas described in this Chapter. 
iv.  Water features, landscape boulders, decorative rocks, gravel, and organic mulch are permitted but shall not be considered a substitute for plants. Landscape boulders shall only be allowed as a focal feature or may be used as a protective device from vehicle traffic. 
v.  If ornamental gravel is utilized, it must be contained within durable borders and arranged in a decorative pattern that incorporates varying sizes, types, or colors of gravel. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
Chapter 17.07 - DESIGN STANDARDS 
Sections: 
 
17.07.010 - Applicability. 
In addition to all applicable Construction Codes, the following design standards shall apply to: 
A.  All new Structures; 
B.  Any Change of Use, addition, expansion, remodel, or intensification of the Use of any property that increases or modifies the Floor Area of a Building or Use by 50% or more; and 
C.  All Noncomplying Structures that are a part of any Development identified in Subsection B. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.07.020 - Building Form by Land Use District. 
A.  Building Forms. Only Building forms designated by the letter A in the following matrix are allowed in each district. All other Building forms are prohibited. 
	Single-Family 	Townhome 	Garden-Style Multi-Family 	Urban-Style Multi-Family 	Single-Story Commercial 	Civic 	Office 	Large Format Commercial 	Flex 	Accessory Structure to Non-Res. Building 
Commercial Corridor 				A 	A 	A 	A 	A 		A 
Commercial Neighborhood 		A 			A 	A 				A 
Commercial General 					A 	A 	A 			A 
TOD & TOD-Core 		A 		A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 
Mixed-Use 		A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 		A 
Business Park 					A 		A 		A 	A 
Professional Office 					A 	A 	A 			A 
Flex 					A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 
Historic 						A 				A 
Jordan River 	A 									
City Facility 						A 				A 
Open Space 										
R1 	A 					A 				A 
Residential Multiple 	A 	A 	A 	A 		A 				A 
Riverfront Flex/Office 									A 	A 
Riverfront R1 	A 									
Riverfront RM1 			A 							
Riverfront School 						A 				A 
Crossing MPMU - Anchor Tenant 								A 		A 
Crossing MPMU - 2100 S/State St. 				A 						A 
Crossing MPMU - Transit District 					A 		A 	A 		A 
Downtown* 		A 		A 	A 	A 	A 	A 		A 
East Streetcar** 		A 		A 	A 	A 				A 
Granite Library 						A 				A 
Granite Townhome 		A 								
Granite Lofts 		A 								
 
*Excludes Station District 
** See East Streetcar MPMU 
B.  Building Form Does Not Determine Land Use. Regardless of Building form, all Uses carried on within a Building shall be limited to the Permitted Uses in the land use district in which the Building is located. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.07.030 - Development Standards. 
In addition to the Subdivision and platting requirements contained elsewhere in this Title, the following Development standards apply to all Structures: 
A.  Yard Areas. All Development shall comply with the Setbacks designated for each district. All Yard areas shall be free of any Structure and shall not be used for parking, unless otherwise provided herein. 
1.  Setbacks. 
	Front Yard 	Corner Side Frontage Yard 	Side Yard 	Side Yard Combined 	Rear yard 
Commercial Corridor 	10 	10 	0 	0 	0 
Commercial Neighborhood 	10 	10 	5 	12 	0 
Commercial General 	10 	10 	0 	0 	0 
TOD & TOD-Core 	5 	5 	0 	0 	0 
Mixed-Use 	5 	5 	5 	12 	20 
Business Park 	15 	10 	0 	0 	0 
Professional Office 	10 	10 	5 	12 	20 
Flex 	10 	10 	0 	0 	0 
Historic and Landmark 	15 	15 	15 	30 	15 
Jordan River 	30 	10 	20 	40 	20 
School 	25 	25 	25 	50 	25 
City Facility 	15 	10 	0 	0 	0 
R1 	20 	12 	5 	12 	20 
Residential Multiple 	20 	10 	5 	12 	20 
Riverfront MPMU - Flex/Office 	20 	5 	5 	10 	25 
Riverfront MPMU - R1 	20 	10 	5 	10 	20 
Riverfront MPMU - RM1 	10 	10 	10 	20 	20 
Riverfront MPMU—School 	20 	20 	20 	40 	20 
Crossing MPMU - Anchor Tenant 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 
Crossing MPMU - 2100 S./State St. 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 
Crossing MPMU—Transit 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 
Downtown 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 
East Streetcar 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 
Granite Lofts Townhome Units 1-5,8-11,14-15,20-23 	8 	236 ft. 2 	0 	0 	12 
Granite Lofts Townhome Units 6,7,12,13,18,19,24,25 	8 	236 ft. 2 	8 	20 	0 
Granite MPMU—Library 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 
Granite MPMU—Townhome 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 
Nature Center Pilot Project 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 
 
* See Approved MPMU or Overlay District 
** Double Frontage Lots shall two (2) Front Yards and no Rear Yard. 
2.  Yard Requirements and Qualifications. 
a.  Outdoor Storage is prohibited in all Yard areas, off-Street Parking Areas, maneuvering and loading areas, and site Landscaping. 
b.  All Front and Corner Side Yard areas shall be landscaped according to the landscape standards established in this Title. 
c.  Yard areas shall not be used for parking, except for driveways or garages as required by this Title. 
d.  Fences, Courtyards, and patios are permitted in certain Yard areas in specific districts, provided they meet requirements established elsewhere in this Title. 
B.  Build-to Standards. All Structures shall conform to the following Build-to Standards, as applicable: 

Build-to Standard 	Commercial Corridor 	Commercial Neighborhood 	Commercial General 	TOD & TOD-Core 	Mixed-Use 	Business Park 	Professional Office 	Flex 	Jordan River 	City Facility 	R1 	Residential Multiple 	Riverfront Flex/Office 	Riverfront R1 	Riverfront RM1 	Riverfront School 	The Crossing Anchor Tenant 	The Crossing 2100 S./State Street Frontage 	The Crossing Transit 	Downtown 	East Streetcar 	Granite Lofts Units 6,7,12,13,18,19,24,25 	Granite Library 	SSLC-PD 
Min—In Feet 	10 	10 	10 	5 	5 	15 	10 	10 	20 	15 	20 	20 	20 	20 	10 	20 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 	0 	10 	** 
Max—In Feet 	25 	20 	20 	15 	30 	20 	20 	25 	30 	20 	25 	30 	25 	N/A 	15 	40 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 	5 	30 	** 
 
* See Approved MPMU 
** See Approved SSLC-PD Accessory Structure siting regulations 
A Structure may encroach into the Front Yard to comply with a Build-to Standard. 
C.  Architectural Elements and Mechanical Equipment into Yard Areas. 
1.  Architectural elements and mechanical equipment, specified below, may project into required Yard areas according to the standards established in the following table. 
Element 	Front and Corner Side Yard 	Side Yard 	Rear Yard 
Steps, Porches, landings, stoops, and porticos 	4 feet 	2 feet 	4 feet 
Eaves, cornices, and overhangs 	2 feet 	4 feet 
Required overhead weather protection 	4 feet 	4 feet 
Bay windows, cantilevered rooms, and awnings 	4 feet 	2 feet 	4 feet 
Balconies 	Shall not project into Yard areas. 	6 feet 
Mechanical equipment and chimneys 	Shall not project into Yard areas. 	2 feet 	4 feet 
Exterior staircases as allowed 	Shall not project into Yard areas. 	4 feet 
 
2.  Permitted projections of Architectural Elements and mechanical equipment into Yard areas shall comply with the Clear View requirements established in this Title. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.07.040 - Crime Prevention through Environmental Design (CPTED). 
The following principles shall be addressed in the design of all Buildings and Developments: 
A.  Natural Surveillance. Physical design that keeps potential intruders under the perception of continual watch, such as view to Streets, driveways, and Parking Lots, and visual permeability in architecture, lighting, and Landscaping. 
B.  Natural Access Control. Physical design that guides the mobility of people, decreases crime opportunity, and increases perception of risk to potential offenders. 
C.  Territorial Enforcement. Physical design that encourages users of property to develop ownership over it. Territorial Enforcement includes Developing space with an easily discernable purpose, using symbolic barriers such as low-lying fences and walls, Landscaping and signage, eliminating ambiguous spaces, encouraging easy maintenance, and discouraging crime. 
D.  Landscaping Standards. Shrubs shall be a maximum height of 2 to 3 feet and trees shall have a ground clearance of 7 feet above walkways and sidewalks. 
E.  Public Safety. In order to encourage public safety solid windowless walls shall not be permitted adjacent to Streets, pedestrian areas, and open space. 
F.  Maintenance and Management. Proper maintenance and management of a site and Building discourages criminal activity. Site maintenance to keep grounds and Building clean and orderly, and where indicated, public access management plan. Public access management plans shall address strategies: (1) to limit public WIFI access outdoors during evening hours; (2) to avoid single-user restrooms; (3) to control or eliminate exterior electrical outlets; (4) for strategic irrigation to prevent overnight camping; (5) for scheduling activities in common areas; and (6) for site lighting to discourage criminal activity. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.07.050 - General Design Review Considerations. 
In addition to the specific design standards required for each Building form all Development shall comply with the following: 
A.  General. All Development shall: 
1.  Minimize the impacts of Development on utility facilities including water, sewer, storm drainage, power, gas, and communications; 
2.  Incorporate CPTED principles in Building design, site layout, and Landscaping design; 
3.  Integrate permitted signage into architectural and site design; and 
4.  Design patios, Accessory Structures, awnings, and other appurtenances to blend with the design of the Primary Buildings and site. 
B.  Façades. 
1.  All Buildings shall be designed with all Façades using similar quality materials and percentage of windows. 
2.  Primary Façade. All Buildings shall have at least one Primary Façade. The Primary Façade shall contain at least one primary entrance. Buildings on Corner Lots shall locate the Primary Façade on the corner closest to the adjacent Street intersection. 
3.  Every man-door shall have overhead weather protection at least four-feet in depth. 
C.  Height Transition. Any Building located within 100 feet an R-1 district, as measured from the closest Property Line, shall be subject to the following height transition requirements: 
1.  Beginning at the Setback of the subject property abutting the R-1 district the maximum Building Height shall be thirty-five feet (35') measured from Grade to the peak of the roof or, for flat roofed structures, from Grade to the top of the parapet; 
2.  An additional one (1) vertical foot of Building Height for every two (2) horizontal feet of distance from the subject property Setback abutting the adjacent R-1 district may be added to achieve the lesser of the maximum district height or the maximum Building form height; 
3.  This Building Height transition requirement shall end 100 feet (100') from the abutting R-1 district; and 
D.  Traffic Safety and Congestion. All Development shall design and locate on a Site Plan all: 
1.  Vehicular and pedestrian entrances, exits, drives, and walkways; 
2.  Off-Street parking; 
3.  Loading and service areas; 
4.  Circulation patterns within the Development; 
5.  Connections to abutting and nearby sites; and 
6.  Site lighting 
To minimize the impacts of the Development on traffic safety and congestion in the surrounding neighborhood. 
E.  Building and Site Layout. All Developments shall: 
1.  Minimize Structure silhouette and massing, site location, elevations, and impacts on abutting and nearby Buildings; 
2.  Ensure Compatibility of Building Façades with abutting and nearby Buildings in terms of height, color, materials, Primary Façades, placement of windows, rooflines and roof pitches, and the arrangement of Buildings on approved Development Lot(s); 
3.  Design energy efficient Structures through the use of energy efficient building materials, passive solar designs or Solar Energy Systems, and Landscaping; and 
4.  Use durable, high quality building materials. 
F.  Roofs. All roof vents, pipes, Antennae, satellite dishes, and other roof penetrations and equipment, except chimneys, shall be located on the rear Façade or configured to have a minimum visual impact as seen from any adjacent Street. 
G.  Fencing and Clear View Regulations. 
1.  Fences. 
a.  All fences shall meet the Clear View Area requirements contained in this Title. 
b.  All fences shall be maintained in a state of good repair. 
c.  All Fences and retaining walls shall meet applicable building code requirements and shall meet or exceed City engineering standards. 
d.  Development of all fences over six feet (6') and any retaining wall require a Building Permit. 
e.  Retaining Walls. Where a retaining wall protects a cut below or a fill above the natural Grade and abuts a Boundary Line, such retaining wall may be topped by a fence, wall, or hedge of the same height that would otherwise be permitted at the location, as measured from the Grade of the higher side ground level. 
f.  Barbed Wire. Fences containing strands of barbed wire, including all forms of security wire, shall be prohibited in all districts, except that barbed or security wire shall be permitted as a security fence on Jail property. 
g.  Electrified Fences. Electrified fences shall be prohibited in all districts, except that electrified fences shall be permitted as a security fence on Jail property. This provision does not prohibit an "invisible" fence (wired or wireless) to contain canines with a collar receiver. 
h.  Vacant Lots and Parcels. Vacant Lots and Parcels shall be fenced with a six-foot (6') temporary security fence. 
i.  All Development shall ensure that the location, height, and materials of walls and fences are Compatible with abutting and nearby Development and the character of the neighborhood, and shall completely conceal storage areas, utility installations, waste containers, or other Uses that are required to be screened from view by the standards in this Title. 
j.  Exceptions. 
i.  The height and location requirements contained in this Section shall not limit state imposed fencing requirements for public utility installations, public schools, or other public Buildings. 
ii.  Specialty fences requiring greater heights than allowed in this Title, such as tennis courts or basketball backstops may be allowed, subject to the following conditions: 
a)  They do not create a hazard, nuisance, or violation of other ordinances; and 
b)  The Applicant has submitted the signed approval of all property Owners whose property abuts the Applicant's property. 
2.  Clear View Regulations. 
a.  On Corner Lots, no obstruction to view will be permitted on that portion of the Lot defined as the Clear View Area. 
b.  No view-obstructing fence, wall, hedge or planting exceeding four feet (4') in height above the level of the sidewalk shall be located in the triangular area bounded by lines drawn from a point on the centerline of any driveway, set back fifteen feet (15') from the Front Property Line to points on the Property Line at the Street in front of the property ten feet (15') on either side of the driveway. 
c.  Shade trees may be located or maintained in the Clear View Area in excess of the permitted height, provided the Clear View Area shall be clear of all obstruction between (1) the ground and fourteen feet (14') in height above all public Right-of-Ways; or (2) the ground and six feet (6') in height above any private property. 
H.  Permanent Structures and Occupiable Space. 
1.  All Structures and Occupiable Space shall be permanently affixed to a foundation and of permanent construction without a chassis, hitch, wheels, or other features that would make the Structure mobile. 
2.  Prefabricated or relocatable Structures or Occupiable Space shall conform to one of the Building forms and accompanying design standards established in this Code. 
3.  Prefabricated or relocatable Structures or Occupiable Space shall be permanently affixed to a foundation, in compliance with the International Building Code. 
I.  Loading and Service Areas. Loading and service areas shall be configured to avoid disruption of primary vehicular access and circulation on the site and shall be separated from customer parking, pedestrian areas, and main Drive Aisles. 
J.  Waste Containers and Enclosures. 
1.  Waste container enclosures are required to be constructed for all new non-residential, Multi-Family, or Townhome Development in the City. 
2.  All waste container enclosures shall be constructed according to the requirements of this Title. 
3.  All waste containers shall be located at the rear of the Building, in the service area, or in another properly fenced and screened area. 
4.  All waste containers shall be located so they are not visible from a public Right-of-Way. 
5.  Height. Waste container enclosures shall have a maximum height of twelve inches (12") higher than the highest part of the waste container the enclosure will house. Waste container enclosures shall not be less than six feet (6') in height, including gates. 
6.  Materials and Construction Methods. Waste container enclosures shall have walls constructed of finished masonry units (block or brick), decorative pre-cast concrete, metal, or a combination of these materials. The materials and colors used for all waste container enclosures shall be Compatible with the materials used on the Primary Building. 
a.  Masonry and Brick Walls. All exterior Façades of waste container enclosures shall be constructed with finished block, brick, or split-faced blocks installed according to industry standards. All masonry walls shall have a permanent block or pre-cast end cap to prevent deterioration from climate exposure. 
b.  Concrete Walls. Pre-cast or poured concrete walls shall have a decorative textured finish. Pre-cast walls shall be installed according to industry standards. 
c.  Metal Enclosures. 
i.  Exterior walls of any metal waste container enclosure shall be constructed of at a minimum, sixteen (16) gauge metal cladding. 
ii.  Attachments of cladding to structural frame shall not exceed thirty-two inches (32") center-to-center in either direction. 
iii.  All structural posts, and their foundations, shall be adequately sized to support the walls and gates and shall be spaced at a maximum of six feet (6') center-to-center. 
iv.  Structural frame members shall have a minimum steel thickness of three-sixteenths of an inch (3/16") and consists of structural tubing, angle iron. 
v.  Corrugated roofing or other metal roofing materials are prohibited. 
7.  Gates. All enclosures shall have service access gates. 
a.  All gates shall be constructed with a sturdy metal frame. 
b.  Gate posts shall be embedded on the outside of the enclosure to limit damage when the waste container is removed from the enclosure. 
c.  All gates shall be constructed with commercial grade hinges, poles, and hasps. 
d.  Waste container enclosures with gates that swing out from the dumpster shall be set back from the Property Line a distance at least equal to the width of the gate. 
e.  Gates shall be closed except during scheduled collection periods. 
f.  Vinyl or chain link gates are prohibited. 
8.  Pads. 
a.  All waste container enclosures and waste containers shall be placed on poured concrete or any existing hardened paving system. 
b.  New pads shall be a minimum thickness of six inches (6") using 3,500 psi steel-reinforced concrete. If subgrade conditions are poor, the minimum thickness increases to eight inches (8"). 
c.  All pads shall have an interior drain or shall have a maximum two percent (2%) grade for water to drain from the enclosure. 
d.  When an enclosure is constructed as part of new construction there shall be a minimum ten-foot (10') apron with a minimum twelve-inch (12") thickened edge. 
9.  Bollards and Wheel Stops. The corners of all waste container enclosures, where the gate hinges are attached, shall be protected with colored bollards to prevent vehicles from driving into the enclosure. Each waste container enclosure shall have bollard or pre-cast concrete curb wheel stops attached to the slab to keep the waste container from hitting the back of the enclosure. 
10.  Location. All waste containers and enclosures shall be located on major drives within Developments to provide adequate circulation of waste collection vehicles. Waste container enclosures shall be located so that waste collection vehicles can pull in front of the enclosure, empty, and reset the container without physically removing the container from the enclosure. 
11.  Maintenance. Waste container enclosures shall be maintained in good condition and appearance at all times. 
a.  Screening materials shall be replaced immediately when found to be in disrepair. 
b.  Gates and latches shall remain in place and shall be kept fully operable. 
c.  Gates shall be closed except during scheduled collection periods. 
d.  Waste container enclosure pads and access drives shall be repaired or rebuilt whenever the pavement Structure deteriorates. 
e.  Graffiti shall be removed immediately. 
K.  Utilities. All utility lines shall be underground in designated easements. 
1.  Underground utility lines serving multi-Building Developments shall be placed within Drive Aisles or fire lanes. 
2.  No pipe, conduit, cable, water line, gas, sewage, drainage, or any other energy or service equipment shall be installed permanently above ground, except for backflow devices. 
3.  Gas meters, electric service meter panels, transformers, and other utility equipment shall be grouped together and shall be painted to match the adjacent Building wall. 
L.  Solar Energy Systems. All Solar Energy Systems shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Solar Energy Systems that do not comply with the following standards are prohibited. 
2.  Solar Energy Systems in the Historic and Landmark district shall be subject to additional standards found in Chapter 17.03. 
3.  Panels shall be constructed of non-glare glass with an aluminum frame or equal or better quality. 
4.  All Solar Energy Systems shall minimize visual impacts on the surrounding neighborhood by preserving natural vegetation, Screening adjoining properties, or other appropriate measures. 
5.  Setback and Location. 
a.  Building-mounted systems shall be mounted only on lawfully permitted Structures. 
b.  Free-standing Solar Energy Systems are subject to the Accessory Structure design standards in this Chapter. 
c.  Free-standing Solar Energy System shall not extend into the Yard area. 
6.  Roof-Mounted Systems. The following design standards apply to all roof mounted Solar Energy Systems: 
a.  All Solar Energy Systems shall meet all design review, Screening, and visibility requirements found elsewhere in this Chapter. 
b.  Pitched Roofs. 
i.  Solar Energy Systems that face the Front Yard shall be mounted a maximum twelve inches (12") from the roof, as measured from the roof surface and the highest edge or surface of the system. 
ii.  No Solar Energy System shall extend past the roof ridge, roof bottom, or side edges of the roof. 
iii.  Solar Energy Systems that face the Front Yard or a public Right-of-Way shall be installed at the same angles and contour as the roof on which they are installed. 
 
c.  Flat Roof. Solar Energy Systems installed on flat roofs shall only extend up to six feet (6') above the roof and shall be placed at a maximum twenty-degree (20°) angle. 
 
7.  Design. 
a.  Solar Energy Systems shall be designed to blend into the architecture of the Building upon which it is mounted and the surrounding neighborhood. 
b.  Solar Energy Systems shall be screened from view from public Rights-of-Way through use of one or more of the following methods: 
i.  Parapet wall; 
ii.  Setback from the roof edge; or 
iii.  Architectural Elements attached to the Building. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.07.060 - General Design Standards for Residential Buildings. 
In addition to the general design standards contained in 17.07.050 the following design standards apply to all residential Building forms: 
A.  Frontage and Orientation. 
1.  Single-Building Developments. Single-Building Developments shall front on a Street. 
2.  Multi-Building Developments. All multi-Building Developments shall be oriented so that the Primary Façade of each Building faces toward the following, listed in priority order: 
a.  Public Street; 
b.  Perimeter Street; 
c.  Primary internal Street; 
d.  Park or other Common Open Space; and 
e.  Secondary internal Street. 
B.  Windows and Doors. 
1.  Windows are required on the Primary Façade of all Buildings. 
2.  Windows on the Primary Façade shall have a minimum transparency of 70 percent (70%). 
3.  All windows on the Primary Façade shall incorporate at least two (2) of the following features: 
a.  Mullions and/or transoms; 
b.  Trim or molding at least four inches (4") in width; 
c.  Canopies, shutters, or awnings proportional to window size; or 
d.  Recessed insets from the Primary Façade by at least two inches (2"). 
 
C.  Materials. 
1.  Primary Materials. All Buildings shall use one of the following materials on at least 60% of each Façade: 
a.  Cementitious fiber board; 
b.  Brick; 
c.  Wood; 
d.  Stone; or 
e.  EIFS. 
2.  Secondary Materials. No Building shall use the following materials on more than 20% of any Façade: 
a.  Stucco; 
b.  Corrugated metal siding; 
c.  Split-faced masonry block; 
d.  Exposed smooth-finish concrete block; or 
e.  Architectural metal panels. 
3.  Prohibited Materials. No Building shall use vinyl or aluminum siding on any Façade. 
4.  Roofs. All roofs shall be clad in asphalt shingles, wood shingles, standing seam metal, or a material of equivalent quality and durability. 
5.  Arrangement. 
a.  Where two or more materials are proposed to be combined on a Façade, the heavier and more massive material shall be located below the lighter material. 
 
 
b.  All material changes shall occur along a horizontal line or where two forms meet; material changes may occur as accents around windows, doors, cornices, at corners, or as a repetitive pattern. 
 
c.  Primary Façade materials and/or colors shall not change within two feet (2') of Building corners and shall continue along any Façade visible from a Street or pedestrian Right-of-Way. Materials may change where side or rear wings meet the main body of a Building. Primary Façade materials used on Buildings on Corner Lots shall extend the full length of the sides visible from a Street or pedestrian Right-of-Way. 
 
D.  Compatibility. New Building forms shall be Compatible with the existing neighborhood. 
E.  Fencing. 
1.  Fences in Front Yards shall not exceed four feet (4') in height. 
2.  Fences in Corner Side Yards shall not exceed six feet (6') in height. 
3.  Fences in Rear Yards shall not exceed six feet (6') in height. 
4.  Fences may extend to the back of sidewalks, where permitted. 
5.  Vinyl or Chain link fences are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.07.070 - Single-Family Building Form. 
In addition to the standards contained in 17.07.050 and 17.07.060, the following design standards apply to all Single-Family Buildings. 
 
A.  Orientation. All Buildings shall front on a Public Street. 
B.  Primary Façade. Any Primary Façade of thirty feet (30') or more shall incorporate wall offsets in the form of projections or recesses. Required offsets shall have a minimum depth of two feet (2'). 
C.  Building Height. 
1.  The maximum height for any Building shall be thirty-five feet (35') measured from Grade to the peak of the roof or, for flat roofed Buildings, from Grade to the top of the parapet. 
2.  Buildings on Lots that abut existing single-Story residential Buildings in existing R1, RM, or Jordan River districts shall have a maximum height of 30 feet (30'). 
D.  Materials. Additional permitted Primary Materials include: 
1.  Wood clapboard; or 
2.  Wood board and batten. 
E.  Garages. All Buildings shall include a garage. The following garage standards shall apply: 
1.  Garages shall not visually or architecturally dominate the Primary Façade of the Primary Building. 
2.  Garages shall not comprise more than fifty percent (50%) of the Primary Façade. 
3.  Garages that comprise between forty percent (40%) and fifty percent (50%) of the Primary Façade shall be recessed from the Primary Façade by at least four feet (4'). 
4.  Garages that comprise less than forty percent (40%) of the Primary Façade may be flush with the Primary Façade. 
5.  Garages that comprise no more than thirty percent (30%) of the Primary Façade may protrude from the Primary Façade but shall not protrude more than eight feet (8'). All Buildings with garages protruding more than four feet (4') from the Primary Façade shall include a Porch or covered landing that extends at least six feet (6') from the plane of the living space. 
6.  All garages protruding four feet (4') or more from the Primary Façade shall have garage doors with windows. 
7.  Garages with more than two bays or with doors greater than sixteen feet (16') wide shall be located on the rear Façade or shall be Side-Loaded. 
8.  Side-Loaded Garages. All Buildings with side-loaded garages shall incorporate a portico, arbor, trellis, or other element to emphasize the primary entrance on the Primary Façade. 
9.  All garages must contain at least three (3) of the following design features: 
a.  Single carriage house garage doors with windows; 
b.  Garage doors that include windows and are painted to match the main or accent color of the Dwelling; 
c.  Ornamental light fixtures flanking the doors; 
d.  Arbor or trellis; 
e.  Columns flanking doors and/or an eyebrow overhand; 
f.  Portico; 
g.  Dormers; 
h.  Twelve-inch overhangs over garage doors; 
i.  Eaves with exposed rafters with a minimum six-inch (6") projection from the front plane; or 
j.  Roof line changes. 
10.  Carports are not permitted. 
 
 
 
F.  Roofs and Overhangs. Roofs and overhangs shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Pitched roofs covering the main body of the Building shall be hip style, shed style, mansard, or shall have symmetrical gables. 
2.  Shed roofs shall maintain a minimum pitch of 2:12 and all other roofs covering the main body shall maintain a minimum roof pitch of 6:12. 
3.  Overhanging eaves may expose rafters. Flush eaves shall be finished with profiled molding or gutters. 
4.  Flat Roofs. All flat roofs shall require a minimum two-foot (2') parapet wall. All flat roofs shall also include two (2) of the following: 
a.  Gables, shed roofs, or pitched roof elements covering at least fifty percent (50%) of the length of the Primary Façade; 
b.  A Porch, portico, or colonnade located along the Primary Façade of the Building, emphasizing the front door; or 
c.  Additional two-foot (2') projections or recesses in the Façade plane every 20 feet (20'). 
 
 
 
G.  Porches. All Buildings shall have a covered Porch that is the prominent Architectural Element of the Primary Façade and that is least six feet (6') deep. 
 
H.  Accessory Structures. Accessory Structures shall be built in the same architectural style with a similar roofline and exterior materials as the Primary Building. The following standards shall apply to all Accessory Structures: 
1.  Building Requirements. 
a.  Accessory Structures shall not exceed one Story and shall total no more than seven hundred (700) square feet. 
b.  Accessory Structures shall be clad in similar materials and shall be a similar color as the Primary Building. 
c.  Accessory Structures shall only be accessed at Grade. 
d.  Windows are permitted on Accessory Structures. Façades of Accessory Structures facing abutting properties shall have the heads or upper casings of windows no higher than eight feet (8') above Grade of the Structure. Greenhouses and Structures with clerestory windows that are at least eight feet (8') above Grade are exempt from this requirement. 
e.  Accessory structures shall not be connected to sewer service. All other utilities for Accessory Structures shall be accessed from the Primary Building. 
2.  Setbacks. 
a.  Accessory Structures shall be located behind the Primary Structure. 
b.  Accessory Structures shall be separated from the Primary Building by at least ten feet (10'). 
c.  Accessory Structures shall be located at least two feet (2') from any Property Line. 
3.  Height. Accessory Structures may not exceed twenty feet (20') in height. Accessory Structures shall have a maximum first floor height of fourteen feet (14') measured from Grade to ceiling. Pitched roofs may extend to twenty feet (20'). 
4.  Carports. The following requirements apply to all Carports. 
a.  Carports are only permitted for existing Single-Family Buildings. 
b.  Carports shall have a maximum height of 14 feet and shall only house one car. 
c.  Carports must be placed on a properly located Hard-Surfaced driveway. 
d.  Carports must be permanently affixed to the ground with a proper foundation and footings. 
I.  Solar Energy Systems. In addition to the requirements found in 17.07.050, all Solar Energy Systems installed on Single-Family Buildings with flat roofs shall have a maximum height of three feet (3') above the roof and shall be placed at a maximum twenty-degree angle (20°). All Solar Energy Systems shall meet all design review, Screening, and visibility requirements found elsewhere in this Chapter. 
J.  Architectural Variability. 
1.  Developments with three to ten (3-10) units shall have a minimum of three (3) Distinctly Different Primary Façade variations. 
2.  Developments with greater than ten units shall add one additional Distinctly Different Primary Façade variation for each additional ten (10) units. 
3.  Mirror images of the same Primary Façade are not Distinctly Different Primary Façades. 
4.  Distinctly Different Primary Façades shall utilize at least one of the Required Architectural Variability standards and three (3) of the Optional Architectural Variability standards listed in the following table: 
Architectural Variability Table: 
Required Architectural Variability Standards
(must choose one) 	Optional Architectural Variability Standards
(must choose three) 
The use of different exterior materials or colors 	Variation in the width of the Primary Façade by two feet or more 
Variation in the location and proportion of front Porches 	At least a two-foot horizontal or vertical variation of the placement or size of windows or doors on the Primary Façade 
Variation in trim or quoins 	Variation in rooflines, pitches, or the use of dormers 
	Variation in the location or proportion of garages and garage doors 
 
5.  No Primary Façade design shall be used: 
a.  Within 3 Lots of the same Primary Façade design; 
b.  Directly across the Street from the same Primary Façade design; or 
c.  On more than 25% of the Buildings within a single phase of a Development. 
 
 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.07.080 - Townhome Building Form. 
The Townhome Building form allows for three (3) to twelve (12) attached Dwelling Units to be located side by side, in a single Building. In addition to the design standards contained in 17.07.050 and 17.07.060, the following design standards apply to all Townhome Buildings. 
A.  Façades. 
1.  All Dwelling Units shall include at least one primary entrance on the Primary Façade. Individual Dwelling Units may have a secondary entrance on the Side or Rear Façade. 
2.  All details on a single Building, including roof forms, siding materials, windows, doors, and trim shall use a consistent architectural style. 
3.  All Façades of any Building in a multi-Building Development shall use the same materials, Architectural Elements, and detailing. 
4.  Identifiable Transition. All Dwelling Units shall have at least two (2) of the following elements between each separate Dwelling Unit: 
a.  A change in roofline; 
b.  An offset in the Primary Façade of the Dwelling Unit of at least two feet (2'); or 
c.  Variation in the location and proportion of front Porches. 
B.  Building Height. The maximum Building Height is thirty-eight feet (38') measured from Grade to the peak of the roof or, for flat-roofed Buildings, Grade to the top of the parapet. 
C.  Materials. Additional permitted Primary Materials shall include: 
1.  Wood clapboard; or 
2.  Wood board and batten. 
D.  Garages. At a minimum, all Buildings shall include a two-car garage serving each Dwelling Unit. 
1.  Garages shall be to the side or rear of the Building. 
2.  All Buildings shall emphasize the primary entrance to the Building. 
3.  Side-loaded Garages along Primary Façades shall incorporate a portico, arbor, trellis, or similar Architectural Element to articulate the Façade incorporating the garage. 
E.  Access and Off-Street Parking Areas 
1.  All Buildings shall be served by a common access and off-Street Parking Area. 
2.  No off-Street Parking Area shall be located between a Building and the Street it fronts, except as allowed on driveways. 
3.  Off-Street Parking Areas, including access and Drive Aisles, located on the side of a Building shall not occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of the Lot's Frontage. 
F.  Usable Open Space. All Buildings shall include Usable Open Space equal to at least 20 percent (20%) of the Development site. 
G.  Meter and Equipment Placement. 
1.  Wall-mounted and ground-based meters, HVAC, and utility equipment serving any Building shall: 
a.  Be fully screened from view or located to the sides or rear of the Building they serve; and 
b.  Be placed in close proximity to one another. 
2.  All roof-mounted vents, pipes, Antennae, satellite dishes, and other roof penetrations and equipment, except chimneys, shall be fully screened from view and shall be painted the same color as the roof. 
H.  Accessory Structures. Accessory Structures shall be constructed with the same architectural style and roofline and with similar materials as the Primary Building. 
 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.07.090 - Garden-Style Multi-Family Building Form. 
The garden-style Multi-Family Building form requires Dwelling Units arranged in a stacked configuration where units are located side-by-side and one atop another and are served by non-climate-controlled staircase. Developments using this Building form shall provide large landscape Buffers between Buildings that shall contain some of the required amenities as specified in this Chapter. In addition to the design standards contained in 17.07.050 and 17.07.060 the following design standards apply to all garden-style Multi-Family Buildings. 
 
 
A.  Façades. All Façades shall provide at least three (3) of the following design features: 
1.  Projections or recesses in the Façade plane every 30 feet (30'). Projections or recesses shall have a minimum depth of two feet (2'); 
2.  At least two (2) different exterior Building materials or colors; 
3.  Decorative textures on exterior finish (e.g. scales/shingles, wainscoting, ornamentation, and similar features); 
4.  One or more dormer windows, or box or bay windows with a minimum twelve-inch (12") projection from the Façade plane; 
5.  Eaves with exposed rafters or a minimum twelve-inch (12") projection from the Façade plane; 
6.  A parapet wall with an articulated design with architectural design variation rather than a simple rectilinear form; or 
7.  Windows with a minimum four-inch (4') wide trim. 
B.  Building Height. The maximum Building Height is forty-five feet (45'), measured from Grade to the peak of the roof or, for flat-roofed Buildings, Grade to the top of the parapet. 
C.  Primary Materials. Additional permitted Primary Materials shall include: 
1.  Wood clapboard; 
2.  Wood board and batten; 
3.  Wood siding; or 
4.  Other similar material. 
D.  Identifiable Transition. All Buildings shall provide an identifiable transition between the lower and upper floors. An identifiable transition shall consist of: 
1.  A change in material, with the heavier or more massive material on the lower floor(s); or 
2.  A change in Façade articulation. 
E.  Windows and Doors. All Buildings shall provide windows or doors in the following amounts: 
1.  At least 40 percent (40%) of the Primary Façade and any Façade that faces a Street or Open Space; and 
2.  At least 25 percent (25%) of any Façade that does not face a Street. 
F.  Garages. 
1.  Individual garages or Carports shall be located within interior Parking Lots of the Development. 
2.  Shared garages shall include at least one of the following Façade treatments at Street level: 
a.  Artwork; 
b.  Decorative grilles; 
c.  Unique material treatments; or 
d.  Projections or recesses of at least two feet (2') in the Façade plane at least every 30 feet. 
3.  Shared garages shall incorporate openings with grillwork or other treatments that resemble windows. 
G.  Off-Street Parking. Off-Street surface parking, including access and Drive Aisles, shall not occupy any portion of the Building's Public Street Frontage. 
H.  Roofs. Roofs shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Pitched roofs covering the main body of a Building shall have a minimum pitch of 6:12 and shall be hip style, mono-pitch or shed style, or shall have symmetrical gables. 
2.  Roof forms shall be designed to emphasize the individual Dwelling Units and to correspond and denote Building elements and functions such as primary entrances and arcades. 
3.  All roofs shall be clad in asphalt shingles, wood shingles, standing seam metal, or other material of equivalent quality and durability. 
4.  Flat Roofs. All flat roofs shall have a minimum two-foot (2') parapet along the entire length of the roofline. 
5.  Equipment. All roof mounted vents, pipes, Antennae, satellite dishes, and other roof penetrations and equipment, except chimneys, shall be fully screened from view and shall be painted the same color as the roof. 
I.  Porches, Balconies, and Private Patios. 
1.  Every Dwelling Unit that faces a Public Street, a perimeter Street, primary internal Street, park, or Common Open Space shall have either a Porch, balcony, or private patio. 
2.  Porches, balconies, or private patios shall have a minimum Floor Area of 60 square feet and a minimum depth of five feet (5'). 
3.  Porches, balconies, and private patios shall: 
a.  Be configured to avoid views into rear yards of Parcels containing Single-Family Dwellings to the maximum extent practicable; and 
b.  Have railings consisting of materials other than vinyl, such as powder coated steel, or other materials of equivalent quality and durability. 
J.  Exterior Staircases and Entry Features. Each Building shall have a non-climate-controlled staircase as the primary means of access to the upper level Dwelling Units. All staircases shall conform to the following standards: 
1.  No more than one common exterior staircase per seventy-five feet (75') of Building Façade. 
2.  All common exterior staircases shall be enclosed, but not climate controlled. 
3.  Common exterior staircases shall be incorporated into a primary entrance that is a prominent, architectural focal point featuring a secondary roof Structure consistent with or complementary to the primary roof form. 
4.  Exterior staircases may project from the Primary Building. Projecting staircases shall have a minimum three-foot (3') Façade projection. 
5.  Staircases may be recessed from the Primary Façade. Recessed staircases shall be set back at least three-feet (3') from the Primary Façade. 
6.  All common staircases shall be designed to allow for natural light. 
 
K.  Usable Open Space. All Developments shall provide large landscape Buffers between Buildings that shall contain some of the required amenities as specified in this Chapter. All Developments shall designate at least 30 percent (30%) of the Development site as Usable Open Space. At least 15 percent (15%) of the required Usable Open Space shall consist of improved exterior recreational amenities. Indoor recreation or community club houses shall not be included in the calculation of Usable Open Space. 
L.  Pedestrian Circulation. 
1.  Sidewalks. All Buildings shall provide full pedestrian access around the exterior of the Building in the form of a sidewalk that is at least five feet (5') wide. 
2.  Crosswalks. Crosswalks used as part of an internal pedestrian circulation system, or across driveways accessing Public Streets, shall be constructed using a contrasting paving material, such as stamped concrete, stenciled graphics, colored or varying paint applications, or similar design. 
M.  Meter and Equipment Placement. Wall-mounted and ground-based meters, HVAC, and utility equipment shall: 
1.  Be fully screened from view, or located to the sides or rear of the Building they serve; and 
2.  Be placed in close proximity to one another. 
N.  Accessory Structures. Accessory Structures shall be constructed with the same architectural style and roofline and with similar materials as the Primary Building. 
 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.07.100 - Urban-Style Multi-Family Building Form. 
The urban-style Multi-Family Building form requires Dwelling Units arranged in a stacked configuration where units are located side-by-side and one atop another and all units are accessed via internal hallways, staircases, or elevators. In addition to the design standards contained in 17.07.050 and 17.07.060 the following design standards apply to all urban-style Multi-Family Buildings. 
 
 
A.  Façades. 
1.  All Façades shall include at least three (3) of the following design features: 
a.  Projections or recesses in the Façade plane every 30 feet (30'). Projections or recesses shall have a minimum depth of two feet (2'); 
b.  At least two (2) different exterior Building materials or colors; 
c.  Decorative textures on exterior finish (e.g. scales/shingles, wainscoting, ornamentation, and similar features); 
d.  One or more dormer windows, or box or bay windows with a minimum twelve-inch (12") projection from the Façade plane; 
e.  Eaves with exposed rafters or a minimum twelve-inch (12") projection from the Façade plane; 
f.  A parapet wall with an articulated design with design variation rather than a simple rectilinear form; or 
g.  Windows with a minimum four-inch (4') wide trim. 
2.  Dwelling Units located on the ground floor that face a public Right-of-way or park shall have an additional, separate entrance to the Dwelling Unit from the exterior of the Building. 
B.  Building Height. The maximum Building Height is sixty-five feet (65') measured from Grade to the peak of the roof or, for flat-roofed Buildings, Grade to the top of the parapet. All Buildings shall have a first-floor minimum ceiling height of twelve feet (12') measured from floor deck to floor deck. 
C.  Primary Materials. Additional permitted Primary Materials shall include: 
1.  Wood clapboard; 
2.  Wood board and batten; or 
3.  Wood siding. 
D.  Identifiable Transition. All Buildings shall provide an identifiable transition between the lower and upper floors. An identifiable transition shall consist of: 
1.  A change in material, with the heavier or more massive material on the lower floor(s); or 
2.  A change in Façade articulation. 
E.  Windows and Doors. All Façades shall provide windows or doors in the following amounts: 
1.  At least 40 percent (40%) of the Primary Façade and any Façade that faces a Street or Open Space; and 
2.  At least 25 percent (25%) of the side and rear Façades. 
F.  Garages. 
1.  Individual garages or Carports shall be located within interior Parking Lots of the Development. 
2.  Shared garages shall include Façade treatments at Street level to enhance the pedestrian environment and obscure the view of parked cars, such as: 
a.  Artwork; 
b.  Decorative grilles; 
c.  Unique material treatments; or 
d.  Projections or recesses in the Façade plane every 30 feet. 
3.  Shared garages shall incorporate openings with grillwork or other treatments that resemble windows at the Street level. 
G.  Off-Street Parking. An off-Street Parking Lot, including access and Drive Aisles, shall not occupy any portion of the Building's Public Street Frontage. 
I.  Roofs. Roofs shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Pitched roofs covering the main body of the Building shall have a minimum pitch of 6:12 and shall be hip style, mono-pitch or shed style, or shall have symmetrical gables. 
2.  Roof forms shall be designed to emphasize individual Dwelling Units and to correspond and denote Building elements and functions such as primary entrances and arcades. 
3.  All roofs shall be clad in asphalt shingles, wood shingles, standing seam metal, or other material of similar quality and durability. 
4.  Flat Roofs. All flat roofs shall have a minimum two-foot (2') parapet along the entire length of roofline. 
5.  Equipment. All roof mounted vents, pipes, Antennae, satellite dishes, and other roof penetrations and equipment, except chimneys, shall be fully screened from view and shall be painted the same color as the roof. 
J.  Porches, Balconies, and Private Patios. 
1.  At least seventy percent (70%) of the Dwelling Units on each Façade of every Building shall have either a Porch, a balcony, or a private patio. 
2.  Porches, balconies, or private patios shall have a minimum area of 60 square feet and a minimum depth of five feet (5'). 
3.  Porches, balconies, and private patios shall: 
a.  Be configured to avoid views into rear yards of Lots or Parcels containing Single-Family Dwellings to the maximum extent practicable; and 
b.  Have railings consisting of materials other than vinyl, such as powder coated steel, or other material of similar quality and durability. 
K.  Stairways and Corridors. All stairways and corridors that provide access to Dwelling Units in any Buildings shall be enclosed and climate controlled. 
L.  Open Space. All Developments shall provide large landscape Buffers between Buildings that shall contain some of the required amenities as specified in this Chapter. All Developments shall designate at least 20 percent (20%) of the Development site as Usable Open Space. At least 15 percent (15%) of the required Usable Open Space shall consist of improved exterior recreational amenities. Indoor recreation or community club houses may be included in the calculation of Usable Open Space. 
M.  Pedestrian Circulation. 
1.  Sidewalks. All Buildings shall provide full pedestrian access around the exterior of the Building in the form of sidewalk that shall be at least five feet (5') wide. 
2.  Crosswalks. Crosswalks used as part of an internal pedestrian circulation system, or across driveways accessing Public Streets, shall be constructed using a contrasting paving material, such as stamped concrete, stenciled graphics, colored or varying paint applications, or similar design. 
N.  Meter and Equipment Placement. Wall-mounted and ground-based meters, HVAC, and utility equipment shall: 
1.  Be fully screened from view, or located to the sides or rear of the Building they serve; and 
2.  Be placed in close proximity to one another. 
O.  Accessory Structures. Accessory Structures shall be constructed in the same architectural style and roofline and similar materials as the Primary Building. 
 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.07.110 - Required Amenities for multi-Family and Townhome Building Forms. 
A.  All Buildings shall include the following amenities: 
1.  Full size washer and dryer; 
2.  Nine-foot (9') ceilings; 
3.  Enhanced soundproofing; 
4.  Upgraded countertops in kitchen and bathrooms (granite, marble, quartz, or equivalent); 
5.  Stainless steel appliances. 
B.  All Buildings shall provide the following additional amenities according to the table below: 
Table of Required Amenities 
Unit Features 	General Amenities 	Recreation Amenities 	Energy Efficiency
Enhancements 
(3/ 50 units)
Each Development shall include 3 of the following amenities per 50 Dwelling Units or portion thereof: 	(5/ 50 units)
Each Development shall include 5 of the following amenities per 50 Dwelling Units or portion thereof: 	(4/ 50 units)
Each Development shall include 4 of the following amenities per 50 Dwelling Units or portion thereof: 	(2/ 50 units)
Each Development shall include 2 of the following amenities per 50 Dwelling Units or portion thereof: 
Individual garages for at least fifty percent (50%) of all units 
  
Private Porches, patio, or balconies for every unit—at least 70 square feet each 
  
Upgraded floor coverings (hardwood, tile, concrete, or similar) 
  
Solid Doors throughout unit 
  
Smart Building Capabilities 
  
Trash Valet 
  
Walk-In Closets—minimum of 6ft x 6ft 
  
Dishwasher 	Exterior Social Area—at least 1000 square feet 
  
Project Security—automated gate or guard 
  
Enclosed Parking Garage 
  
Secured, Enclosed Storage Units, at least 80 sq/ft in size, for each Dwelling Unit 
  
Public Transit Passes provided to each Dwelling Unit 
  
Permanent On-Site Social Activities 
  
Library, Office, or Meeting Facilities 
  
Secure Package Room/Package Lockers 
  
Freight elevator or loading area 
  
Polished concrete in Building hallways 
  
Rooftop patio/garden 
  	Pool—at least 400 square feet 
  
Internal Fitness Facilities at least 1000 square feet in size 
  
Secured, programmed, children's playground (at least 1,000 sq/ft) 
  
Hot Tub 
  
Community Garden 
  
Perimeter Trail—a minimum ten-foot wide (10') sidewalk that extends along at least two sides of the Lot and connects to a public trail or Public Open Space 
  
Sport Court/Field 
  
Bike Storage, Repair and Washing Area 
  
Outdoor Dog Park— at least 1000 square feet in size 
  
Grilling Stations and Outdoor Pavilions 
  
Bike Share/Green Bike program 	Compliance with ENERGY STAR New Homes Standard for Buildings three stories or fewer 
  
Compliance with ENERGY STAR Multi-Family High-Rise Program for Buildings four stories or greater 
  
Installation of photovoltaic panels, wind turbines, or other electric generating renewable energy source to provide at least 20 percent of the project's estimated electricity demand. 
  
Electric Vehicle Charging Stations 
  
Participation in a recycling program as part of a rental agreement or HOA 
  
Installation of tankless hot water systems. 
  
Demonstrated compliance with any of the criteria listed in the Site Improvements, Water Conservation, or Energy Efficiency sections of the 2011 Enterprise Green Communities Criteria 
 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.07.120 - General Design 
Standards for Non-Residential Development. 
In addition to the design standards contained in 17.07.050, the following design standards apply to all non-residential Development: 
A.  Frontage. The Primary Façade of all Buildings shall front onto a Public Street or a Common Open Space area. 
B.  Orientation. 
1.  Single-Building Development. All single-Building Development shall be oriented so that the Primary Façade is parallel to the Public Street it fronts. 
2.  Multi-Building Development. Multi-Building Development shall be configured to: 
a.  Break up the site into a series of smaller Blocks defined by on-site Streets, Drive Aisles and internal Streets, pedestrian walkways, or other circulation routes; 
b.  Frame the corner of an adjacent Street intersection or entry point into the Development; 
c.  Frame and enclose a main pedestrian or vehicle access corridor within the Development site; 
d.  Frame and enclose at least three (3) sides of Parking Areas, public spaces, or other site amenities; or 
e.  Frame and enclose outdoor dining or gathering spaces for pedestrians between Buildings. 
3.  Outparcel Development. 
a.  Outparcel Developments shall be clustered to define Street edges, entry points, and outdoor seating and gathering areas. 
b.  Spaces between Buildings and outparcels shall be improved to provide small scale pedestrian amenities such as plazas, seating areas, pedestrian connections, gathering spaces, or landscaped Parking Areas. 
C.  Building Height. The maximum Building Height shall be the lesser of the maximum district height (See 17.03 for Land Use Districts) or the maximum Building form height as provided below: 
Building Form 	Minimum Height 	Maximum Height 
Single-Story Commercial 	20 feet 	36 feet 
Civic 	28 feet 	65 feet 
Office 	26 feet 	65 feet 
Large Format Commercial 	26 feet 	36 feet 
Flex 	30 feet 	65 feet 
 
D.  Materials. 
1.  Primary Materials. 
a.  The following shall be additional permitted Primary Materials: 
I.  Cast concrete; 
II.  Brick; or 
III.  Stone. 
b.  All Buildings shall use low-reflectance, subtle, and neutral colored Primary Materials. 
2.  Secondary Materials. 
a.  The following shall be additional permitted Secondary Materials: 
i.  Cementitious fiber board; or 
ii.  Architectural metal paneling. 
b.  Secondary Materials may feature brighter colors and need not be neutral in color. 
3.  Prohibited Materials. No Building shall use the following materials on any Façade: 
a.  Stucco; 
b.  Vinyl siding; or 
c.  Aluminum siding. 
4.  All Buildings shall use at least two (2) materials on each Façade. 
5.  Identifiable Transition. All Buildings shall provide an identifiable transition between the lower third (1/3) of the Building and the upper two-thirds (2/3). An identifiable transition shall consist of: 
a.  A change in material, with the heavier or more massive material on the lower floor(s); or 
b.  A change in Façade articulation. 
6.  Building materials shall continue to the Grade on any Façade. 
7.  Exceptional Architectural Merit. The Community Development Director may, with a written explanation of such findings, accept Building designs that deviate from these materials standards for designs exhibiting exceptional architectural merit. 
E.  Windows. 
1.  The total Building Façade area shall comprise at least 50% windows. 
2.  Each Façade that fronts on a Street shall have a minimum of 40% windows. 
3.  All Façades shall have a minimum of 20% windows. 
4.  All ground floor windows shall extend from two-feet (2') above Grade a minimum of six-feet (6'), to achieve at least eight-feet (8') above Grade. 
5.  All ground floor windows shall have a minimum transparency of 60%. 
6.  All windows above the ground floor shall have a minimum transparency of 25%. 
7.  All windows shall be recessed from the exterior surface by at least two inches (2"). 
8.  In addition, all Buildings shall incorporate at least two of the following window design elements: 
a.  Mullions and/or transoms; 
b.  Trim or molding at least four inches (4") wide; or 
c.  Canopies, shutters, or awnings, proportional to window size. 
 
F.  Off-Street Parking Areas. In addition to the parking and Landscaping requirements found elsewhere in this Title, the following requirements apply to all non-residential Buildings: 
1.  Parking in front of any Building shall be a maximum of 60 ft. wide. All additional required parking shall be located to the side or the rear of the Building's Primary Façade. 
2.  Multiple-Building Development. Buildings shall be arranged to frame and enclose at least three (3) sides of all Parking Areas. 
3.  Surface Parking Lots containing 100 or more stalls shall be organized into a series of parking bays surrounded by Buildings, Landscaping, or Drive Aisles designed to function as Streets. 
 
 
G.  Roofs. 
1.  All Buildings shall have roofs clad in asphalt shingles, wood shingles, standing seam metal, a material of similar quality and durability, or a combination thereof. 
2.  Buildings with flat roofs shall incorporate a two-foot (2') parapet wall along the entire roofline. 
H.  Primary Entrance. Every Building shall provide a primary entrance along the Primary Façade. 
1.  Buildings with multiple tenants shall feature multiple primary entrances. 
2.  All Primary Façades shall incorporate a Building canopy, awning, or similar weather protection, projecting at least four feet (4') from the Façade, along the Building's primary entrances. 
3.  Primary Façades shall incorporate visually prominent Building entrances through the use of at least one of the following features: 
a.  Secondary roof structures or a parapet roof with transitions used to accent the principal public entrance; 
b.  Outdoor pedestrian features such as seat walls and Landscaping, or permanent landscaped planters with integrated benches; or 
c.  Architectural details such as tile, metal, stone, precast or cement board work and moldings integrated into the Building. 
I.  Loading and Service Areas. Loading, service, and equipment areas shall be located at the rear or side of the Building, behind the Primary Façade, in a manner that minimizes their visibility from drive approaches, Parking Lots, and Streets. Loading, service, and equipment areas shall be screened through the use of Architectural Elements, materials, and Landscaping that reduce their visibility. All loading and service areas must comply with the parking and loading area standards in Chapter 17.06. 
 
J.  Screening Requirements. 
1.  Ground-level, wall-mounted, or roof-top mechanical equipment shall be screened from Streets and off-site view. 
2.  All roof vents, pipes, Antennae, satellite dishes, and other roof penetrations and equipment, except for chimneys, shall be located on the rear elevation, shall be screened from view, and shall match the roof color. 
K.  Fencing. All Buildings shall comply with the following additional fencing requirements: 
1.  All fences shall meet the Clear View Area requirements set out in this Title. 
2.  Front Yard. Fences are prohibited in the Front Yard of any Building. 
3.  Rear or Side Yard. The maximum height for any fence in the Rear or Side Yard of any Building shall be eight feet (8'). 
4.  Solid Fencing. Solid fencing within a Development or along required Buffers shall be constructed of brick, ceramic tile, stone, precast concrete panel, concrete block, or similar masonry material. 
5.  Semi-Transparent Fencing. Semi-Transparent fencing is permitted where solid fencing is not required. Acceptable materials for semi-transparent fencing visible from drive approaches, Parking Lots, or Streets shall be metal or composite picket fencing. 
6.  Prohibited Materials. 
a.  Chain link fencing is prohibited. 
b.  Vinyl fencing is prohibited. Existing vinyl fence may be extended as part of a permitted Building addition or site expansion. 
7.  Exceptions. Regardless of the exceptions contained in this Section, minimum Clear View Area requirements shall not be violated under any circumstance. Public schools or private schools approved by applicable state agencies may use a decorative fence up to six feet (6') high in Front Yards and up to ten feet (10') high in Side or Rear Yards for school playgrounds or school-related recreation areas only. 
L.  Buffering Requirements. All new Development that abuts a Residential Use shall provide a ten-foot (10') landscape Buffer, containing a solid eight-foot (8') fence, on each Property Line or portion thereof. 
M.  Waste Container Enclosures. Waste container enclosures are required to be constructed for existing non-residential Buildings when any of the following occur: 
1.  An existing Building is expanded or remodeled; 
2.  Garbage, junk, solid waste, debris, or refuse are piled or stacked next to or outside the container on a regular basis; 
3.  The container is regularly overfilled to the point that garbage or refuse from the waste container litters the property on which the container is located or litters that of adjoining properties; or 
4.  The container has been damaged or dilapidated to the extent that it has become unsightly, or the property Owner has allowed graffiti defacement of the container to remain on the container for more than seven (7) days after the vandalism occurred, and this has occurred at least two (2) other times. 
N.  Unity. 
1.  The architectural design within a multi-Building Development shall be organized around a consistent theme in terms of the Architectural Elements, character, materials, texture, color, and Scale of Buildings. 
2.  Themed Restaurants, Retail chains, and other franchise-style Buildings shall conform to the Development's Architectural Elements and character. 
O.  Drive-Through Window. 
1.  Canopy or Roof. Drive-through windows shall include a canopy or roof that is architecturally integrated with the Building and mirrors the roof form of the Primary Building. 
2.  Location. Except when a 10 ft. landscape Buffer that fully screens the drive-through from view is provided, drive-through windows shall be prohibited on any Façade that faces a Right-of-Way. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.07.130 - Single-Story Commercial Building Form. 
The single-Story commercial Building form is intended to be used for small and moderate scale commercial or Retail Uses. In addition to the design standards contained in 17.07.050 and 17.07.120, the following design standards apply to all single-Story commercial Buildings. 
 
A.  Façade. All Buildings shall comply with the following Façade requirements: 
1.  The Primary Façade shall contain at least one primary entrance and one entrance for every seventy-five feet (75') of Frontage. 
2.  The Primary Façade shall contain Façade depth variations every 40 feet (40') of Façade. Façade depth variations shall be at least one-foot (1') deep and ten (10') feet wide. 
3.  Primary Façade. Primary Façades shall incorporate at least four (4) of the following design elements: 
a.  Variation in roof form and parapet height; 
b.  Wall recesses or projections of a minimum depth of two feet (2') at least every forty feet (40'); 
c.  A ground-level arcade along the full length of the Primary Façade; 
d.  Architectural metal awnings above all entrances and windows; 
e.  Secondary roof structures or a parapet roof with transitions used to accent the primary entrance; 
f.  Outdoor pedestrian features such as seat walls and Landscaping or permanent landscaped planters with integrated benches; or 
g.  Architectural details such as tile, metal, stone, precast or cement board work and moldings integrated into the Building. 
B.  Windows and Doors. 
1.  Each Façade shall have a minimum of 40% windows. 
2.  All Buildings shall have doors at least every 30 feet (30') along the ground floor. 
C.  Materials 
1.  Primary Materials. Additional permitted Primary Materials shall include: 
a.  Marble; 
b.  Split-faced masonry block; or 
c.  Other materials comparable in appearance, quality, and durability. 
2.  Secondary Materials. Additional Permitted Secondary Materials shall include: 
a.  EIFS; or 
b.  Architectural metal panels. 
D.  Roofs. All roofs shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Roofs shall correspond with and denote Architectural Elements and Building functions, including primary entrances and arcades. 
2.  Flat Roofs. Flat roofs shall incorporate a minimum two-foot (2') parapet wall along the entire roofline. The following additional standards apply: 
a.  The parapet shall have a distinct cornice treatment; 
b.  The parapet shall extend along all Façades of the Building; and 
c.  Additional two-foot (2') projections or recesses shall be required in the Façade plane at least every 40 feet (40'). 
E.  Overhead Doors. Buildings may incorporate overhead doors, subject to the following standards: 
1.  Overhead doors may not exceed 22 feet in width. 
2.  Transparency. Each overhead door visible from a public Right-of-Way shall be at least 80% transparent. 
3.  Materials. Overhead doors visible from a public Right-of-Way shall use materials and colors consistent with Building design standards in this Title. 
4.  Façades containing overhead doors shall incorporate: 
a.  A canopy or awning over the door; and 
b.  Sconces or other decorative lighting. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.07.140 - Civic Building Form. 
The civic Building form is reserved for City facilities and Libraries. In addition to the design standards contained in 17.07.050 and 17.07.120, the following design standards apply to all civic Buildings. 
 
A.  Orientation. Accessory Buildings shall be located behind the Primary Façade of the Primary Building and shall be arranged to create secondary gathering space on the site. 
B.  Materials. 
1.  Primary Materials. Additional permitted Primary Materials shall include: 
a.  Integral color CMU; or 
b.  Marble. 
2.  Secondary Materials. EIFS shall be an additional permitted Secondary Material. 
C.  Façades. Blank Façades are prohibited. 
D.  Windows. 
1.  All Buildings shall have a 4-sided average of at least 75% windows on the ground floor. 
2.  All floors above the ground floor shall have a 4-sided average of at least 25% windows. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.07.150 - Office Building Form. 
In addition to the design standards contained in 17.07.050 and 17.07.120, the following design standards apply to all office Buildings. 
 
A.  Orientation. 
1.  Single Building Development. All single-Building Developments shall have the primary entrance on the Primary Façade. 
2.  Multi-Building Development. Multi-Building Developments shall be configured to incorporate on-site Streets, drive approaches, pedestrian walkways, and other circulation routes throughout the Development. 
B.  Façade. 
1.  Primary Façade. 
a.  All Buildings shall incorporate at least three (3) of the following design features: 
i.  Canopies or porticos above all entrances; 
ii.  Roof overhangs above all entrances; 
iii.  Entry recesses or projections; 
iv.  Raised corniced parapets above all entrances; 
v.  Gabled roof forms or arches above all entrances; or 
vi.  Architectural details, such as tile work or moldings, integrated into the Building above or directly adjacent to all entrances. 
b.  All Buildings shall have a primary entrance a least every 75 feet (75') on the Primary Façade. 
2.  Façade Division. All Buildings shall emphasize, through the use of materials, design elements, or architectural details, the proportion of height to width so that Building Façades are oriented vertically. 
a.  Horizontal Façade Division: 
i.  All multi-Story Buildings shall have a base, consisting of at least one-third (1/3) of the total Building Height, that incorporates at least 3 Of the following features: 
a)  Thicker walls, ledges or sills; 
b)  Integrally textured materials such as stone or other masonry; 
c)  Integrally colored and patterned materials such as smooth finished stone or tile; 
d)  Bulkheads; 
e)  Lighter or darker colored materials, mullions, or panels; 
f)  Landscaped planters; or 
g)  A canopy or an awning above all windows on the Primary Façade. 
i.  All Buildings with a maximum height of 44 feet (44') shall have a horizontal Façade division within three feet (3') of the top of the ground floor. 
ii.  All Buildings over 44 feet (44') in height shall have a horizontal Façade division within three feet (3') of the top of the ground Story or the second Story. 
b.  Vertical Façade Division. All Buildings shall incorporate a vertical Façade division at least every 40 feet (40') of Façade for the entire height of the Building. 
c.  Façade Depth Variation. All Buildings shall have a Façade depth variation that is at least two-feet (2') deep. 
C.  Materials. 
1.  Primary Materials. Additional permitted Primary Materials shall include: 
a.  Cast concrete; 
b.  Marble; 
c.  Split-faced masonry block; or 
d.  Other material of equivalent quality and durability. 
2.  Secondary Materials. Additional permitted Secondary Materials shall include: 
a.  EIFS; 
b.  Architectural metal panels; or 
c.  Corrugated metal. 
D.  Windows. All Buildings shall comply with the following window design standards: 
1.  All Buildings shall have a 4-sided average on the ground floor of at least 75% windows. For the purposes of this Section, the ground floor of the Primary Façade consists of the portion of the Façade from Grade to the roof deck of the ground floor, or 14 feet (14'), whichever is less. 
2.  All floors above the ground floor shall have a 4-sided average of at least 35% windows. 
E.  Roofs 
1.  Flat Roofs. All Buildings with flat roofs shall have a parapet of at least two-feet (2') for the entire roofline. 
2.  All roofs shall correspond to and denote Architectural Elements and Building functions, including primary entrances and colonnades. 
3.  All rooftop equipment shall be screened from pedestrian view. 
4.  All skylights shall be flat. 
F.  Pedestrian Circulation. All Buildings shall provide a six-foot (6') wide sidewalk across the Primary Façade of the Building. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.07.160 - Large Format Commercial Building Form. 
The large format commercial Building form is intended for commercial Buildings with a ground Floor Area of 30,000 square feet or greater. In addition to the design standards contained in 17.07.050 and 17.07.120, the following design standards apply to all large format commercial Buildings. 
 
A.  Façade. All Buildings must comply with the following Façade design standards: 
1.  The Primary Façade shall contain at least one primary entrance and one entrance for every seventy-five feet (75') of Frontage. 
2.  The Primary Façade shall contain Façade depth variations at least every 40 feet (40') of the Façade. Façade depth variations shall be at least one-foot (1') deep and ten (10') feet wide. 
3.  All Buildings shall provide a Building canopy, awning, or similar weather protection over the primary entrance that extends at least four feet (4') from the Façade. 
4.  Primary Façade. 
a.  All Primary Façades shall feature a primary entrance featuring an outdoor plaza adjacent to the entrance containing seating. Outdoor plazas shall have a minimum depth of 20 feet (20'). 
b.  Customer Entrances. All Buildings shall include at least one primary entrance on the Primary Façade. 
c.  Primary Façades shall incorporate at least four (4) of the following design elements: 
i.  Variation in roof form and parapet height; 
ii.  Wall recesses or projections of a minimum depth of two feet (2') every forty feet (40'); 
iii.  A ground-level arcade along the full length of the Primary Façade; 
iv.  Architectural metal awnings above all entrances and windows; 
v.  Secondary roof structures, or a parapet roof with transitions, used to accent the primary entrance; 
vi.  Outdoor pedestrian features such as seat walls and Landscaping, or permanent landscaped planters with integrated benches; or 
vii.  Architectural details such as tile, metal, stone, precast or cement board work and moldings integrated into the Building. 
B.  Materials 
1.  Primary Materials. Additional permitted Primary Materials: 
a.  Marble; 
b.  Split-faced masonry block; or 
c.  Other materials comparable in appearance and durability. 
2.  Secondary Materials. Additional permitted Secondary Materials: 
a.  EIFS; or 
b.  Architectural metal panels. 
C.  Roofs. All roofs shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Roof forms shall correspond with and denote Architectural Elements and Building functions, including primary entrances and arcades. 
2.  Flat Roofs. All flat roofs shall incorporate a minimum two-foot (2') parapet along the entire roofline. The following additional standards apply: 
a.  The parapet shall have a distinct cornice treatment; 
b.  The parapet shall extend along all Façades of the Building; and 
D.  Overhead Doors. Buildings may incorporate overhead doors, subject to the following standards: 
1.  Overhead doors may not exceed 22 feet in width. 
2.  Transparency. Each overhead door visible from a public Right-of-Way shall be at least 80% transparent. 
3.  Materials. Overhead doors visible from a public Right-of-Way shall use materials and colors consistent with Building material standards in this Chapter. 
4.  Façades containing overhead doors shall incorporate: 
a.  A canopy or awning over the door; and 
b.  Sconces or other decorative lighting. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.07.170 - Flex Building. 
In addition to the design standards contained in 17.07.050 and 17.07.120, the following design standards apply to all flex Buildings. 
 
A.  Materials 
1.  Primary Materials. Additional Primary Materials shall include: 
a.  Natural or synthetic stone; 
b.  Integral color CMU; 
c.  High-quality pre-stressed concrete systems; 
d.  Finished and treated tilt-up concrete panels; or 
e.  Float finish EIFS. 
2.  Secondary Materials. Additional Secondary Materials shall include: 
a.  Architectural metal paneling; 
b.  Unfinished or untreated tilt-up concrete panels; or 
c.  Standard single-tee or double-tee concrete systems. 
B.  Façades. All Buildings shall incorporate wall recesses or projections along the Primary Façade at least every 60 feet (60') or for each primary entrance, whichever is greater. Recesses or projections shall be a minimum depth of two feet (2'). In addition, at least two of the following design elements are required: 
1.  Variations in roof form and parapet height; 
2.  Distinct changes in texture and color of wall surfaces; or 
3.  Vertical accents or focal points. 
C.  Windows. The following window design standards apply to all flex Buildings and supersede the general, non-residential, minimum window percentages contained in this Chapter. 
1.  Each Façade that fronts on a Street shall have a minimum of 40% windows. 
2.  All Façades shall have a minimum of 5% windows. 
D.  All Buildings shall employ pedestrian Scale design along the ground floor consisting of a variety of Architectural Elements and architectural detail to break up large walls and enhance visual quality. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.07.180 - Accessory Structures to Non-Residential Buildings. 
In addition to the design standards contained in 17.07.050 and 17.07.120 the following design standards apply to all Accessory Structures to non-residential Buildings. 
 
A.  Orientation. Except for fuel pump canopies, Accessory Structures shall not front on a Street, and shall be located in the rear yard in a manner that minimizes their impact on adjacent Uses. 
B.  Height and Area Requirements. 
1.  Except for fuel pump canopies, Accessory Structures shall not exceed the height of the Primary Building. 
2.  Except for fuel pump canopies, Accessory Structures shall have a maximum area of 20% of the Primary Building. 
C.  Materials. Accessory Structures shall use materials of the same or higher quality and durability as the materials used on the Primary Building it serves. 
D.  Roofs. Accessory Structures shall incorporate the same roof type, materials, and pitch used on the Primary Building it serves. 
E.  Fuel Pump Canopies. 
1.  Fuel pump canopies shall incorporate similar materials used on the Primary Building it serves. 
2.  Canopy lighting shall be recessed and flush with the underside of the canopy. 
3.  Columns shall be integrated with the design of the Primary Building it serves. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
Chapter 17.08 - SIGN REGULATIONS 
Sections:  
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
17.08.010 - Purpose and Intent. 
A.  The regulations of this Chapter are designed and intended to further the goals and policies of the City by: 
1.  Implementing portions of the City's General and Master Plans; 
2.  Creating a distinctive appearance; 
3.  Contributing to enhancing the City's character; 
4.  Furthering the purposes and intents of the City's regulations; 
5.  Fostering economic prosperity; and 
6.  Limiting and reducing visual clutter along Streets within the City. 
B.  The requirements herein are created to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of South Salt Lake by: 
1.  Eliminating potential hazards to motorists and pedestrians by requiring that Signs are designed, constructed, installed and maintained in a manner that promotes public safety and traffic safety; 
2.  Safeguarding and enhancing property values; 
3.  Protecting public and private investment in Buildings and open space; and 
4.  Reducing confusion and inattentive driving habits. 
C.  The standards established in this Chapter are meant to encourage Signs that, by their good design, are integrated and harmonious with the Buildings and sites, including Landscaping, which they occupy. The restrictions are crafted to encourage Sign legibility through the elimination of excessive and confusing Sign displays, thus reducing driver inattention or confusion. 
D.  The restraints designated herein are intended to preserve and improve the appearance of the City as a place in which to live and to work, to create an attraction to nonresidents to come to visit or trade and to allow each individual business to clearly identify itself and the nature of its business in such a manner as to become the hallmark of the business. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.020 - Conformity of Signs. 
No Sign shall be erected, raised, moved, placed, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or altered except in conformity with the regulations specified in this Chapter. The regulations in Article I apply to all Signs and locations in the City regardless of type or district. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.030 - Maintenance. 
All Signs shall be properly maintained. Exposed surfaces shall be cleaned and painted as required. Defective and damaged parts shall be replaced promptly. The ground space within a radius of ten feet from the base of any Detached Sign shall be kept free and clear of all weeds, rubbish, and inflammable material. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.040 - Traffic and Pedestrian Hazards Prohibited. 
No Sign shall be erected in such a manner or in such a location as to obstruct free and clear vision; or at any location where, by reason of its position, shape, color or words, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized traffic Sign, signal or device or block visibility for driveway ingress or egress. No Sign shall be erected in such a manner or in such a location where, by reason of its position, shape, color or words, it may interfere with or obstruct the view of traffic devices or create any confusion or impediment to pedestrian or vehicular movement or travel. 
No Sign shall be erected or located in any manner that would create a safety hazard to pedestrians or vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.050 - Sign Removal. 
Signs identifying a discontinued Use on the property shall be removed from the property within thirty (30) calendar days of the time the Use was discontinued. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.060 - Indemnification and Insurance. 
All persons involved in the maintenance, installation, Alteration, or relocation of Signs near or upon any public right-of-way or property shall agree to hold harmless and indemnify the City, its officers, agents and employees against any and all claims of negligence resulting from such work. All such persons involved shall maintain all required insurance and shall file with the state a satisfactory certificate of insurance to indemnify the state, county, or City against any form of liability. Proof of such filing shall be provided to the City upon demand. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.070 - Exempt Signs and Sign-Related Activities. 
A.  For Signs or activities listed in this Section, permits are not required, nor is the area of such Signs to be included in any computation of the total allowed Sign Area permitted for a particular Parcel or use. All such Signs must still meet the maintenance, removal and safety standards of this Title as well as the size, location, height and other standards of this Title to the extent possible as determined by the Community Development Department. 
B.  Exempt Signs shall not be located on property in a manner that constitutes a safety or visibility problem. 
C.  The Signs listed in this Section may be limited or restricted by the Community Development Department as deemed appropriate to meet the intent of this Chapter and the City's General or Master Plans. The Community Development Department may limit the placement, location, size, height, number, lighting and other factors of Signs usage. 
D.  Any exempt Sign which becomes a nuisance, as determined by the Community Development Department, may be required by the Community Development Department to be removed, relocated, modified in size or height or other requirements designed to eliminate the nuisance. 
E.  The following Signs and Sign-related activities shall be exempt from the provisions of this Chapter to the extent indicated herein: 
1.  Directional or Instructional Signs. Signs which provide direction or instruction and are located entirely on the property to which they pertain and exceed neither four square feet in area nor four feet in height. These Signs include, without limitation, Signs which identify rest rooms, public telephones or walkways or may provide direction such as Parking Lot entrance and exit Signs and those of a similar nature. 
2.  Memorial Signs or Tablets. Memorial Signs or tablets, names of Buildings and dates of Building erection when embedded or cut into the surface or Façade of a Building. 
3.  Public Notices. Official notices posted by public officers or employees in the performance of their duties. 
4.  Governmental Signs. Governmental Signs for control of traffic and other regulatory purposes, Street Signs, danger Signs, railroad crossing Signs, and Signs of public service companies indicating danger and aids to service or safety. 
5.  Real Estate Signs. Real estate Signs that are temporary in nature and have no visible connection to a Sign, light pole, tree or other items and are not placed on roofs. Such Signs shall not be allowed on road pavement, sidewalk, gutter areas or Park Strips. 
6.  Flags. The flags, emblems or insignias of any nation or political subdivision subject to the restrictions as found herein, those of this Chapter and as allowed by special exception. Flags shall be restricted in size, except when allowed as a special exception, to a maximum of seventy-two (72) square feet in size. 
7.  Symbols or Insignias. Religious symbols, commemorative plaques of recognized historical agencies or identification emblems of religious orders or historical agencies, provided that no such symbol, plaque or identification emblem may exceed four square feet in area, and provided further that all such symbols, plaques and identification emblems shall be placed flat against a Building or on low profile Signs. 
8.  Interior Signs. Signs located within the interior of any Building or stadium, or within an enclosed lobby or court of any Building, and Signs for and located within the inner or outer lobby, court or entrance of any theater. 
9.  Temporary Event Signs. Temporary Signs not exceeding sixty-four (64) square feet in area pertaining to drives or events of civic, philanthropic, educational or religious organizations, provided that said Signs are posted only during said drive and are removed within fifteen (15) days after said event. 
10.  House Numbers and Name Plates. A Building or house numbers Sign shall be limited to one per Street address. A Building numbers Sign shall not be greater in size than two percent of the Building Façade on which located. 
11.  Political and Campaign Signs. Political or campaign Signs on behalf of candidates for public office or measures on election ballots are allowed, provided that the Signs are not be erected in such a manner as to constitute a Roof Sign, are not located on property in a way that constitutes a safety or visibility problem and are not erected on utility poles, Street Signs or in public Rights-of-Way. 
12.  Holiday Decorations. Signs of a decorative nature, clearly incidental and customary and commonly associated with any national, local or religious holidays are permitted. Such Signs may be of any type, number, area or illumination and shall be placed so as to avoid confusion with authorized traffic lights and signals and shall conform to traffic safety standards. 
13.  Building Plaque Sign. A Building plaque Sign shall be limited to one per address and shall not exceed four square feet in area. 
14.  Building Security Sign. A Building security Sign whose Sign face is limited to no more than one square foot in area. Building security Signs shall be limited to no more than four Signs per Lot. 
15.  Gas pump Signs, provided the Sign is an integral part of the pump. 
16.  Public Event Signs and Banners. A public event Sign or banner authorized by the City for a specific event. 
17.  Routine Maintenance of Sign. Routine Sign maintenance or changing of lettering or parts of Signs designed to be regularly changed. 
18.  Warning Signs. Private warning Signs shall be no more than six square feet in area and shall be limited to one such Sign per Parcel unless a special exception is obtained from the Community Development Department. 
19.  Incidental Signs. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.080 - Prohibited Signs. 
Unless specifically allowed otherwise in this Title, no person may erect, alter or relocate any Sign of the type or nature specified in this Section. 
A.  Animated and intensely lighted Signs. 
1.  Animated Signs are not permitted, except as allowed as an electronic display Sign and excluding public service Signs. 
2.  No Sign is permitted which, because of its intensity of light, size, configuration, elevation or location, constitutes a nuisance or hazard to vehicular traffic, pedestrians or adjacent properties. 
B.  Moving Signs. No moving Sign or any portion thereof may rotate or repeat a pattern of motion more than eight complete repetitions every sixty seconds. 
C.  Roof Signs of any type, except where allowed as a special exception under the provisions of this Title, and except location Signs or numbers designed to be visible from the airways only and intended for public safety purposes. 
D.  Miscellaneous Signs and Posters. Except where expressly allowed by this Chapter, the tacking, painting, pasting or otherwise affixing of Signs or posters of a miscellaneous character, visible from a public way, located on the walls of Buildings, barns, sheds, on trees, poles, posts, fences or other structures is prohibited. 
E.  Snipe Signs of any type are prohibited except as posted by a government agency. 
F.  A-frame, pedestal and other portable Signs of any nature, except as allowed as a special exception by the Community Development Department for limited temporary usage. 
G.  Portable trailer or flashing Signs. 
H.  Flashing or scintillating lights. 
I.  Spot lights, except as allowed as a special exception by the Community Development Department. 
J.  Parking of advertising vehicles. 
1.  No person shall park, on any property in the City, any vehicle or trailer which has attached thereto or located thereon any Sign or advertising device for the basic purpose of providing advertisement of products or directing people to a business or other activity. 
2.  It is the intent of this Section to restrict advertising in residential areas of the City and to standard Signs in business areas. This Section is not intended to apply to standard advertising or identification practices where such Signs or advertising devices are painted on or permanently attached to a business or commercial vehicle used to deliver or pick up merchandise or materials for such business. 
a.  Such a vehicle may not be parked, except for brief visiting or delivery purposes, on residential district Streets or at a residential property not resided in by the operator of said vehicle and must meet all other requirements of City ordinances. 
b.  Such a vehicle at the residence of the operator may not be parked on the Street and must be parked on private Parking Areas, to the fullest extent such area allows, so that the vehicle is the least visible from the Street. 
K.  Sound, Odor, or Visible Matter. No advertising Sign or device shall be permitted which emits audible sound, odor or visible substance. 
L.  Painted Wall Signs. Except as allowed as a special exception, no Sign may be painted directly on any Building, wall, fence or pole. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.090 - Construction Standards. 
A.  Applicable Regulations. 
1.  All Signs erected in the City shall comply with the current standards of the building and Construction Codes adopted by the City. 
2.  All Signs shall comply with all provisions of this Chapter, any other applicable provisions of this Chapter or other applicable regulations. 
3.  All electric Sign component parts shall be approved and labeled as conforming to the standards of the United States Bureau of Standards, the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. or other similar institution of recognized authority. 
B.  Engineering Required. All Signs shall be engineered to conform with applicable Code provisions and, where required by the Community Development Department, Applications for permits shall be accompanied by an engineering drawing stamped and signed by a structural engineer licensed by the state of Utah attesting to the adequacy of the proposed construction of the Sign and its supports. 
C.  General Standards. Except for banners, flags, Temporary Signs and Window Signs conforming in all respects with the requirements of this ordinance, all Signs shall be constructed of permanent material and shall be permanently attached to the ground, a Building or another Structure or be a direct attachment to a rigid wall, frame or structure. 
D.  Detached Signs. All Detached Sign structures or poles shall be self-supporting structures erected on and permanently attached to concrete foundations. Such structures or poles shall be fabricated only from painted steel or such other materials as may be approved by the Community Development Department. 
E.  Signs on Architectural Projections. Signs may be placed below and may be supported by an architectural projection of a Building when the projection is designed to carry the additional weight of the Sign. Any Sign attached to or located on an architectural projection may not be located less than eight feet above a walkway, surfaced area or ground level below the Sign. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.100 - Signs on or Over Public Property. 
A.  Insurance Required. No Sign on or over public property shall be erected, re-erected, located or relocated or enlarged or modified structurally or changed in ownership without first receiving the approval of the Community Development Department and submitting a certificate of insurance as specified by the Community Development Department. 
1.  The City must be named as an insured party. 
2.  A thirty-day written notice to the City of South Salt Lake of cancellation or expiration must be included in the insurance certificate. 
3.  The name of the Owner of the projecting Sign must be clearly identified on the permit as an official corporation, partnership or sole proprietorship with appropriate names of individuals involved. 
B.  Permission Required. No Sign shall be located on or over publicly owned land or inside Street Rights-of-Way, except Signs erected by permission of an authorized public agency and meeting the requirements of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.110 - Illumination. 
For the protection of community appearance and to minimize light pollution and traffic hazards caused by glare, lights and illuminated Signs shall be subject to the conditions found herein. 
A.  Any light used for the illumination of a Sign shall be shielded so that the beams or rays of light will not shine directly onto surrounding areas. 
B.  Neither the direct nor the reflected light from any light source shall create a traffic hazard or distraction to operators of motor vehicles on public thoroughfares. 
C.  No portion of the Sign, including any frame, bracing or support structure, shall be constructed of a reflective surface. 
D.  Signs Illuminated from an Exterior Light Source. No light source shall be directly visible to any motor vehicle or pedestrian located in a public Right-of-Way or Street or from any residential area within a distance of three hundred (300) feet measured from the light source. 
E.  Signs Illuminated from an Interior Light Source. The light source shall not be visible from the exterior of the Sign. 
F.  Lights or Lighted Signs Not to Create a Nuisance. No spotlight, floodlight or lighted Sign shall be installed in any way which will permit the rays of light to penetrate beyond the property on which such light or lighted Sign is located in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance. 
G.  Lights or Signs alleged to be a nuisance by reason of light by the neighboring property Owners or tenants shall be subject to review by the Community Development Department to consider the validity of the nuisance complaint. If the illumination of the light or Sign is determined by the Community Development Department to be a nuisance, the Owner or person having control or interest of the light or Sign shall be required by the Community Development Department to take appropriate corrective action. Any person adversely affected by a decision of the Community Development Department may appeal the decision to the Administrative Law Judge as provided for appeals of administrative decisions. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.120 - Repair of Façades. 
A Building Façade damaged as the result of the removal, repair, replacement or installation of any Sign shall be repaired by the property Owner within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the damage. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.130 - Multi-Frontage Lots. 
A.  On-site Signs may be placed on each Frontage of a Lot or Parcel in the number, area, size and height allowed by this Chapter for one Frontage, except that: 
1.  Maximum allowances may not be transferred in whole or in part from one Frontage to another for purposes of computing any limitation using Frontage as a factor; and 
2.  The maximum area for a Sign placed at a Street intersection corner of the Parcel and turned at an angle to be visible from both Streets is computed using the longer of the Frontages. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.140 - Signs for Nonconforming Businesses. 
In order to encourage changes to eliminate Nonconforming Uses and noncompliant sites, Signs for nonconforming businesses and businesses occupying noncompliant sites shall be limited as found herein. 
A.  Conditional Use. All Signs for nonconforming businesses and businesses occupying non-compliant sites shall be a Conditional Use. 
B.  Businesses Located in Residential Districts. Signs for businesses in residential districts shall be limited to Attached Signs. 
C.  Nonconforming Businesses. Signs for such businesses may be limited to fifty (50) percent of the normal Sign allowances. 
D.  Businesses Noncompliant as to Bulk (Site) Requirements. Signs for such businesses may be limited to seventy-five (75) percent of the normal Sign allowances. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.150 - Signs in Landscaping. 
All Detached Signs (for Billboards see Article VI) are to be located in a Landscaped Area. All Landscaped Areas are subject to design review standards. The "normal" minimum Landscaped Area is defined as an area equal to twice the size of the area of the Sign or an area of four hundred (400) square feet, whichever is smaller. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.160 - Signs in Flood Hazard Areas. 
No Detached Sign shall be located in a flood hazard area except as approved by the Planning Commission as a special exception and only if constructed to withstand flood hazards as determined by the City. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.170 - Sign Area. 
Sign Area shall include the entire area within a single continuous perimeter of a Sign that encloses the extreme limits of a writing, representation, emblem, or any figure of similar character, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate a Sign designed with more than one exterior surface. 
A.  Sign Area does not include the supports, uprights, or Structure that support a Sign except if such supports, uprights, or structures are designed in a manner as to form an integral background of the Sign. 
B.  If a Sign has two (2) or more display faces, the Sign Area shall include the combined area of all display faces. 
C.  Only one side of a back-to-back or double-face Sign covering the same subject shall be counted as Sign Area when the Signs are parallel or diverge from a common edge by an angle of not more than forty-five (45) degrees. 
D.  Sign Area on frameless Signs shall be calculated based on the smallest rectangle, triangle, or circle large enough to frame the entire display. 
E.  Sign messages consisting of separate or individual letters, modules, or symbols shall be measured by a single continuous perimeter completely surrounding the entire Sign message to determine its Sign Area. 
F.  When more than one Use or business occupies a single Lot, the Lot or Building Frontage shall be used to calculate the allowable Sign sizes for a combined total of a Detached or Attached Sign, not for each Use. The total Sign Area shall then be divided between the Uses. 
G.  Multiple Signs. A single business may have multiple Signs provided the total Sign Area of all of the Signs combined, does not exceed the maximum Sign Area allowed. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
Article II. - Permits and Enforcement 
 
17.08.210 - Sign Permit Required. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person whether acting as Owner, occupant or contractor, or otherwise to erect, construct, reconstruct, enlarge, locate or alter any Sign or change the text of any Sign within South Salt Lake contrary to any provisions of this Chapter or without first obtaining a Sign permit from the Community Development Department. No Sign shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, located or altered until the plans for such Sign have been approved and a permit issued by the Community Development Department. Exempt Signs and Temporary Signs conforming to the provisions of this Chapter may be erected without such approval or permit. 
B.  Any permit or license issued for Signs which are in conflict with the provisions of this Chapter shall be null and void whether or not the license or permit was issued by employees of South Salt Lake authorized to issue said permits or licenses. 
C.  Permits shall be issued only to state licensed contractors unless specifically exempted by the state. 
D.  The Community Development Department may require additional permits for specified construction elements such as electrical components, footings, unique construction methods and other such items as determined by the Community Development Department. 
E.  All permits issued for Sign construction shall expire in ninety (90) days unless completed. No extensions may be granted. New Applications are required for Signs not completed in the required time. Billboards have differing requirements found in Article VI. 
F.  Applications and permits are not transferable. 
G.  The following changes shall not require a Sign permit. These exceptions shall not be construed as relieving the Owner of the Sign from the responsibility of its erection and maintenance in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter or any other law or ordinance regulating the same. 
1.  The changing of the advertising copy or message of Signs specifically designed for the use of replaceable copy; or the changing of advertising copy or message where no electrical components or structural modifications are involved. 
2.  Electrical maintenance, repainting or cleaning maintenance of a Sign. 
3.  The repair of a Sign. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.220 - Revocable Sign Permit. 
A.  All rights and privileges acquired under the provisions of this Chapter permitting the erection or maintenance of marquees or Signs over sidewalks or public Rights-of-Way are mere licenses. They are revocable at any time without compensation with or without cause by the Community Development Department, whether or not such permits contain this provision. 
B.  Notice of Revocation. If the Community Development Department elects to revoke such license, the Community Development Department shall give notice of such revocation to the permittee or Owner of the property on which the marquee or Sign is situated and shall afford such person a period of not less than ninety (90) calendar days within which to remove the marquee or Sign or to reconstruct it in such a manner that it does not extend over the public Right-of-Way. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.230 - Applications. 
A.  Applications for a Sign permit shall be on forms provided by the community Development Community Development Department and be accompanied by plans and information as required by the Community Development Department to appropriately review the Application for compliance with the requirements of this Chapter and other ordinances, rules or regulations. 
B.  Applications shall be accompanied by the appropriate fees as set forth in the Consolidated Fee Schedule of the City. All such permit fees are considered Application fees and are not refundable but shall be applied toward the required permit fee if granted. 
C.  Double Fee Required. In the event that work is started prior to obtaining a permit, the fee for a Sign permit shall be doubled. The payment of such double fee shall not relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of this Chapter in the execution of the work, nor from any other penalties prescribed herein. 
D.  Expiration of Application. An Application for which no permit is issued after sixty (60) days following the date of Application, due to inaction by the Applicant, shall expire. Applications and plans submitted may thereafter be destroyed by the Community Development Department. The Community Development Department may extend the time for action by the Applicant for a period not exceeding a total of ninety (90) days from the date of Application upon written request by the Applicant showing the circumstances beyond the control of the Applicant that have prevented action from being taken. In order to renew action on an Application after expiration, the Applicant shall resubmit plans and pay new fees. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.240 - Enforcement. 
A.  The Community Development Department shall be vested with the duty of enforcing these Sign regulations. In the performance of that duty, the Community Development Department shall be authorized and directed to perform the following: 
1.  To issue permits to construct, alter or repair Signs which conform to the provisions of this Chapter. 
2.  To ascertain that all Signs, construction, and all reconstructions or modifications of existing Signs are built or constructed or modified in conformance with the provisions of these Sign regulations and all other regulations incorporated herein by reference. 
3.  To make inspections. The Community Development Department may make inspections at any stage of the construction process as deemed appropriate by the Community Development Department, including prior to footings being poured on a Detached Sign and upon the completion of construction, erection, re-erection or remodeling of any Sign for which a permit has been issued. The permit holder shall be responsible to schedule inspections with the Community Development Department. The Community Development Department may conduct an inspection of Signs at any time. If the Community Development Department finds any Sign which is in need of repair or violates any provision of this Chapter, the Community Development Department may take the necessary legal action, as specified in this Title, to bring the Sign into compliance. 
4.  To issue citations and/or file complaints against violators of these Sign regulations. 
5.  To perform abatement activities in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
6.  To remove Signs on public property or within Rights-of-Way. 
B.  The Community Development Department may take any appropriate action or institute any proceeding in any case where any Sign is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or in any case where any Sign is used in violation of these Sign regulations or any other City ordinance. 
C.  Notice of Violation. Except for Signs on public property or within Rights-of-Way and snipe Signs, notice of violation shall be given by written notice of violation sent by registered mail or delivered in person to the Owner of the property where the Sign is located or to the person having charge or control or receiving the benefit of any Sign found by the Community Development Department to be unsafe or dangerous or in violation of these Sign regulations or of any other City ordinance. 
D.  Non-Maintained or Abandoned Signs. The Community Development Department may require each Non-Maintained or Abandoned Sign to be removed from the Building or premises when such Sign has not been repaired or put into use within thirty (30) calendar days after notice of non-maintenance or Abandonment is given. If such Signs are not removed within thirty (30) working days after the Community Development Department gives notice, the Community Development Department may abate and remove the Sign, and the Owner or person having charge, control or benefit of any such Sign shall pay to the City the costs incurred the same as established for an unsafe Sign. 
E.  Unsafe or Dangerous Signs. A property Owner or occupant may not maintain or allow any Sign which is dangerous or defective on any premises he/she owns, occupies or controls. 
If an unsafe or dangerous Sign is not repaired or made safe within five working days after the Community Development Department gives notice pursuant to this Chapter, the Community Development Department may abate and remove the Sign, and the person having charge, control or benefit of any such Sign shall pay to the City the costs incurred in such removal, including an administrative fee, as established in the Consolidated Fee Schedule of the City, and any legal expenses within thirty (30) calendar days after written notice is mailed to such person. 
F.  Illegal Signs. If an illegal Sign is not brought into compliance with the provisions of these Sign regulations within thirty (30) working days after the Community Development Department gives notice, the Community Development Department may abate and remove the Sign, and the Owner or person having charge, control or benefit of any such Sign shall pay to the City the costs incurred the same as established for an unsafe Sign. 
G.  Confiscation of Signs. The Community Development Department may immediately confiscate any Sign located on public property, sidewalks or within rights-of-way in violation of these Sign regulations or any other City ordinances. A Sign located on a sidewalk or in a public Right-of-Way is a nuisance per se and may be removed at any time without prior notice to the Owner. 
1.  Confiscated Signs shall be stored at a location determined by the Community Development Department for a period of fourteen (14) days, during which time the Owner or person having charge, control or benefit of the confiscated Sign may redeem the Sign after payment of civil penalties as established in the Consolidated Fee Schedule of the City. 
2.  The City shall be held harmless for any damages incurred to Signs as a result of their confiscation. 
3.  In addition to civil penalties, Sign Owners and responsible persons shall be liable for any damages caused to public property, public facilities or public utilities by reason of the placement, attachment and/or removal of such unlawful Signs. 
4.  Signs not redeemed within fourteen (14) days shall be deemed to be the property of the City and may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of by the City. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.250 - Nonconforming Signs (other than Billboards). 
A.  Moving, Extensions or Alterations. 
1.  A Nonconforming Sign shall not be reconstructed, raised, moved, replaced, extended, altered or enlarged unless the Sign is changed so as to conform to all provisions of this Chapter. 
2.  Alteration shall not include the changing of copy or panels containing copy so long as the Structure remains the same. 
3.  Repair or maintenance shall not be considered an Alteration. 
4.  Removal of portions of a Sign shall not be a violation of this Section if such removal brings the Sign more closely in compliance with the provisions of the Chapter. 
B.  Termination of Nonconforming Signs shall be: 
1.  By Abandonment. Abandonment of a Nonconforming Sign shall terminate immediately the right to maintain such Sign. 
2.  By Violation of Ordinance. Any additional (besides nonconformance) violation of this ordinance or other City ordinances shall terminate immediately the right to maintain a Nonconforming Sign. 
3.  By Destruction, Damage or Obsolescence. The right to maintain any Nonconforming Sign shall terminate and shall cease to exist whenever the Sign is damaged or destroyed from any cause whatsoever, or becomes obsolete or substandard under any applicable ordinance of the City to the extent that the Sign becomes a hazard or a danger. 
4.  By Change in Status of the Property. Any of the conditions of Subsection C below shall result in loss of nonconforming status and subject the Sign to removal or changes to be brought into conformance. 
C.  Compliance Required. A Nonconforming Sign shall be brought into conformance upon the occurrence of any one of the following: 
1.  Any action that increases the Floor Area of the premises by more than twenty-five (25) percent. 
2.  For a Lot located in a commercial or industrial district, any change in Use to a more intensive Use when a new certificate of occupancy is required. 
3.  Any change in Use from a Nonconforming to a conforming Use. 
D.  Any Nonconforming Sign erected or displayed prior to the effective date of this ordinance that is defined as a Temporary Sign under this Chapter shall be removed immediately upon notice by the Community Development Department. 
E.  A special exception may be requested of the Planning Commission for unusual circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.260 - Nonconforming Billboards. 
A.  Moving, Extensions or Alterations. 
1.  A Nonconforming Billboard shall not be reconstructed, raised, moved, replaced, extended, altered or enlarged except in conformance with Article VI of this Chapter. 
2.  Alteration shall not include the changing of copy or panels containing copy so long as the Structure remains the same. 
3.  Repair or maintenance shall not be considered an Alteration. 
4.  Removal of portions of a Billboard shall not be a violation of this Section if such removal brings the Sign more closely in compliance with the provisions of the Chapter. 
5.  Billboards nonconforming as to site requirements (Setbacks, heights, Landscaping, size, etc.) may be modified or relocated on site if such relocation or modifications brings the Billboard into compliance with the requirements of this Chapter. 
B.  Termination of Nonconforming Billboards shall be after notice and a hearing as established by Utah Code Section 10-9a-213, as may be amended or replaced. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.270 - Violation/Penalty. 
A.  Any person, whether acting as Owner or occupant of the premises involved, contractor or otherwise, who violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of the Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in this Title. 
B.  Civil penalties, as established by the City Council in the Consolidated Fee Schedule, shall apply as set forth in this Chapter. 
C.  A separate offense shall be deemed to be committed on each day an offense occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.280 - Appeals. 
Appeals of the orders, administrative decisions, or interpretations arising out of the provisions of this Chapter, and any request for variances to the standards of this Chapter, shall be to the as provided in this Title. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
Article III. - General Regulations 
 
17.08.310 - General Requirements. 
A.  All Signs shall be subject to the requirements and restrictions found herein for the district or area in which located and shall be subject to design review standards of this Title. 
B.  All Signs shall be classified by the Community Development Department, and subject to the specific requirements of that classification, as well as the general provisions and general regulations of this Chapter, as one of the six types found herein: 
1.  Attached; 
2.  Detached; 
3.  Billboards; 
4.  Temporary; 
5.  Exempt; or 
6.  Prohibited. 
C.  Signs Adjacent to Residential Districts. Where any property on which a Sign is to be located is adjacent (within one hundred (100) feet of) any residential district, additional requirements may apply as found elsewhere in this Chapter. 
D.  Specific District Requirements. The requirement of the City's zoning district shall apply to all Signs, notwithstanding the requirements found in this Chapter, and such requirements shall rule. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.320 - Residential Districts. 
Within any residential district, Signs may be allowed as contained herein. 
A.  All Signs shall comply with the specifications of the specific type as found in this Article or elsewhere in this Chapter. 
B.  One civic Sign is not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet in Sign Area. 
C.  Development/construction/Subdivision Signs, as allowed in this Chapter. 
D.  One residential Sign is not to exceed two square feet in area for the purpose of identifying the address and occupants of the residence. 
E.  Each Multi-Family Residential Use shall be allowed one Sign per Street Frontage for the purpose of identifying the name and address of the Use to which it is appurtenant. Said Sign shall not exceed six feet in height above ground level, shall not exceed ten square feet per Sign face with a maximum total Sign Area of fifteen (15) square feet and shall be set back a minimum of fifteen (15) feet. 
F.  Signs described above must be located on the property to which they pertain. 
G.  Other special Use Signs as specifically allowed in this Chapter. Low profile identification Signs may be allowed in residential districts only as a special Use Sign subject to the provision therein. 
H.  Heights. Unless specifically allowed otherwise, no Sign in a residential district may exceed a height of six feet. 
I.  Home Occupation Signs. One Sign not exceeding two square feet in area may be allowed for a permitted Home Occupation. Such Sign must be placed on or against the Dwelling. 
J.  Illumination. Illuminated Signs in residential districts shall only be allowed as a special exception and are discouraged except for unusual circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.330 - Commercial and Industrial Districts. 
In commercial and industrial districts, Signs indicating the business, commodities, service, industry or other activity sold, offered or conducted on the premises may be allowed as found herein. 
A.  All Signs allowed in residential districts may be allowed. 
B.  There may be any number of attached or Detached Signs provided their total does not exceed the maximum square footage of Sign Area allowed for the type of Sign and the location unless a special exception is granted for unusual circumstances. Except as otherwise specified, the Community Development Department may determine special exceptions in this Section. 
C.  Detached on-premise Signs may be allowed as follows: 
1.  Detached Signs may be located, subject to the standards of this Chapter, anywhere on the Parcel. However, the total square footage allowed is based solely on Lot Frontage. 
2.  Size. One and one-half square foot of Sign Area for each lineal foot of Street Frontage. Except for Freeway oriented Signs (see Subsection D below), those Signs subject to "adjacent to residential" requirements of this Chapter, and where granted a special exception for unusual circumstances, no Sign may exceed two hundred (200) square feet of total Sign Area. When more than one Use or business occupies a Lot, the Lot Frontage is to be used to calculate the Sign sizes for a combined total of all Detached Signs, not for each Use. The total may then be divided between the Uses. 
3.  Billboard Signs shall not count toward the total Sign Area allowed on a Parcel for Detached Signs. 
D.  Freeway-Oriented Detached Sign. Businesses may request on-premise Freeway-oriented Detached Signs as a Conditional Use and subject to the requirements as found herein. 
1.  Must be located on property which is within three hundred (300) feet of the Freeway. 
2.  Sign Area. The area of the Sign shall be subject to the size limitation based on Lot Frontage whether located in front or another location except such Signs may, if the Planning Commission finds conditions that warrant such sizes, be up to three hundred (300) square feet maximum. 
3.  All such Signs shall be subject to "adjacent to residential" regulations found elsewhere in this Chapter. 
4.  Such Signs shall not be allowed on any Parcel of property east of those Parcels with Frontage on State Street. 
E.  Attached on-premise Signs may be allowed as follows: 
1.  Signs may be placed, subject to the standards of this Chapter, on any side of a Building. However, the total Sign Area allowed will be based solely on the Building front. 
2.  Size. On-premise Attached Signs may not exceed a total of three square feet of Sign Area for each lineal foot of Building Frontage, unless, for unusual circumstances, a special exception is granted. The area of any one Sign shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet, unless, for unusual circumstances, a special exception is granted. 
3.  When more than one Use or business occupies a Building, the lineal footage of the Building is to be used to calculate the Sign sizes for a combined total of all Attached Signs, not for each Use. The total may then be divided between the Uses. 
F.  Businesses in free standing Buildings containing more than one non-Residential Use and businesses located on Lots containing more than one nonresidential Building and more than one non-Residential Use, may request a special exception for additional Signs or Sign Area. 
G.  Off-Premise Directional Signs may be allowed as found elsewhere in this Chapter. Other than Off-Premise Directional Signs, off-premise Signs may be allowed only as found in this Chapter. 
H.  Billboards may be allowed only as found elsewhere in this Chapter and are prohibited or restricted in certain locations. 
I.  Low-profile Signs as defined in this Chapter may be allowed in conformity with the following provisions: 
1.  Low-profile Signs must not violate the clear view ordinance of this Title; 
2.  Low-profile Signs must not cross the Property Line; 
3.  Low-profile Signs must be incorporated into a Landscaped Area, which area is subject to design review standards; 
4.  Low-profile Signs shall be limited to a maximum of six feet in height from Grade; and 
5.  Low-profile Signs shall contain no animation unless granted a Conditional Use by the Planning Commission. 
J.  Roof Signs shall not be allowed except as a special exception under the provisions of this Chapter and, if allowed, must conform to the following standards: 
1.  The height of the Sign face of Roof Signs shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the height of the Building or ten feet, whichever is less; 
2.  Roof Signs shall not be animated; 
3.  No visible guy wires, braces or secondary supports shall be used; 
4.  Roof Signs shall be designed to appear as extensions of the exterior Building wall; 
5.  Roof Signs shall not exceed the maximum permitted height for the zoning district in which located; 
6.  Detached Signs may not overhang any portion of the roof of a Building. Attached Signs may not overhang any portion of the same or any other Building; and 
7.  Height Regulations for Signs on Parapet Walls, Sloping and Shed Roofs. The following regulations apply to the location and height of Signs on parapet walls and various roof structures: 
a.  Parapet Wall. A Sign attached to a parapet wall may project above the top of the parapet wall no more than one fourth of the Sign height, except that the maximum projection allowed is four feet. 
b.  Sloping Roof. A Sign attached to the fascia or located on the sloping roof of a structure, may not extend more than four feet above the lower edge or the fascia of the sloping roof. 
c.  Shed Roof. A Sign attached to the fascia of a shed roof may not be located so as to extend more than four feet above the lower edge of the fascia. 
K.  Menu boards for drive-in Restaurants may be allowed as detached or Attached Signs provided there are no more than two free-standing or wall-mounted menu boards per business and such are located not less than twenty (20) feet from the Street Property Line. 
L.  Painted Wall Signs as defined by this Chapter are allowed only as specifically approved by the Planning Commission as a special exception and provided such Signs are designed so as to achieve community goals related to improving appearance and are located on walls where Attached Signs would be less desirable or more difficult to attach. 
M.  Permanent Window Signs. For each ground floor occupancy of a Building not more than two permanent Signs may be painted on or otherwise displayed from the inside or outside surface of any window, showcase or other similar facility. These Signs are allowed in addition to those Signs permitted elsewhere in this Chapter. The total area of each such Sign, however, may not exceed a maximum Sign Area of four square feet. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.340 - Transit-Oriented Development (TOD) District Special Requirements. 
The standards herein shall apply to all areas of the TOD district. 
A.  All Signs within the TOD district are conditional and must be approved by the Planning Commission. 
B.  Where the Building orientation is with the front of the business toward the light rail corridor, business standards may be applied. 
C.  Where the Building orientation is with the back or side toward the light rail corridor, any Signs along the corridor shall be limited to Attached Signs and low-profile Signs. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.350 - Heights. 
Heights of Signs shall be regulated as found herein. 
A.  For the purpose of determining height on Detached Signs (including Billboards), measurement of the vertical distance shall be from the elevation of the nearest public sidewalk within twenty-five (25) feet or, if there is no sidewalk within twenty-five (25) feet, from the lowest point of the Grade on the Lot upon which the Sign is located and within twenty-five (25) feet of the Sign, to the uppermost point on the Sign or Sign structure. 
B.  Pole and Ground Signs. Pole and ground Signs shall be limited to a maximum height of thirty-five (35) feet, except for Freeway oriented Signs, unless granted a special exception by the Community Development Department for unusual circumstances. 
C.  Freeway-Oriented Detached Signs. Such Signs are a Conditional Use requiring Planning Commission approval. Upon a finding by the Planning Commission of conditions that warrant such heights, such Signs may be allowed greater heights up to a maximum of twenty-five (25) feet above the Grade of the adjacent Freeway or barrier wall. 
D.  Low-Profile Signs. Low profile Signs shall be limited to a maximum height of six feet. 
E.  Billboards. See requirements elsewhere in this Chapter. 
F.  Special Use Signs. See requirements elsewhere in this Chapter. 
G.  Height of Attached Signs. The height of Attached Signs shall conform to the following provisions: 
1.  When a Building has more than one level, the wall on which the Sign is installed will govern. 
2.  Awning Signs. Awning Signs shall not be located above the second floor level of the Building. 
3.  Flat Signs. Flat Signs may extend a maximum of two feet above the roofline or parapet wall of the Building on which they are located. 
4.  Marquee and Canopy Signs. Marquee and canopy Signs shall not be located above the main entry level of the premises. 
5.  Nameplates. Nameplates shall not be located above the first floor level of the Building. 
6.  Projecting Signs. A projecting Sign shall not extend above the top of the vertical Building wall on which it is located. 
7.  Roof Signs. See requirements found elsewhere in this Chapter. 
8.  Window Signs. Window Signs shall not be located above the second floor. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.360 - Setbacks. 
Signs shall conform to the Setback requirements as specified herein and as found elsewhere in this Chapter. 
A.  For the purposes of determining Setback distances, measurements shall be taken from the edge or surface of the Sign or Sign Structure which is closest to the Property Line from which the Sign is to be set back. 
B.  Front or Corner Side. Signs on Corner Lots or at the intersection of any driveway, Parking Lot, entrance or exit with any Street, shall meet clear view requirements of this Title. 
C.  Pole and Ground Signs (Including Billboards). All such Signs shall have a minimum Setback of five feet from any Property Line. Frontage Setbacks shall be a minimum of five feet and one additional foot of Setback for each foot of height over twenty-five (25) feet, up to the maximum allowed. 
D.  Low-Profile Signs. Low-profile Signs shall have a minimum Setback of one foot. 
E.  Signs appurtenant to any Multi-Family Residential Use shall be set back a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from any Property Line adjacent to a Street. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.370 - Projection and Clearance Requirements. 
A.  Clearance Standards. 
1.  No Sign or Sign Structure shall be erected in such a manner that any portion of its surface or supports will interfere in any way with the free use of any fire escape, exit or standpipe. 
2.  No Sign shall obstruct any openings to such an extent that light or ventilation is reduced to a point below that required by the City. 
3.  Clearance Between Sign and Ground. 
a.  Generally, pole and ground Signs must not be located in or hang over areas of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
b.  If no other location is reasonably available, pole Signs must have a minimum clearance of ten feet between the bottom of any pole or overhanging Sign and the ground or Sign base. Pole Signs which have a maximum clearance of four feet may be excepted. 
c.  All ground Signs shall have a maximum clearance of four feet. 
d.  Signs projecting over a sidewalk or public Right-of-Way may not be less than eight feet above the sidewalk or Right-of-Way. 
B.  Projection of Signs. Signs may be allowed to project from Buildings or Structures in conformance with the following general provisions: 
1.  Across Property Lines. Detached Signs shall not be allowed to project over any Property Lines and must meet minimum Setback requirements. Attached Signs may be allowed to cross into public Rights-of-Way (but not Alleys) subject to the requirements as found elsewhere in this Chapter. 
2.  Over Alleys. No Sign or Sign Structure shall project into any public Alley. 
3.  Projecting Signs may be allowed to extend even with the roof line or parapet wall of a Building. 
4.  When a Building has more than one level, the wall on which the Sign is installed will govern. 
5.  Marquee Signs. Signs attached to an approved marquee, as specified in this Chapter, may extend over public property, with no copy on the sides, a maximum of twelve (12) inches from the face of the marquee. Signs placed within or below the ceiling of a marquee shall not extend beyond the marquee face and shall be placed within the vertical plane of the marquee. 
6.  Flat Signs. Signs placed flat against a Building must be erected parallel thereto and the outside face of the Sign may not extend more than one foot from the wall of the Buildings. Flat Signs may project over a public Right-of-Way but may not be less than eight feet above the sidewalk. Flat Signs may have no copy visible from the sides. 
7.  Canopies or Awnings. Canopies or awnings may extend from Buildings subject to the provisions found herein. 
a.  Canopies or awnings over sidewalks or public property shall maintain a minimum eight-foot clearance above the sidewalk or public property. Approval of the public agency is required as is insurance as found elsewhere in this Chapter. 
b.  Canopies or awnings may extend a maximum of twelve (12) feet from the Building but not more than six feet into a public Right-of-Way. 
c.  Canopies or awnings shall not create any traffic or pedestrian hazards as found in this Chapter. 
8.  Attached Signs, other than flat Signs, marquees, canopies or awnings (which have specific requirements), may project no more than six feet from the Building and may not cross Property Lines. Such Signs must maintain a minimum clearance of ten feet over pedestrian ways and fourteen (14) feet over vehicular ways. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
Article IV. - Special Regulations 
 
17.08.410 - Uses Adjacent to Residential Districts. 
Where any property on which a Sign is to be located is adjacent (within one hundred (100) feet of) any residential district, the requirements found herein shall apply as well as those found elsewhere in this Chapter. 
A.  Detached Signs, Including Freeway-Oriented. Such Signs shall be located at the extreme distance away from the residential district as the property on which located will allow. Such Signs shall be limited to twenty-five (25) feet in height, be one hundred (100) square feet or less in size, and meet the illumination and other location requirements of this Chapter. 
B.  Illuminated Signs. Any Sign illuminated by any means must be equipped with a timer and shut off the illumination between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m. 
C.  Closeness of Signs. Except for Directional Signs, no Sign not mounted on a Building shall be located any closer to a residential district than thirty-five (35) feet. 
D.  Limits on Heights of Detached and Attached Signs. No Sign shall be above the height of fifteen (15) feet if located within fifty (50) feet of a residential district. 
E.  Billboards have specific requirements found elsewhere in this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.420 - Special Use Signs. 
The Signs listed in this Section may be approved by the Community Development Department on a case-by-case basis. The Community Development Department may limit or restrict these Signs as deemed appropriate to meet the intent of this Chapter and the City's General and Master Plans. The Community Development Department may limit the placement, location, size, height, number, lighting and other factors of Signs usage. 
A.  Neighborhood Identification Signs. In any district, a Sign, masonry wall, Landscaping and other similar materials or features may be combined to form a display for neighborhood or tract identification. 
B.  Construction Signs. In any district, one unlighted Sign per Development may be allowed on the Lot or attached to the outside of a Building during its construction period. The Sign may identify only the project, its developer, architects, engineers, designers, contractors or other persons or groups participating in the project. 
C.  Subdivision/Development Signs. 
1.  The Community Development Department may issue a permit for a Development Sign in any district in connection with the marketing of Lots or structures in a Subdivision, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Time Limit. Such permits may be issued for a period not to exceed one year. The Community Development Department may renew such permits for additional periods of up to one year for each permit upon written Application at least thirty days prior to its expiration 
b.  Type of Sign. Sign as used in this Section refers to all types of Signs except those prohibited in this Chapter. 
c.  Location. Subdivision Signs must be located and set back from Property Lines sufficiently to eliminate any safety visibility obstructions as authorized by the Community Development Department. A Subdivision/Development Sign may be located at each entrance in the Subdivision and, in addition, one interior Sign may be located within the Subdivision as approved by the Community Development Department. 
2.  Severely limited off-premise Subdivision/Development Signs may be approved by the Community Development Department for isolated or difficult to locate Developments. 
D.  Nonexempt Signs for direction or instruction. 
1.  Signs which provide direction or instruction to the public are allowed in any district, provided such Signs are located entirely on the property to which they pertain and the number, size and location thereof has been approved by the Community Development Department. 
2.  In addition, the Community Development Department may authorize the placing of Directional Signs at appropriate Street intersections or other locations for the convenience of the motoring public; such Signs must pertain to places of general interest such as schools, hospitals, public Buildings, airports, fair grounds and other similar public services or institutions. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.430 - Sexually Oriented Business Signs. 
Sexually oriented business Signs are limited as found herein. 
A.  No more than one detached and no more than one Attached Sign is allowed per business. 
B.  No Sign may exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area 
C.  No descriptive art or designs depicting any activity related to or implying, the nature of the business is allowed. Signs may contain alphanumeric copy only. 
D.  Other than the Signs specifically allowed by this Section, a Sexually Oriented Business may not use any Temporary Sign, banner, light or other device designed or intended to draw attention to the business location. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.440 - Localized Alternative Sign District. 
A.  Purpose. Large scale land Uses (such as a shopping center, an office park, a special district such as an RDA project, or large institutions such as universities or medical centers having a multi-Building campus) have common design elements that can be complemented and enhanced through the use of special signage. Localized alternative Sign districts allow for the creation of special Sign regulations to meet the needs of these situations. 
B.  Applicability. These regulations shall be applicable in all commercial or industrial districts. In order to give effect to the purpose set forth herein, a localized alternative Sign district pertaining only to a particular center, campus or district may be proposed as an alternative to the Sign regulations that would otherwise be applicable under this Chapter. 
C.  Effect of Overlay District. If a localized alternative Sign district is established, the Sign standards and limitations established within that district shall govern. 
D.  Application and Hearing Procedure. 
1.  Persons seeking to establish a localized alternative Sign district pursuant to this Section shall submit the regulations proposed for the district to the Community Development Department, together with any additional material the Community Development Department requests. 
2.  Such Application shall be considered a special exception subject to a public hearing by the Planning Commission. Following adoption of the district by the commission, the regulations of the district shall apply uniformly to all properties located within the boundaries of the Overlay District. 
3.  Changes to Approved Localized Alternative Sign Districts. An alternative localized Sign district may be amended or modified only upon submission and approval of another Application pursuant to this Section. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.450 - Temporary Signs. 
Temporary Signs may be allowed, without requirements for a permit, in all business and industrial districts. Temporary Signs are considered an exception to the rules and are therefore allowed only so long as they do not violate the intent of this Chapter and the goals of the City's General and Master Plans. No rights for displaying any Temporary Sign is implied or intended. The following standards shall apply to Temporary Signs: 
A.  General Restriction. Temporary Signs shall be limited in duration of display. To this extent, the Community Development Department may determine any reasonable time frame for display using the following as a guide: Normal display periods should not exceed twenty-one (21) consecutive days or sixty-three (63) days per calendar year. 
B.  Size, height, location, duration of display and other items may be limited or extended by the Community Development Department to meet the intent of this Chapter and the General and Master Plans of the City. 
C.  Nuisances. If any Temporary Sign becomes a nuisance, as determined by the Community Development Department, such Signs may be subject to removal or relocation or other actions to eliminate the nuisance. 
D.  Temporary Signs shall meet all other general or specific type Sign requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.460 - Marquee Requirements. 
A marquee may be allowed in all business or industrial districts of the City. 
A.  All marquees shall conform to the provisions found herein. Where specifications as outlined in this Chapter are different from the provisions of the building codes as adopted by the City, the more restrictive shall apply. 
B.  Design Standards. 
1.  A marquee, in order to provide pedestrian shelter, shall have its first six feet of projection form a rectangle with the sides ninety (90) degrees to the Building face and the plane at least six feet from the Building parallel with the Front Property Line. The remaining projection of the marquee can assume a configuration Compatible with the architecture of the Building. 
2.  Height Limitation. A marquee shall not be located on any floor above the main entry level of the premises. 
3.  Thickness. A marquee shall have a vertical face height or cross section dimension not exceeding six feet. 
4.  Clearance. A marquee shall have a clearance of at least ten feet above the sidewalk. 
5.  Projection. A marquee may extend a maximum of ten feet from the face of the Building but must not project closer than two feet to the back of the curb. 
6.  Location. A marquee shall be so located as to not interfere with the operation of any exterior standpipe or to obstruct the clear passage of stairways or exits from the Building. 
C.  Insurance Required. No marquee projecting over City property shall be erected, re-erected, located or relocated or enlarged or modified structurally or change ownership without first receiving approval from the Community Development Department and submitting a certification of insurance with the following provisions: 
1.  The City of South Salt Lake must be named in the certificate of insurance as an additional insured. 
2.  A thirty-day written notice to South Salt Lake of cancellation or expiration must be included in the certificate of insurance. 
3.  Identification. The name of the Owner of the marquee must be clearly identified on the Application for a permit as an official corporation, partnership or sole proprietorship with appropriate names of individuals involved. 
D.  Marquee Signs. A permanent Sign or letters may be attached to the top of, or fascia of, or within or below the ceiling of an approved marquee, subject to the following provisions 
1.  Vertical Dimension. Overall vertical dimensions of the combined Sign and marquee shall not exceed ten feet. 
2.  Height of Sign. The height of the Sign or letters shall not exceed four feet. 
3.  No Side Copy. Signs attached to marquees shall have no copy on the side portion of the Sign. 
4.  Clearance. Signs attached to marquees shall maintain the minimum ten-foot clearance required for the marquee. 
5.  Insurance Required. Marquee Signs shall meet the same requirements for insurance as marquees. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.470 - Off-Premise Business Signs. 
A.  Businesses located in the City may be granted, by the Community Development Department, a special exception for Off-Premise Directional Signs subject to the following: 
1.  Sign Area. Maximum area for off-premise business Directional Signs is thirty-two (32) square feet. 
2.  Height. Maximum height is four feet unless located on an existing Sign pole. If located on an existing or shared Sign pole, the off-premise business Directional Sign must adhere to all standards and restrictions for Detached Signs. 
3.  General Restrictions. 
a.  All new off-premise business Directional Signs must be constructed as a low-profile monument style Sign unless located on an existing or shared Sign pole. 
b.  The Sign must be located completely on private property at least five feet behind any public Right-of-Way and meet all requirements for Detached Signs. 
c.  Off-premise business Directional Signs are allowed only on 2100, 2700, 3300 and 3900 South, State, Main and West Temple Streets, and on 300, 500, 600, 700, and 900 West. 
B.  Special purpose Directional Signs may be allowed as a special exception granted by the Community Development Department when warranted due to unusual circumstances and to further the economic viability of the City. 
C.  Businesses located in the City may be granted, by the Planning Commission, a special exception for an off-premise advertising Sign, such as a Painted Wall Sign, an Attached Sign or a Sign shared with another business located in the City, which would not otherwise be allowed as a Billboard or off-premise Sign. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.480 - Electronic Message Centers. 
Electronic Message Centers require Conditional Use permit approval from the Planning Commission in all districts. In addition to the restrictions found in this Chapter and the other Chapters that apply to the districts mentioned above, Electronic Message Centers are subject to the following restrictions: 
A.  Electronic Message Centers are not allowed off-premise, except on Billboards. 
B.  All Electronic Message Centers must have an automatic dimmer to reduce Sign intensity after dark. 
C.  Light intensity may not exceed that produced by fifty-four (54) watts of incandescent lighting for daytime usage. An automatic dimmer must be installed to reduce nighttime intensity to that produced by thirty (30) watts of incandescent lighting. Light emitting diodes, magnetic discs and other lighting types may be used if the light intensity is not greater than that produced by incandescent lighting. 
D.  An Electronic Message Center may not flash or scintillate except to change the displayed wording to different wording. 
E.  Any display on the Electronic Message Center must remain lighted for at least two seconds. 
F.  An Electronic Message Center located within five hundred (500) feet of a residential area, or as otherwise determined by the Planning Commission, may not operate between the hours of ten p.m. and six a.m. of the following day. 
G.  For a minimum of five percent of the time the Sign is in use, the Electronic Message Center shall be devoted to public service messages. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.490 - Electric Awning Signs. 
The following requirements apply to electric awning Signs: 
A.  All frames shall be made of tubular or structurally shaped steel or aluminum with finishes or coatings as required to ensure against corrosion. 
B.  Vinyl fabric coverings shall be fourteen (14) ounces per yard minimum weight with certification as to tensile strength and flame resistance to meet adopted building and fire code standards. 
C.  Fastenings and/or structural attachments to Buildings shall be attached to structural members and of sufficient size and strength to meet adopted building code standards. 
D.  Letter copy on electric awning Signs shall be applied with manufacturer approved processes and may not exceed forty-five (45) percent of the total face area. 
E.  Electric awning Signs conform to the size and area requirements of this Chapter, except that only the copy area of an electric awning Sign is used to compute these limitations. The remaining portion is considered awning area only. 
F.  Electric awning Signs are restricted to single-store Buildings or to the first level only of multi-Story Buildings. 
G.  Back lighting shall be sufficient to light the Sign and provide down lighting but may not be so bright as to obstruct adjoining and surrounding Signs. 
H.  Awning Signs shall be architecturally Compatible with their surroundings as determined by the Community Development Department. Any Applicant denied a permit on the basis of incompatibility may appeal that decision to the Administrative Law Judge. 
I.  An electric awning Sign may project over a public Right-of-Way no more than two feet, except that the Sign may not project more than four feet from the face of the Building. 
J.  Minimum awning clearance from Grade to the bottom of the awning is eight feet. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
Article V. - Billboards 
 
17.08.510 - Purpose and Intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this Section to limit the number of Billboards in the City in order to improve driver safety, avoid impediments to redevelopment and enhance aesthetics. This Article and Chapter provides for the reasonable regulation of Billboards with the following intentions: 
A.  Limiting negative impacts and providing for the protection of property values; 
B.  Implementing goals and policies promoting pedestrian and traffic safety; 
C.  Maintaining the desired gateway areas of the City; 
D.  Protecting the views and vistas that enhance the City; 
E.  Creating aesthetically pleasing Streetscapes, commercial districts and Freeway connections, and enhancing the aesthetics of existing Billboards; 
F.  Encouraging business location; 
Furthering the applicable elements of the City's General and Master Plans. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.520 - Cap. 
A.  The total number of Billboards allowed in the City shall be limited to the number of Billboards within the City legitimately in existence or for which permits were properly issued as of September 1, 2003. 
B.  The total combined square footage of advertising area of all Billboards in the City shall be limited to the total combined square footage of advertising area of all Billboards within the City legitimately in existence or for which permits were properly issued as of September 1, 2003. 
C.  The total combined height of all Billboards in the City shall be limited to the total combined height of all Billboards within the City legitimately in existence or for which permits were properly issued as of September 1, 2003. 
D.  As the total number of Billboards, total combined square footage of advertising area of all Billboards and/or total combined height of all Billboards in the City decreases, the cap on the total number, total combined square footage of advertising area and total combined height of all Billboards within the City shall decrease correspondingly. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.530 - Permits. 
A.  Permits shall be required for all Billboard construction, including modifications, relocations and initial construction. Construction shall not commence without all required permits. 
B.  Except as found in Subsection C of this Section, all permits issued for Billboard construction expire ninety (90) days after issuance. Renewals or extensions to issued permits shall not be allowed. Work not completed in the prescribed time frame requires a new permit. 
C.  State Permits. If, in addition to a City permit, a state permit is required, the state permit must be obtained within one hundred twenty (120) days of issuance of the City permit or the City permit shall expire. The City permit shall expire ninety (90) days after the issuance of the state permit. 
D.  Relocation of Billboards. Except for Billboards relocated by Conditional Use or provisions found in this Chapter, conforming and Nonconforming Billboards may be relocated only to sites within the City allowed pursuant to provisions of this Chapter and in compliance with all other restrictions in this Chapter. A Conditional Use permit may be granted by the Planning Commission following a public hearing to facilitate Development or redevelopment of a site. Prior to relocation of a Billboard, a permit to remove an existing conforming or Nonconforming Billboard must be obtained. A permit may be issued for construction of a Billboard at the relocation site only after completion of the removal of the existing Billboard. 
E.  Permits Involving Modifications. To eliminate nonconformity, visual clutter and antiquated Billboards, existing Billboards may be modified in accordance with this Section. 
1.  Conforming Billboards. Modifications to conforming Billboards shall be made consistent with the requirements of this Chapter. Consistent with the cap imposed on the total square footage of advertising area and Billboard height set forth in this Chapter, if the conforming Billboard is of lesser height and/or contains less advertising area than is allowed under this Chapter, the height or advertising area of the Billboard may be increased to the maximum limits allowable only in exchange for the elimination of a Nonconforming Billboard within the City or a corresponding reduction in square footage of advertising area and/or height of a Nonconforming Billboard within the City. In addition, if a Billboard Sign Owner removes a Nonconforming Billboard from a surface Street, the footage may be used to increase the size of a conforming or Nonconforming Billboard on the interstate provided that the modified interstate Billboard does not exceed six hundred seventy-five (675) square feet in size exclusive of Embellishments. 
2.  Nonconforming Billboards. Modifications to Nonconforming Billboards may not increase the nonconformity with the exception of relocating square footage from a Billboard on a surface Street to a Billboard on the interstate. If a Nonconforming Billboard exceeds the height and/or advertising area limits of this Chapter, any modification to the Nonconforming Billboard shall bring it into compliance with the current height and advertising area limits. If the Nonconforming Billboard is of lesser height and/or contains less advertising area than is allowed under this Chapter, the height or advertising area of the Billboard may be increased to the maximum limits allowable only in exchange for the elimination of a different Nonconforming Billboard within the City or a corresponding reduction in square footage of advertising area and/or height of a Nonconforming Billboard within the City. 
3.  Billboards Affected by Road Construction. Billboards affected by road construction may be modified in accordance with state law and this Chapter. 
F.  Removal by the City. The City may remove Billboards as provided by state law without taking out a permit 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.540 - Location. 
A.  Billboards may be allowed only as found herein. 
1.  Billboards may be allowed in CC, CG and LI districts. Billboards may be relocated within community reinvestment project areas created or existing under the Limited Purpose Local Government Entities - Community Reinvestment Agency Act, Title 17C of the Utah Code, as amended from time to time, following the process outlined within this Chapter. 
2.  Prohibited Areas. Billboards are not allowed in the following areas of the City, regardless of the underlying district: 
a.  Within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any Residential Use as measured from the edge of the Sign face to the closest Property Lines; 
b.  Within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any part of the I-15/I-80 interchange as measured from the edge of the Sign face to the closest Property Lines. The interchange shall be that area which is one hundred fifty (150) feet from the Freeway property and lies within the area west of West Temple, east of 600 West, south of 2100 South and north of 2600 South; 
c.  Five hundred (500) feet from any direction of the I-15/3300 South interchange as measured from the edge of the Sign face to the closest Property Lines; 
d.  Five hundred (500) feet from any direction of the SR 201/900 West interchange as measured from the edge of the Sign face to the closest Property Lines; 
e.  Five hundred (500) feet from any direction of the I-80/State Street interchange as measured from the edge of the Sign face to the closest Property Lines; 
f.  East of 200 East; 
g.  Within the transit-oriented district, except those areas specified in Subsection (A)(3) of this Section. 
3.  Billboards may be allowed in the following areas of the City by Conditional Use permit following the requirements as found in Chapter 17.05 but only for purposes of relocation from another site to accommodate Development. 
a.  3300 South from State Street to the Jordan River; 
b.  2100 South from the Jordan River to State Street. 
B.  Separation. Except by Conditional Use permit approval, the minimum distance between Billboards shall be five hundred (500) feet along the same side of the Street. The separation distance may be reduced to four hundred (400) feet by Conditional Use permit but only for purposes of relocation from another site to accommodate Development. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.550 - Design and Construction Standards. 
A.  Size of Advertising Area. 
1.  Billboard advertising shall not exceed six hundred seventy-five (675) square feet in area, sixty (60) feet in width or twenty (20) feet in height along Freeways (within one hundred (100) feet of the Freeway property). Billboard advertising shall not exceed three hundred (300) square feet in area, twenty-five (25) feet in width or fifteen (15) feet in height in other locations or areas of the City. 
2.  The maximum size and height of the advertising area is exclusive of Embellishments. 
a.  Along Freeways, Embellishments may be allowed provided the Embellishment does not exceed thirty (30) percent of the advertising face of any Billboard and does not extend more than five feet above or to the side of the Billboard structure. 
b.  In other areas of the City, Embellishments may be allowed provided the Embellishment does not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the advertising face of any Billboard and does not extend more than five feet above or to the side of the Billboard structure. 
B.  Height. The highest point of any Billboard shall be no higher than thirty-five (35) feet above the existing grade. If the Freeway, within one hundred (100) feet of the Billboard measured from the Freeway at the point at which the Billboard is perpendicular to the Freeway, is on a different grade than the Billboard, then the highest point of the Billboard may be twenty-five (25) feet above the pavement elevation or any barrier wall at that location of the Freeway. 
C.  Setbacks. All Setbacks shall be measured from the closest edge of any portion of a Billboard to the Property Line. The minimum Yard Setback from all Property Lines shall be five feet. The minimum Frontage Setback for Billboards shall be five feet, plus one additional foot for each foot in height over twenty-five (25) feet in height, up to the maximum height allowed. 
D.  Lighting. Lighting shall be confined to the Sign face and not illuminate the night sky. Such lighting shall also conform to the illumination provisions of this Chapter. 
E.  Supports. All Billboards shall be Detached Signs. Monopole construction is required unless the Community Development Department determines that special design or safety considerations exist that warrant differing support systems. 
F.  Maintenance. All Billboards shall be continuously maintained both structurally and copy. 
G.  Landscaping. All Billboards are to be located in a Landscaped Area. All Landscaped Areas are subject to design review standards. The "normal minimum" Landscaped Area is defined as an area equal to the size of the advertising area of the Sign or four hundred (400) square feet, whichever is the lesser amount. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.560 - Nonconforming Billboards. 
A.  Moving, Extensions or Alterations. 
1.  A Nonconforming Billboard shall not be reconstructed, raised, moved, replaced, extended, altered or enlarged except in conformance with applicable requirements of this Chapter. 
2.  Alteration shall not include the changing of copy or copy panels so long as the Structure remains the same. 
3.  Repair or maintenance shall not be considered an Alteration. 
4.  Removal of portions of a Billboard or extension of a Billboard adjacent to the Freeway, subject to permit approval, shall not be a violation of this Section if such removal brings the Sign more closely in compliance with the provisions of the Chapter and any extension does not increase the cap limits of this Title. 
5.  Billboards nonconforming as to site requirements only (Setbacks, Landscaping, height, etc.) may be modified or relocated on site, after receiving appropriate permits, if such relocation or modifications brings the Billboard into compliance with the requirements of this Chapter. 
B.  Termination of Nonconforming Billboards shall be after notice and if the Sign Owner has failed to bring the Billboard in question into compliance with this Chapter in a reasonable amount of time and a hearing as established by Utah Code Section 10-9a-213. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.570 - Relocation. 
A.  The Owner of an existing Billboard may remove the existing Billboard and relocate to an approved location as found in this Chapter only after permits are obtained as set forth in this Chapter and other provisions of this Chapter are complied with. 
B.  Any relocation must not increase the cap limits as set forth in this Title. 
C.  Relocations may be allowed as a result of road widening, Development proposals or voluntary request. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.580 - Billboard Business. 
A.  In order to equalize competition, to encourage business success, and to impose appropriate requirements and fees, all Billboards shall be considered a separate business and shall be subject to obtaining a business license and paying the required fee as established in the Consolidated Fee Schedule of the City. Companies or individuals with multiple locations may license as a single unit with a fee for each location. 
B.  The City considers Billboards to operate as a separate business due to the following factors: 
1.  Advertising space is rented/leased on each Billboard separately. 
2.  Each Billboard is erected at a separate location requiring a separate rent/lease agreement. 
3.  Billboards require regular inspections to assure continued compliance. 
4.  Billboards create other administrative costs such as zoning approvals and enforcement activities. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
ARTICLE VI. - SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS 
 
17.08.610 - Purpose and Intent. 
A.  A special exception is an activity or Use incidental to or in addition to the principal Use(s) permitted in a zoning district or an adjustment to a fixed dimension standard permitted as exceptions to the requirements of this Chapter which requires a careful review of such factors as location, design, configuration and/or impacts to determine the desirability of authorizing its establishment on any given site. 
B.  A special exception may or may not be appropriate in a particular location depending on the local impacts, and consideration of ways to minimize adverse impacts through special site planning and Development techniques. 
C.  It is the intent of the allowances for special exceptions to foster fairness and flexibility in the regulations while yet maintaining the integrity of the purposes and intentions of the City's General and Master Plan and the zoning and other regulations of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.620 - Review. 
A.  Except for those specifically allowed to be reviewed by the Community Development Department, the Planning Commission shall review Applications for special exceptions as allowed in this Chapter. Only those Signs specifically enumerated in this Chapter as eligible shall be considered for a special exception. 
B.  Appeals of determinations of the City regarding special exceptions shall be reviewed by the. 
C.  Special exceptions shall be limited to a time period as determined by the City. However, unless specifically approved otherwise by the City, actions in accordance with such approvals must be completed within six months of the date of approval. Failure to complete all actions approved, according to the conditions of approval, within the required time shall result in loss of the approval and subject the Applicant/Owner to the enforcement provisions of this Section. Applicants/Owners may request one and only one extension by filing such request with the Community Development Department prior to the expiration date. The Community Development Department shall review the reasons for the request and may grant, for any term not to exceed six months, or deny the requested extension. 
D.  Special exceptions reviewed by the Planning Commission shall be reviewed following the requirements for a Conditional Use. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.630 - Conditions on Special Exceptions. 
A.  The City may impose conditions and limitations as may be necessary or appropriate to prevent or minimize adverse effects upon other property and improvements in the vicinity of the special exception or upon public facilities and services. 
B.  Conditions may include, but are not limited to, conditions concerning Use, construction, size and height, lighting, location, Landscaping, Screening and other matters relating to the purposes and objectives of this Chapter. 
C.  Conditions shall be expressly set forth in the granting of the special exception. 
D.  Compliance with Standards. The proposed exception shall comply with all additional standards imposed. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.640 - Violation of Conditions. 
Violation of any condition or limitation imposed shall be a violation of this Chapter and shall constitute grounds for revocation of the special exception. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.650 - Applications. 
An Application may be made by the Owner of the subject property or the Owner's authorized agent to the Community Development Department and must include such information as the Community Development Department determines is needed to adequately review the request. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.08.660 - Decisions. 
A.  The City may approve the special exception, approve the special exception subject to specific conditions or deny the special exception. In making its determination, the City shall consider the items found herein and others as deemed appropriate for the request. 
B.  Appropriateness. No Application for a special exception shall be approved unless it is determined that the proposed special exception is appropriate in the location proposed based upon its consideration of the standards of this Chapter, other appropriate regulations and standards, the specific conditions for certain special exceptions and the ramifications related to the City's General and Master Plans. 
C.  Compliance with Ordinance and District Purposes. The proposed exception shall be in harmony with the general and specific purposes for which this Chapter was enacted and for which the regulations of the district were established. 
D.  No Substantial Impairment of Property Value. The proposed exception shall not substantially diminish or impair the value of the property within the neighborhood in which it is located. 
E.  No Undue Adverse Impact. The proposed exception shall not have a material adverse effect upon the character of the area or the public health, safety and general welfare. 
F.  Compatible with Surrounding Development. The proposed exception shall be constructed, arranged and operated so as to be Compatible with the Use and Development of neighboring property in accordance with the applicable district regulations. 
G.  No Destruction of Significant Features. The proposed exception shall not result in the destruction, loss or damage of natural, scenic or historic features of significant importance. 
H.  No Material Pollution of Environment. The proposed exception shall not cause material air, water, soil or noise pollution or other types of pollution. 
I.  Compliance with Design Review. The proposed exception shall be in compliance with the purpose, intentions and standards of the design review elements of the City. 
J.  Unusual Circumstances. In reviewing exceptions for unusual circumstances, the City may consider the following factors and others as the circumstances warrant: 
1.  Lot or Building size in relationship to others in the area; 
2.  The potential impact of the style and size of the Sign; 
3.  The special features of the location in relationship to the general area in which located; 
4.  The long-term effect on the purposes and intentions of the regulations and General and Master Plans of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
Chapter 17.09 - NONCONFORMING USES AND NONCOMPLYING STRUCTURES 
Sections: 
 
17.09.010 - Determination of Nonconforming or Noncomplying Status. 
A.  Burden on Owner to Establish Legality. The Owner bears the burden of establishing that any Nonconforming Use or Noncomplying Structure lawfully exists. 
B.  Determination of Status. The Community Development Director in consultation with the City Attorney shall determine in writing the Nonconforming or Noncomplying status of any property provided the Owner or his/her designee has submitted a complete Application for a certificate of legally existing Nonconforming status to the Community Development Department. Any decision made by the Community Development Director may be appealed within ten (10) calendar days of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.09.020 - Authority to Continue. 
A.  Continuation of Nonconforming Use. Any lawful Nonconforming Use may continue subject to the standards and limitations of this Chapter. 
B.  Continuation of Noncomplying Structure. A Noncomplying Structure that was lawfully constructed prior to a contrary change in this Code may be used and maintained, subject to the standards and limitations of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.09.030 - Abandonment or Loss or Nonconforming Use. 
A.  Abandonment of Nonconforming Use. A Nonconforming Use that is discontinued for a continuous period of at least one (1) year is presumed abandoned and shall not thereafter be reestablished or resumed. 
1.  Abandonment may also be presumed if any of the following occur: 
a.  A majority of the Primary Structure associated with the Nonconforming Use has been voluntarily demolished without prior written agreement with the City regarding an extension of the Nonconforming Use; 
b.  The primary Structure associated with the Nonconforming Use remains vacant for a period of one (1) year; 
c.  A less intensive or conforming Use has replaced the original Nonconforming Use and has continued for a period of at least one (1) year; 
d.  Once destroyed by fire or other casualty, a Nonconforming Use is presumed to abandoned if a Building Permit for reconstruction of the Structure is not applied for within six (6) months from the date of destruction; or 
e.  The City business license associated with any Nonconforming Use has been revoked. 
2.  Any party claiming that a Nonconforming Use has been abandoned shall have the burden of establishing the abandonment. 
3.  Any subsequent Use of the Building, Structure, or land must conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located. 
B.  Rebuttable Presumption of Abandonment. The property Owner shall have the burden of establishing that any claimed abandonment has not in fact occurred. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.09.040 - Moving, Enlarging, or Altering Nonconforming Uses. 
No Nonconforming Use may be moved, enlarged, altered, or occupy additional land or Structures, except as provided in this Section. 
A.  Enlargement. A Nonconforming Use may not be enlarged, expanded, or extended to occupy all or a part of another Structure or site that it did not occupy on the date that the Use became Nonconforming. A Nonconforming Use may be extended through the same conforming Structure provided: (1) no structural alteration of the Structure is proposed or made for the purpose of the expansion; and (2) the parking demand is not increased. 
B.  Exterior or Interior Remodeling or Improvements to a Structure. Exterior or interior remodeling or improvements to a Structure containing a Nonconforming Use shall be allowed provided: (1) there is no expansion of the area of the Nonconforming Use; (2) the remodeling and improvements comply with all existing City Codes; and (3) all Landscaping complies with current City standards. 
C.  Change of Nonconforming Use to another Nonconforming Use or a Conforming Use. No Nonconforming Use may be changed to another Nonconforming Use. Whenever any Nonconforming Use is changed to a conforming Use, the Nonconforming Use is per se abandoned. 
D.  Damage or Destruction of Structure housing Nonconforming Use. 
1.  A Nonconforming Use shall not be resumed, and the Structure shall not be restored, unless it is restored to accommodate a conforming Use within a complying Structure, if: 
a.  A Structure that contains a Nonconforming Use is allowed to deteriorate to an uninhabitable condition and is not repaired or restored within six (6) months after written notice to the property Owner that the Structure is uninhabitable and that the Nonconforming Use will be lost if the Structure is not repaired or restored within six (6) months; 
b.  The property Owner has voluntarily demolished more than 50% of the Gross Floor Area of the Structure that houses the Nonconforming Use; or 
c.  A Structure that contains a Nonconforming Use is voluntarily razed or is required to be razed by law. 
2.  If a Structure that contains a Nonconforming Use is involuntarily destroyed, in whole or in part, due to fire or other casualty and the Use has not been abandoned, the Nonconforming Use may be resumed and the Structure may be restored to the condition prior to the destruction, provided such work is started within six (6) months of such casualty, is completed within eighteen (18) months of work commencement, and the intensity of Use is neither increased nor changed. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.09.050 - Noncomplying Structures. 
No Noncomplying Structure may be moved, enlarged, or altered, except in the manner provided in this Section. 
A.  Repair, Maintenance, Alteration, and Enlargement. Any Noncomplying Structure may be repaired, maintained, altered, or enlarged, provided that such repair, maintenance, alteration, or enlargement shall neither create any new noncompliance nor shall increase the degree of the existing noncompliance of all or any part of such Structure. 
B.  Moving. A Noncomplying Structure shall not be moved in whole or in part to any other location on the same or any other Lot unless the entire Structure shall thereafter comply with the regulations of the district in which it will be located. 
C.  Damage or Destruction of Noncomplying Structure. 
1.  If a Noncomplying Structure is allowed to deteriorate to a condition that the Structure is rendered uninhabitable and is not repaired or restored within six (6) months after written notice is provided to the property Owner stating that the Structure is uninhabitable and that the Noncomplying Structure shall not be restored unless it is restored to comply with all regulations of the district in which it is located. 
2.  If the property Owner has voluntarily demolished, or is required by law to demolish, more than 50% of the Gross Floor Area of the Noncomplying Structure, the Structure shall not be restored unless it is restored to comply with all regulations of the district in which it is located. 
3.  If a Noncomplying Structure is involuntarily destroyed in whole or in part due to fire or other casualty and the Structure or Use has not been abandoned, the Structure may be restored to its original condition, and the Use may be resumed, provided: (1) such work is started within six (6) months of such casualty; (2) such work is completed within eighteen (18) months of work commencement; and (3) the intensity of Use is not increased. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.09.060 - Ordinary Repair and Maintenance and Structural Safety. 
The Owner may complete normal maintenance and incidental repair on a complying Structure that contains a Nonconforming Use or on a Noncomplying Structure. This Section shall not be construed to authorize any violations of law nor to prevent the strengthening or restoration to a safe condition of a Structure in accordance with an order of the Building Official who declares a Structure to be unsafe and orders its restoration to a safe condition. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
Chapter 17.10 - SUBDIVISION AND PLATTING 
Sections: 
 
17.10.010 - Purpose, Policy, and Authority. 
A.  The purpose of this Chapter is to: 
1.  Protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the South Salt Lake City; 
2.  Facilitate and encourage efficient orderly growth and beneficial Development of all parts of the City; 
3.  Provide for adequate light, air, and privacy, to secure safety from fire, flood, collapsible soils and other geologic hazards, and other danger, and to prevent insufficient infrastructure or overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of population; 
4.  Protect the character and the social and economic stability of all parts of the City; 
5.  Regulate future growth and Development within the City in a manner which promotes the physical integration of diverse housing forms, the preservation of South Salt Lake community values, and the social integration of residents from diverse backgrounds in accordance with the General Plan; 
6.  Provide procedures and standards for the physical Development of Subdivisions and other Uses of land and construction of Buildings and thereon within the City including, but not limited to, the construction and installation of Streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, drainage systems, water and sewer systems, design standards for public facilities and utilities, access to public Rights-of-Way, Dedication of land and Streets, granting easements for Rights-of-Way, and to establish fees and other charges for the authorizing of Development and for the improvement of land and Buildings thereon; 
7.  Protect and conserve the value of land throughout the City and the value of Buildings and improvements upon the land, and to minimize the conflicts among the Uses of land and Buildings; 
8.  Guide public and private policy and action to provide adequate and efficient transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds, recreation, and other public requirements and facilities; 
9.  Provide the most beneficial relationship between the Uses of land and Buildings and the circulation of traffic, throughout the City, having particular regard for the avoidance of congestion in the Streets and highways, and the pedestrian traffic movements appropriate to the various Uses of land and Buildings, and to provide for the proper location and width of Streets and Building Lines; 
10.  Establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for Platting, Subdivisions, Re-Subdivisions, and Lot Line Adjustments, in order to facilitate the orderly layout and Use of land and to insure proper legal description and monumenting of all platted land; 
11.  Ensure that public facilities are available and will have a sufficient capacity to serve the proposed Plat, Subdivision, Plat Amendment, Parcel Boundary Adjustment, or Lot Line Adjustment; 
12.  Prevent the pollution or degradation of air, streams, and ponds, assure the adequacy of drainage facilities, and safeguard the water table; 
13.  Minimize site disturbance, removal of native vegetation, and soil erosion; 
14.  Encourage the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the municipality in order to preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty of the community and the value of the land; 
15.  Preserve the natural beauty of South Salt Lake City and to ensure appropriate Development to complement the natural features; and 
16.  Provide for open spaces through the most efficient design and layout of the land, including the use of flexible Density or cluster-type zoning in providing for minimum width and Area of Lots, while preserving the Density of land. 
B.  Policy. 
1.  The Subdivision or Platting of land and the subsequent amendment of a Subdivision Plat, the adjustment of Lot Lines therein, is required for the orderly, planned, efficient, and economical Development of property within the City. 
2.  Development property shall be of such character that it can be used safely for Building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood, landslide, mine subsidence, geologic hazards, or other menace. 
3.  Land shall not be subdivided, re-subdivided, platted, or adjusted until available public facilities and improvements exist and proper provision has been made for drainage, water, sewerage, roads, trails, parks, public transportation facilities, and related improvements. 
4.  The existing and proposed Public Improvements shall conform to the Streets Master Plan, designated City Road Profiles, the Official Land Use Map, the International Construction Codes, the 2017 American Public Works Association Manual of Standard Plans, Utah Chapter (as further specified in this Chapter) and the capital budget and program of the City. 
C.  Authority. 
1.  The Planning Commission is the land use authority to review, approve, and deny Plats for subdividing land or platting a legal Development Lot within the corporate limits of the City. 
2.  The Planning Commission is the land use authority to approve Development in Subdivisions, Subdivision amendments, or Parcel Boundary Line or Lot Line Adjustments of land already recorded in the office of the County Recorder. 
3.  A Plat, Subdivision, Subdivision amendment, or Parcel Boundary Line or Lot Line Adjustment is void if the Plat, Subdivision, Subdivision amendment, Parcel Boundary Line or Lot Line Adjustment has not been recorded, or has been recorded with the County Recorder's office without a prior approval by the Planning Commission and signature by the Planning Commission Chair, or in the case of a Parcel Boundary Line or Lot Line Adjustment, without prior written approval by the Community Development Director. 
4.  A transfer of land that has not properly been subdivided, amended, or adjusted is voidable. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.10.020 - Interpretation and Conflicts. 
A.  Interpretation. The provisions of these regulations are the minimum requirements for the promotion and preservation of the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
B.  Conflict with public and private provisions. 
1.  Public provisions. Where any provision of these regulations imposes a restriction different from that imposed by any other provision of these regulations or any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose a higher standard to protect the public health, safety, and welfare shall control. 
2.  Private provisions. Where the provisions of these regulations are more restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations than a private easement, covenant, or other private agreement or restriction, the requirements of these regulations shall govern. The City does not enforce private covenants. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.10.030 - Alteration or Amendment of Plats. 
The Planning Commission may consider and resolve at a public hearing any proposed alteration or amendment of a Subdivision Plat, or Lot, including any proposed alteration to any Street, easement, or Alley that has been extinguished by law or, with the consent of its Owner, is proposed to be replaced with an equivalent Dedication. If the amended Plat is approved, signed by all property interest Owners, and recorded, the recorded Plat shall vacate, supersede, and replace any contrary provision in a previously recorded Plat on the same land. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.10.040 - Vacation of Public Streets or Easements. 
A.  Street. State law governs the process required to vacate a Public Street. The process varies according to the nature of the City's property interest in the Street and the manner by which the property was acquired. 
1.  Typically, upon proper notice, Planning Commission recommendation, and a finding that the public and no person will be adversely affected by the vacation, the City Council may by Resolution, establish the fair market value basis for the purchase price of the vacated Right-of-way. In most circumstances, upon payment of fair market value, the Street will be vacated from the center line of the Right-of-way to each of the adjoining property Owners. 
2.  The Planning Commission shall incorporate the vacated Street into the adjoining Lots or Parcels by Plat (or Plat Amendment). The vacation shall not be effective until the Plat (or Plat Amendment) is recorded. 
B.  Utility Easement. State law governs the process to wholly vacate a utility easement. Amendments to utility easements can be made in the normal platting process, with the consent and mylar signature of the affected utility or utilities. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.10.050 - Enforcement. 
A.  No Owner, or Agent of the Owner, of any un-subdivided Parcel of land located in a proposed Subdivision, shall transfer or sell any such Parcel before a Plat of such Subdivision has been approved by the Planning Commission in accordance with the provisions of these regulations, signed by all required parties and filed with the County Recorder. 
B.  The Subdivision of any Lot or any Parcel of land, by the use of metes and bounds description for the purpose of sale, Transfer, or lease is unlawful. However, subject to all of the requirements contained in these regulations, the City may approve metes and bounds descriptions for purposes of Parcel Boundary Adjustment, Lot Line Adjustment, or judicial process, resolving conflicting boundary descriptions, and the recombination (but not Subdivision or re-Subdivision) of historically platted Properties located within the Big Fields Survey. 
C.  No Building Permit shall be issued for the construction of any Building or Structure located on a Lot or Plat that does not conform to these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.10.060 - Prerequisite Conditions. 
No land shall be subdivided until: 
A.  The Owner or its Agent submits an Application for Subdivision to the Planning Commission through the South Salt Lake City Community Development Department; 
B.  The Planning Commission provides proper notice, holds a public hearing, and approves the proposed Subdivision; 
C.  All technical deficiencies with the proposed Subdivision Plat are resolved; 
D.  All required improvements and Dedications are made and warranted free of liens or encumbrances or have been adequately assured and warranted; 
E.  Conditions, Covenants, and Restrictions are approved as to form by the City Attorney; 
F.  All fees, costs, and property taxes are paid; 
G.  All required signatures are obtained on the approved Subdivision Plat mylar; and 
H.  The approved and signed final Subdivision Plat is recorded. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.10.100 - Subdivision Application Process. 
A.  Preliminary Subdivision Plat. Preliminary Subdivision Plat approval is a required before Final Subdivision Plat approval for a Subdivision Application. 
1.  Preapplication requirements. Before preparing the Preliminary Plat for a Subdivision, the Applicant should arrange for a pre-Application conference with the Community Development Department to discuss the procedure for approval of a Subdivision Plat and the general approval requirements regarding access, layout of Streets, availability of existing services, standards for Street improvements, storm water drainage, sewerage, fire protection, required mitigation of environmental impacts, required cleanup of environmental hazards within Dedicated Rights-of-Way, standards for required public Dedication, resolution of adverse property interests and similar matters. 
2.  Application procedure and requirements. Before subdividing land in a manner that requires a Preliminary Plat, an Owner of the land or the Owner's representative shall file an Application for approval of a Preliminary Plat. The Application shall be made on a form available at the office of the Community Development Department and shall include 
a.  All information requested on the form; 
b.  Payment of the Preliminary Plat Application fee; and 
c.  A trust deposit for out-of-pocket costs the City expects to incur as a result of processing the Application. 
3.  Review of Preliminary Plat. The Community Development staff shall schedule the complete Preliminary Plat Application for review by the City's Development Review Committee. Staff will consider all input received by the Development Review Committee members, seek clarification and any additional required information from the Applicant, and when appropriate, prepare a proper notice of and a Planning Commission staff report for a public hearing and potential action on the Preliminary Plat Application. 
4.  Planning Commission review of Preliminary Plat. The Planning Commission shall study the Preliminary Plat Application and the staff report, taking into consideration requirements of this Title. 
5.  Public hearings. Subject to proper notice, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the Preliminary Plat Application. 
6.  Preliminary approval. After the Planning Commission has reviewed the Preliminary Plat Application and the staff report, including any staff recommendations for conditions of approval, any testimony and exhibits submitted at the public hearing, the Applicant shall be advised of any required changes and/or additions to its proposed Preliminary Plat. One copy of the proposed Preliminary Plat shall be returned to the Applicant with the date of approval, conditional approval, or disapproval and rationale for the decision accompanying the Plat. The other copy shall be maintained in the Community Development Department files. 
7.  Public Improvements. The Planning Commission shall require the Applicant to indicate on both the Preliminary and Final Plat all roads and Public Improvements to be Dedicated, all infrastructure for water, fire, and utility improvements to be Dedicated, all City approved Street names and addresses, and any other special requirements deemed necessary by the Planning Commission in order to conform the Subdivision Plat to the Official Land Use Map, the Streets Master Plan, any applicable Master Planned Mixed-Use approval, the City Construction Standards and Specifications, and this Code. 
8.  Completion/Assurances. An Applicant with a conditionally approved or approved Preliminary Plat Application shall—prior to receiving the City's signatures on the Final Subdivision Plat—be required to either: 
a.  Install and Dedicate the required Public Improvements and execute a one-year infrastructure Improvement Warranty with accompanying 10% cash deposit to assure the proper installation of the required Public Improvements; or 
b.  Provide an adequate improvement assurance for completing and Dedicating all required Public Improvements and for warranting the completed work for one (1) year after acceptance. 
9.  Effective period of preliminary approval. The approval or conditional approval of a Preliminary Plat shall be effective for a period of one (1) year. An Applicant may request an extension of the approval or conditional approval of a Preliminary Plat by submitting a request in writing to the Community Development Department prior to expiration of the approval or conditional approval. After a properly noticed public hearing, the Planning Commission may approve the extension request if the Applicant is able to demonstrate no change in circumstance since the previous approval that would result in a denial of a new Preliminary Plat Application. 
10.  Zoning Regulations. Every Preliminary Plat shall conform to the Land Use Regulations in effect on the date the Applicant is vested in its Application, provided the Applicant's Preliminary Plat approval or conditional approval has not expired without a valid extension to obtain Final Plat approval. 
B.  Final Subdivision Plat. 
1.  Accuracy. Final Plats shall be drawn according to an accurate and complete survey to second-order accuracy of the land to be Developed. A traverse of the exterior boundaries of the tract, and of each Block, when computed from field measurements on the ground shall close within a tolerance of one foot to twenty thousand (20,000) feet. 
2.  Monuments. Prior to Final Plat approval, the Applicant shall install permanent survey monuments on the Property as required by the City Engineer. 
3.  Subdivision Plat. Final Subdivision Plat approval is a required before recording Subdivision Plats as well as Condominium Plats. 
4.  Final Plat Application procedure and requirements. The Final Plat Application shall be made on a form available at the office of the Community Development Department and shall include: 
a.  All information requested on the form; 
b.  Payment of the Preliminary Plat Application fee; and 
c.  A trust deposit for out-of-pocket costs the City expects to incur as a result of processing the Application. 
5.  Review of Final Subdivision Plat. The Community Development Director shall schedule the Final Plat Application for review by the Development Review Committee. The Community Development Department Staff will consider all construction drawings and specifications submitted by the Applicant, all conditions of Preliminary Plat Approval (as applicable), all input received by the Development Review Committee members, seek clarification and any additional required information including proposed Covenants, Conditions, and Restrictions (as applicable) from the Applicant, and prepare a staff report for a public hearing and potential for proposed action to the Planning Commission. 
6.  Planning Commission Review of Final Subdivision Plat. The Planning Commission shall review the Final Subdivision Plat and the staff report, taking into consideration requirements of this Title, any Master Plan, the Streets Master Plan, the Site Plan, construction standards and specifications, and any environmental review pending on the Property. Particular attention will be given to the arrangement, location, width, profile, and construction specifications of Streets, and their relation to sewer lines, storm water drainage, erosion, topography and natural features of the Property, location of Geologic Hazards, Lot sizes and arrangement, the further Development of adjoining lands as yet un-subdivided, requirements of the Preliminary Plat (if a Preliminary Plat was required), and requirements of the Official Land Use Map and Streets Master Plan. 
7.  Public Hearing and Planning Commission action. 
a.  The Planning Commission shall give proper public notice and hold a public hearing on the proposed Final Subdivision Plat. 
b.  After closing the public hearing and considering the Final Subdivision Plat and proposed conditions of approval, the Planning Commission shall take action. 
c.  If the Planning Commission approves the Final Subdivision Plat, the Planning Commission shall stipulate the period of time when the Final Plat shall be recorded and when the performance assurances shall be filed or the required improvements installed and warranted, whichever is applicable. No Plats will be approved or released for recording until necessary warranties have been established. In no event shall the period of time stipulated by the Planning Commission for completion of required improvements exceed one (1) year from the date of the Final Plat approval. 
d.  Extension of Approval. Applicants may request a time extension of the Planning Commission approval by submitting a request in writing to the Community Development Department prior to expiration of the approval. The Planning Commission may grant an extension to the expiration date when the Applicant is able to demonstrate no change in circumstance that would result in an unmitigated impact or that would result in a finding of non-compliance with the Land Use Regulations in effect or pending at the time of the extension request. A "change in circumstance" includes a physical change to the Property or its surroundings. Notice of the request for extension shall be provided consistent with the requirements for a Final Plat. 
8.  Good Cause. The Planning Commission shall make a finding as to Good Cause prior to approving any new Plat or Plat Amendment. 
9.  Submission and Review. After Planning Commission approval, one paper copy of the construction plans, a Word-formatted copy of the proposed Covenants, Conditions, and Restrictions, and one twenty-four inch by thirty-six inch (24" x 36") copy of the approved Subdivision Plat shall be submitted to the Community Development Department for its final review. 
a.  No final approval shall be endorsed on the Plat until the staff's review has indicated that all requirements of Planning Commission approval have been met. The border line of the Plat shall be drawn in heavy lines leaving a space of at least one and one-half inches on the left side and at least one-half inch margin on the other sides. The Plat shall be so drawn that the top of the drawing faces either north or west, whichever accommodates the drawing best. All lines, dimensions, and markings shall be made on a mylar, or comparable material approved by the City, with approved waterproof black ink. The Plat shall be made to a scale large enough to clearly show all details, and in any case not smaller than one hundred (100) feet to the inch, and workmanship on the finished drawing shall be neat, clean cut and readable. 
b.  If the submitted, approved Final Subdivision Plat is incomplete, not in compliance with all requirements, or does not incorporate any required changes, the Community Development Department shall notify the Applicant and specify the respects in which it is deficient. The Community Development Department may refer the documents, Plats, and drawings to others for assistance in its review process. 
10.  City Engineer Approval. Throughout the process and prior to Plat recordation, the City Engineer shall review: 
a.  Any required environmental assessment of the property to confirm that all Dedicated land is free from environmental hazards, 
b.  Tentative Final Plat and construction drawings for compliance with the City Development Standards and Specifications, 
c.  Criteria set forth in this Title, and 
d.  All other applicable ordinances of the City and the state of Utah. 
If the Final Plat and construction drawings comply, the City Engineer shall sign the Final Plat and forward the Final Plat and construction drawings to the Community Development Department for processing. If the Plat and/or construction drawings do not comply, the City Engineer shall return the Plat and/or construction drawings to the Applicant with comments and provide a copy of comments to the Community Development Department. The Applicant shall be responsible for submitting all redlined Plats, plans, and construction drawings, along with corrected copies, to the City for re-review. 
Prior to recordation of the Final Plat, the Applicant shall submit a current title report to be reviewed by the City. A "current title report" is considered to be one that correctly discloses all recorded matters of title regarding the property and is prepared and dated not more than thirty (30) days before the proposed recordation of the Final Plat. 
11.  City Attorney Approval. Once the Planning Commission has approved the Final Plat, the City Attorney shall review the submitted Final Plat, Covenants, Conditions, and Restrictions (as applicable), signed Infrastructure Improvements Agreement (as applicable), current title report to assure all property interests are reflected on the Plat, and the adequacy of the security for insuring completion of the improvements to verify compliance with the City's Dedication and assurance requirements—including the requirement for encumbrance-free Dedications. The City Attorney may also review and require resolution by the Applicant of any title conflicts, public easements, protective covenants, other documents where applicable. Upon approval of the items specified in this Section, the City Attorney shall sign the Plat in the appropriate signature block and forward the Final Plat to the Community Development Department for further processing. 
C.  Parcel Boundary and Lot Line Adjustments. 
1.  The Community Development Director may approve without a Subdivision Plat Amendment a single Lot Line Adjustment between two (2) properly subdivided Lots, or a single Parcel Boundary Adjustment between two Parcels, or a Parcel and a single Lot, if the Owners of each property demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Community Development Director that: 
a.  No new Developable Lot, Parcel, or unit results from the Adjustment; 
b.  All Owners of Property contiguous to the adjusted properties, or to properties owned by the Applicant(s) that are contiguous to the adjusted properties, including those separated by a public Right-of-Way, consent to the Adjustment; 
c.  The Adjustment will not result in remnant land; 
d.  The Adjustment and resulting Lots or Parcels comply with the requirements of their zoning district and are Compatible with existing Lot sizes in the immediate neighborhood; 
e.  Neither of the original Lots or Parcels were previously Adjusted without a Subdivision Plat; 
f.  Written notice was mailed to all Owners of Property within six hundred feet (600') of the Applicants' Property and neither any person nor the public will be materially harmed by the Adjustment; and 
g.  The City Engineer and Community Development Director authorizes the execution and recording of an appropriate deed or Plat, to reflect that the City has approved the Adjustment. 
2.  Extension of Approval. Applicants may request time extensions of the Adjustment approval by submitting a request in writing to the Community Development Department prior to expiration of the approval. The Community Development Director shall review all requests for time extensions of Adjustments and may grant up to a one-year extension when the Applicant is able to demonstrate no change in circumstance that would result in an unmitigated impact or that would result in a finding of non-compliance with the Land Use Regulations in effect or pending at the time of the extension request. Change in circumstance includes physical changes to the Property or its surroundings. Notice shall be provided consistent with the requirements for Parcel Boundary and Lot Line Adjustments. 
3.  If the Community Development Director denies the Adjustment, the Director shall inform the Applicant(s) in writing of the reasons for denial, of the right to appeal the decision to the Administrative Law Judge, and of the right to file a Plat Amendment Application. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.10.110 - Signatures, Assurances, and Recording of the Plat. 
A.  Signatures. The Final Plat shall include the notarized signatures of all property interest Owners, the Culinary Water Authority, the Sanitary Sewer Authority, all other service providers, the County Health Department (if the City considers Health Department approval necessary), the Chairman of the Planning Commission, the Community Development Director, the City Engineer, the City Attorney, the City Recorder, and the County Recorder. 
B.  Notice to Proceed. Prior to commencement of construction of any Public Improvement or private improvement required to be built to public standards, the Applicant shall first obtain a Notice to Proceed from the Community Development Director or her designee. 
C.  Completion/Assurances. Before an Applicant conducts any Development, or records a Plat, the Applicant shall: (i) complete any required Landscaping or Infrastructure Improvements; or (ii) post an Improvement Completion Assurance or Performance Guaranty for any required Landscaping, Dedication, or Infrastructure Improvements. 
1.  If the Applicant elects to install Infrastructure Improvements prior to Plat recordation, the City shall endorse its approval on the Plat after all public Dedications and conditions of Plat approval have been satisfied, the City Engineer has accepted all Infrastructure Improvements, and the Applicant has posted an Infrastructure Improvement Warranty, accepted by the City Attorney, and has deposited a 10% Warranty Assurance. 
2.  At any time prior to recording the Final Plat, an Approved Plat Applicant may post an Improvement Completion Assurance, equal to 100% of the City Engineer's estimate of the cost of completing all required Landscaping and Infrastructure improvements in the manner conditioned in the Final Plat Approval. 
3.  If an Applicant elects to post an Improvement Completion Assurance, the Applicant shall provide an Improvement Completion Assurance for: 
a.  Completion of 100% of the required Landscaping and Infrastructure Improvements; or 
b.  If the municipality has inspected and accepted a portion of the Landscaping or Infrastructure Improvements, 100% of the incomplete or unaccepted Landscaping or Infrastructure Improvements. 
4.  The Improvement Completion Assurance (and any performance Guaranty is made for the benefit of the public.) 
5.  If an Applicant elects to post an Improvement Completion Assurance, the City shall endorse its approval on the Plat after the Improvement Completion Assurance has been approved by the City Attorney and all public Dedications and conditions of the Plat approval have been satisfied. 
6.  The City may withhold an otherwise valid Plat approval until the Owner of the land provides the City with a tax clearance indicating that all taxes, interest, and penalties owing on the land have been paid. 
7.  A Subdivision Plat recorded without the required signatures is void. 
D.  Inspection of Improvements—General Procedure and Fees. The Planning Commission in consultation with or upon the advice of the City Engineer or Community Development Director, shall provide for inspection of required improvements during construction and insure their satisfactory completion. 
1.  The Applicant shall, in accordance with the City's Consolidated Fee Schedule, pay to the City an inspection fee. The Final Subdivision Plat shall not be signed by the Chairman of the Planning Commission unless such fee (including any outstanding out-of-pocket costs) has been paid. These fees shall be due and payable upon demand of the City and no Building Permits or certificates of occupancy shall be issued until all fees are paid. 
2.  If the City Engineer finds upon inspection that any of the required Landscaping or Infrastructure Improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the City's Construction Standards and Specifications, the Applicant shall promptly complete the improvements in accordance with the City's Construction Standards and Specifications. 
3.  Wherever the cost of improvements is covered by a performance Guaranty, or an Infrastructure Completion Assurance, the Applicant is severally and jointly liable for completing the improvements according to the City's Construction Standards and Specifications. 
4.  Maintenance of Improvements. The Applicant shall maintain all required public and private improvements on the newly subdivided Lots and provide for clean Streets and sidewalks until the City's acceptance of all public and required private improvements. 
5.  Completion of Improvements. Before the Plat is signed by the Chairman of the Planning Commission, all Applicants shall be required to complete, in accordance with the Planning Commission's decision and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, all the Street, sanitary sewer, and other improvements (e.g. storm drainage, trails, sidewalk, curb, gutter, Street signs, water lines, etc.) including Lot improvements on the individual Lots of the Subdivision as required, and as approved by the Planning Commission and the City Council, and to Dedicate all required Property and Public Improvements to the City or applicable special service district, free and clear of all environmental contamination, liens, and encumbrances on the Property and Public Improvements thus Dedicated. 
6.  Certificate of Satisfactory Completion. The City will not accept Dedication of required improvements until the City Engineer has submitted a certificate stating that the required improvements have been satisfactorily completed, the Applicant's engineer or surveyor (as applicable) has submission of detailed "as-built" survey Plats of the Subdivision, indicating location, dimensions, materials, and other information required by the Planning Commission and City Engineer, that the layout of the line and Grade of all Public Improvements is in accordance with the City approved construction plans for the Subdivision and that a commitment for a title policy or other acceptable evidence has been furnished to the City Attorney and City Engineer indicating that the improvements have been completed, are ready for Dedication to the local government and are free and clear of any and all liens and encumbrances. 
7.  After the City Engineer has certified that all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed, and upon the City Engineer's approval and recommendation, the Planning Commission shall thereafter accept the improvements for Dedication in accordance with the established policy and procedure. 
8.  The City Engineer may partially release or reduce an Infrastructure Assurance or a performance Guaranty by submitted a certificate stating that the partial release is limited to a functionally discrete portion of the required improvements that have been satisfactorily completed. 
E.  Failure to Complete Improvement. 
1.  For Subdivisions or Plats for which no Infrastructure Assurance or performance Guaranty has been posted, if the improvements are not completed within the period specified by the Planning Commission, the approval shall expire. 
2.  Where an Infrastructure Assurance or performance Guaranty has been posted and required improvements have not been installed as conditioned, the Community Development Department may thereupon declare the Infrastructure Completion Assurance or other Guaranty to be in default and require that all the improvements be installed with funds secured by the Guaranty or the Completion Assurance. 
F.  Recording of Plat. The City shall have exclusive authority to record all fully executed Final Plats. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.10.120 - Requirements for Improvements and Design. 
A.  Compliance. In addition to the requirements established herein, all Subdivision Plats shall comply with the following law, rules, and regulations: 
1.  All applicable statutory provisions. 
2.  The Municipal Code. 
3.  The Streets Master Plan, Official Land Use Map, public utilities plans and regulations, and Capital Improvements Programs, including all Streets, trails, drainage systems, and parks shown on the Official Map or Master Plan adopted or amended for the Subdivision. 
4.  The rules of the Utah Department of Transportation if the Subdivision or any Lot contained therein abuts a state highway or Street. 
B.  The South Salt Lake City Construction Specifications and Standard Drawings. All improvements in areas that will become public Rights-of-Ways and/or easements, or that will become the responsibility of a home owners' association shall meet the following requirements. 
1.  The Utah Chapter, American Public Works Association (APWA) Manual of Standard Plans, current edition with all approved supplements is the City's general construction standard. 
2.  The City has adopted refinements to the APWA standards that supersede the APWA Manual as provided below. 
3.  Any variation, substitution, or exception from the standards in this policy must be authorized by the City Engineer or his/her designee. Any item of construction not covered by the provided standards must have plans and specifications must be approved by the City Engineer or his/her designee. 
4.  City refinements to the APWA standards are as follows: 
a.  Roadway, curb, gutter, driveway, and sidewalk standards. 
i.  Plan 205.1: Curb and gutter. The City's standard plan is depicted below and replaces APWA Plan 205.1. 
 
ii.  Plan 209: Curbs. No details from plan 209 are acceptable. The City of South Salt Lake standard is Type A, from plan 205.1. 
iii.  Plan 211: Waterway. The City's standard plan is depicted below and replaces APWA Plan 211. The City of South Salt Lake standard shall be a four-foot (4') waterway. No other details are acceptable. 
 
iv.  Plan 225: Open driveway approach. This plan is not acceptable and is deleted. 
v.  Plan 229.1: Bridge driveway approach. This plan is not acceptable and is deleted. 
vi.  Plan 229.2: Bridge driveway approach. This plan is not acceptable and is deleted. 
vii.  Plan 231: Sidewalk. The City's standard plan is depicted below and replaces APWA Plan 231. The City of South Salt Lake only accepts sidewalk widths of five feet (5'). 
 
viii.  Plan 235.1: Corner curb cut assembly. The City of South Salt Lake standard is Example B. Example A may be acceptable, at the City Engineer's sole discretion, if Example B is not feasible for the particular project. 
ix.  Plan 235.2: Corner curb cut assembly. This plan is not acceptable and is deleted. 
x.  Plan 235.3: Corner curb cut assembly. This plan is not acceptable and is deleted. 
xi.  Plan 235.4: Corner curb cut assembly. This plan is not acceptable and is deleted. 
xii.  Plan 256.1: Concrete pavement patch. This plan is not acceptable and is deleted. 
xiii.  Plan 256.2: Concrete pavement patch. The City's standard plan is depicted below and replaces APWA Plan 256.2. 
 
b.  Drainage catch basins, inlets, outlets, and hardware standards. 
i.  Plan 303: 44" Frame and cover. This plan is not acceptable and is deleted. 
ii.  Plan 304: 48" Cover and frame. This plan is not acceptable and is deleted. 
iii.  Plan 305.1: 51" Cover and frame. This plan is not acceptable and is deleted. 
iv.  Plan 305.2: 51" Cover and frame. This plan is not acceptable and is deleted. 
v.  Plan 305.3: 51" Cover and frame. This plan is not acceptable and is deleted. 
vi.  Plan 308: 35 ½" Grate and frame. Curb hoods are not allowed. 
vii.  Plan 309: 47 ¾" Grate and frame. The City's standard plan is depicted below and replaces APWA Plan 309. 
 
viii.  Plan 310: 48" Grate and frame. This plan is not acceptable and is deleted. 
ix.  Plan 315.1: Catch basin. The City's standard plan is depicted below and replaces APWA Plan 315.1. Curb hoods are not allowed. 
 
x.  Plan 315.2: Catch basin. The City's standard plan is depicted below and replaces APWA Plan 315.2. Curb hoods are not allowed. 
 
xi.  Plan 316: Combination catch basin and cleanout box. The City's standard plan is depicted below and replaces APWA Plan 316. Curb hoods are not allowed. 
 
xii.  Plan 317: Curb face and inlet box. This plan is not acceptable and is deleted. 
xiii.  Plan 322: Curb face outlet box. This plan is not acceptable and is deleted. 
xiv.  Plan 331.1: Cleanout box. This plan is not acceptable and is deleted. 
xv.  Plan 331.3: Cleanout box. This plan is not acceptable and is deleted. 
xvi.  Plan 345: Concrete deck. The standard requires a 30" opening. The City's standard plan is depicted below and replaces APWA Plan 345. The City prohibits a 60" deck plan with a 38"—40" opening. 
 
xvii.  Plan 362: Cover collar for storm drains. The City's standard plan is depicted below and replaces APWA Plan 362. The only acceptable detail is in Section A-A. 
 
xviii.  Plan 372: Area drain. The City's standard plan is depicted below and replaces APWA Plan 372. Curb hoods are not allowed. 
 
xix.  Plan 402: 30" Frame and cover. The City's standard plan is depicted below and replaces APWA Plan 402. The standard requires solid sewer covers. Sewer covers with holes are not acceptable. 
 
5.  Standard Road Profiles. Each Subdivision shall Dedicate Public Streets according to the Streets Master Plan that meet the following applicable minimum road profiles: 
 
 
C.  Self-Imposed Restrictions. If the Owner places restrictions on any of the land contained in the Subdivision greater than those required by these regulations, such restrictions or reference thereto may be required to be indicated on the Subdivision Plat, or within restrictive covenants be recorded with the County Recorder simultaneously with the Plat in a form and substance approved by the City Attorney, the material terms of which may not be altered without prior Planning Commission approval. 
D.  Restrictions Due to Character of The Land. Land that is unsuitable for Subdivision or Development due to flooding, improper drainage, potentially toxic wastes, wetlands, geologic hazards, utility easements, or other features that reasonably will be harmful to the safety, health, and general welfare of the present or future inhabitants of the Subdivision and/or its surrounding Areas, shall not be subdivided or Developed unless adequate methods are formulated by the Applicant and approved by the Planning Commission, upon recommendation of the City Engineer, to solve the problems created by the unsuitable land conditions. The burden of the proof shall lie with the Applicant. Without adequate remediation, such land shall be set aside or reserved for Uses that do not involve such a danger. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.10.130 - General Subdivision Requirements. 
A.  Subdivision Name. The proposed name of the Subdivision and all roadways contained therein shall not duplicate, or too closely approximate, the name of any other Subdivision or Street in the Area covered by these regulations or those of Salt Lake County, Utah. The Planning Commission shall have final authority to designate the name of the Subdivision and to select Street names. 
B.  Survey Monuments. Prior to Final Plat Approval, the Applicant shall place permanent survey monuments in the Subdivision as required herein or as otherwise approved by the City Engineer. 
1.  Survey monuments shall be installed in accordance with the South Salt Lake City Construction Specifications and Standard Drawings. 
2.  All monuments shall be properly set in the ground and approved by a Registered Land Surveyor prior to the time the Planning Commission recommends approval of the Final Plat unless a performance Guaranty is established in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
C.  Limits of Disturbance/Vegetation Protection. A separate plan that addresses Limits of Disturbance and vegetation protection during construction and re-vegetation of disturbed Areas will be required. This shall include a construction plan for all project improvements such as Streets and utilities and a commitment to replace Significant Vegetation in a ratio of four (4) four-inch (4") caliper trees for each tree outside of the Limits of Disturbance that qualifies as Significant Vegetation. 
D.  Soil Conditions. Consideration must be given to soil conditions and ground water existence and may include appropriate Setbacks or restrictions. 
E.  Trails and Sidewalks. Trails and sidewalks shall be provided to allow efficient internal circulation as well as links to adjacent trail systems on other Properties. Existing trails should be maintained and incorporated into open space elements of the project. This may include trails for pedestrian or bicycle use. Construction of new trails will be required concurrently with the installation of other Public Improvements. Although required trails may not link to adjacent trails immediately, each trail is a vital part of an overall Trails Master Plan. In most cases, the homeowners are required to maintain the trails internal to their Subdivision. 
F.  Limits of Disturbance/Vegetation Protection. Limits of Disturbance or Building Pad lines shall be shown on the Preliminary and Final Plats if the staff determines that there is Significant Vegetation on the Site or if it is important to clearly designate future Building locations. Limits of Disturbance or Building Pad lines with definitions as approved by the Planning Commission must be reflected on the Final Plat. 
G.  Top Soil Preservation and Final Grading. Topsoil shall not be removed from residential Lots or used as spoil, but shall be redistributed so as to provide at least six inches (6") of cover on the Lots and at least four inches (4") of cover between the sidewalks and curbs, and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.10.140 - Subdivision Development Lot Standards. 
A.  All Final Plats shall result in the creation of compliant Lots and Building sites. 
B.  All Lots or Parcels created by a Final Plat shall have Frontage on a Public Street that has been Dedicated to the City and has been improved to the applicable City Road Profile according to City Engineer approved Construction Standards and Specifications. 
C.  Property designated as Street Right-of-Way shall be separate and distinct from subdivided Lots adjoining such Street Right-of-Way. 
D.  The minimum area and dimensions of all Lots shall conform to the requirements of this Code. 
E.  The side boundary lines of all Lots, so far as possible, shall be at right angles to the Street which the Lots face, or approximately radial to the center of curves, if such Street is curved. 
F.  Side boundary lines of Lots shall be approximately radial to the center of a Cul-de-Sac on which the Lots face. 
G.  Corner Lots for Residential Use shall be platted wider than Interior Lots within the Subdivision to facilitate conformance with the required Front Yard Street Setback requirements of this Code. 
H.  A Lot shall not be divided by a City boundary line. 
I.  Double Frontage residential Lots are not permitted for Single-Family residential Subdivision. 
J.  Building sites or Development envelopes shall be designed to allow for minimum separations between Structures. 
K.  Side Lot Lines shall be at right angles to Street lines, or radial to curving Street lines. 
L.  Dimensions of Corner Lots shall be large enough to allow for erection of Buildings, observing the minimum Front Yard Setback and Site Distance Triangles from both Streets. 
M.  Depth and width of Properties reserved or laid out for business, commercial, or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the Off-Street parking and loading facilities required for the type of Use and Development generally contemplated in the District. 
N.  New Single-Family Lots shall not Front on or access an Arterial or Collector Street. 
O.  If Access from an Arterial or Collector Street is necessary for new adjoining Lots, at a minimum, such Lots shall be served by a separate Local Street to limit potential traffic hazards on larger Arterial or Collector Streets. 
P.  Driveways shall be designed and arranged to avoid vehicles backing onto Streets. Single-Family homes may not back onto Arterial or Collector Streets. 
Q.  Lots shall be laid out to provide positive drainage away from all Buildings and individual Lot drainage shall be coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern for the Area. Drainage shall be designed to avoid surface concentration of storm drainage water from any Lot to adjacent Lots or Streets. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.10.150 - Subdivision Layout Requirements. 
A.  General Layout Requirements. 
1.  Roads shall be graded and improved and conform to the South Salt Lake City Standards and Construction Specifications, and Standard Drawings and shall be approved as to design and specifications by the City Engineer, in accordance with the Construction Plans and Specifications required to be submitted prior to Final Plat approval. 
2.  In Developments with non-Residential components, the Streets, and other Access ways shall be planned in connection with the grouping of Buildings, location of rail facilities, and the provision of Alleys, truck loading and maneuvering Areas, and walks and parking Areas to minimize conflict of movement between the various types of traffic and with pedestrians. 
3.  Proposed Streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions. 
B.  Frontage on and Arrangement to Improved Roads. 
1.  No Subdivision shall be approved unless the Area to be subdivided has Frontage on and Access from an existing Street on the Streets Master Plan unless such Street is an existing state highway; or a Street shown upon a Subdivision Plat approved by the Planning Commission and recorded in the County Recorder's office. Such Street or highway must be suitably improved as required by the state highway rules, City regulations, specifications, or orders, or such improvements shall be secured by an Infrastructure Improvement Assurance, with the width and Right-of-Way and Road Profile required by this Chapter. 
2.  Wherever the Area to be subdivided is to utilize existing Street Frontage, such road shall be suitably improved as provided above. 
3.  All Streets shall be integrated with the thoroughfares and Dedicated Rights-of-Way established in the Streets Master Plan. 
4.  All thoroughfares shall be configured to address specific traffic generators such as industries, business districts, schools, churches, and shopping centers; to population densities; and to the pattern of existing, proposed, and future land Uses. 
C.  Road Design Considering Blocks. 
1.  Block lengths in Single-Family residential Areas should not exceed six hundred feet (600') and shall not be less than four hundred feet (400') in length. 
2.  Wherever practicable, Blocks along Major Collector and all Arterial Streets shall be not less than six hundred feet (600') in length. 
3.  Planning Commission may require the reservation of an easement through a Block to accommodate utilities, drainage facilities, and/or pedestrian traffic. 
4.  Planning Commission may require improved pedestrian ways and crosswalks, not less than ten feet (10') wide, through the center of any proposed Development Block that is more than eight hundred feet (800') long. 
D.  Access to/from Arterial or Collector Streets. Where a Subdivision borders on or contains an existing or proposed Arterial or Collector, the Planning Commission may require that Access to such Streets be limited by one of the following means: 
1.  The Subdivision of Lots to back onto the Arterial or Collector and Front onto a parallel Local Street; no direct Access from the primary Arterial or Collector Street, with Screening provided in a strip of land along the Rear Property Line of such Lots. 
2.  A series of U-shaped Streets or short loops entered from and designed generally at right angles to such a parallel Street, with the rear boundary lines of their terminal Lots backing onto the Arterial or Collector Street. 
E.  Construction of Dead-End Roads. The arrangement of Streets shall provide for the continuation of principal Streets between adjacent Properties to allow for convenient movement of traffic, effective fire protection, for efficient provision of utilities. 
1.  Dead End Road-Temporary. If the adjacent Property is undeveloped and the Street must be a dead-end Street temporarily, the Right-of-Way shall be extended to the Property Line. A temporary turnabout shall be provided on all temporary dead-end Streets, with the notation on the Subdivision Plat that land outside the normal Street Right-of-Way shall revert to abutting Property Owners whenever the Street is continued. The Planning Commission shall limit the length and use of temporary dead-end Streets in accordance with these regulations. 
2.  Existing Dead-End Roads, Permanent. Where an existing road does not extend to the boundary of the Subdivision and its continuation is not required by the Planning Commission for Access to adjoining Property, its terminus shall normally not be nearer to such boundary than fifty feet (50'). However, the Planning Commission may require the reservation of an appropriate easement to accommodate drainage facilities, pedestrian traffic, or utilities. A Cul-de-Sac turnaround shall be provided at the end of a permanent, existing dead-end Street in accordance with the Design Standards, Construction Specifications, and Standard Drawings. For greater convenience to traffic and more effective police and fire protection, existing dead-end Streets shall be limited in length to six hundred and fifty feet (650') and no more than ten (10) equivalent residential units. 
F.  Road Names. The Subdivision Applicant, upon consent of the Planning Commission, shall name all roads at the time of Preliminary or Final Plat approval. Names shall be sufficiently different in sound and in spelling from other road names in Salt Lake County, Utah to prevent confusion. A road that is or is planned as a continuation of an existing road shall bear the same name. 
G.  Road Regulatory Signs. The Applicant shall erect or post acceptable Guarantees ensuring each road regulatory Sign and Street name Sign required by the City Engineer has been installed at all road intersections prior to the first Certificate of Occupancy. Street and road regulatory signs shall be designed according to South Salt Lake City Design Standards, Construction Specifications, and Standard Drawings. 
H.  Street Lights. Installation of Street lights is required for every Subdivision of land and shall be placed by the Applicant in accordance with South Salt Lake City Design Standards, Construction Specifications, and Standard Drawings as approved, in writing, by the City Engineer. 
1.  The Applicant shall pay to the City a Street light system development fee in the amount set forth in the City fee schedule, which amount, if necessary, shall be adjusted to cover the City's entire expense for the design, installation, and maintenance of a Street lighting system for the Development. 
2.  The City shall provide for the design and installation of the Street lighting system by contract with the Rocky Mountain Power (or its successor in interest) and shall pay the cost of electricity provided to the Street lighting system. 
I.  Road Design Standards. In order to provide for roads of suitable location, width, and improvement to accommodate prospective traffic and afford satisfactory Access to police, fire fighting, snow removal, sanitation, and road maintenance equipment, and to coordinate roads so as to compose a convenient system and avoid undue hardships to adjoining Properties, the design standards for roads are hereby required to comply with the South Salt Lake City Development Standards, Construction Specifications and Standard Drawings, and Streets Master Plan. 
1.  Road Surfacing and Improvements. After a four-inch (4") quad conduit duct and sewer and water utilities have been installed, the Applicant shall compose and compact all road base, shall construct curbs, gutters, sidewalks, culverts, drains and bridges, and shall surface or cause to be surfaced roadways and the complete road profile installed. Said surfacing shall be of such character as is suitable for the expected traffic. Types of pavement shall be as determined by the City Engineer, based on the soils compaction test within the Right-of-way. In all circumstances the City Engineer shall require at least 4" of asphalt upon untreated base course; native material must have a minimum CBR of 3.0. Adequate provision shall be made for culverts, drains, and bridges. 
2.  All road pavement, shoulders, drainage improvements and Structures, curbs, turnarounds, and sidewalks shall conform to the adopted Construction Standards and Specifications and shall be incorporated into the construction plans required to be submitted by the Applicant for Plat approval. 
J.  Fire Access. All Structures must meet the requirements of Appendix D of the International Fire Code in effect in the state of Utah. 
K.  Intersection Design Standards. 
1.  Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. A proposed intersection of two (2) new Streets at an angle within ten degrees of perpendicular is required. An oblique Street shall be curved approaching an intersection and shall be approximately at right angles for at least one hundred feet (100') there from. Not more than two (2) Streets shall intersect at any one point. 
2.  Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing Street shall, wherever practicable, coincide with any existing intersection on the opposite side of such Street. Street jogs with center line offsets of less than one hundred and fifty feet (150') shall not be permitted, except where the intersected Street has separated dual drives without median breaks at either intersection. Where Streets intersect with Arterial or Collectors Streets, their alignment shall be continuous. Intersections of major Streets shall be at least eight hundred feet (800') apart. 
3.  Minimum curb radius at the intersection of two (2) Local Streets shall be at least twenty feet (20'), and minimum curb radius at an intersection involving a collector Street shall be at least twenty-eight feet (28'). Alley intersections and abrupt changes in alignment within a Block shall have the corners cut off in accordance with standard engineering practice to permit safe vehicular movement and a safe Sight Distance Triangle. 
4.  Intersections shall be designed with a flat Grade wherever practical. At the approach to an intersection, a leveling Area shall be provided having not greater than a two percent (2%) Slope for a distance of sixty feet (60'), measured from the nearest Right-of-Way line of the intersecting Street. 
5.  The cross Slopes on all Streets, including intersections, shall be three percent (3%) or less. 
L.  Road Dedications and Reservations. 
1.  New Perimeter Streets. Street systems in new Subdivisions shall be configured to eliminate or avoid new perimeter half-Streets. The Planning Commission may authorize a new perimeter Street where the Applicant improves and Dedicates the entire required Street Right-of-Way width. 
2.  Widening and Realignment of Existing Roads. Where a Subdivision borders an existing narrow road or when the Streets Master Plan indicates plans for realignment or widening a road that would require use of some of the land in the Subdivision, the Applicant shall be required to improve and Dedicate at its expense such Areas for widening or realignment of such roads. Such Frontage roads and Streets shall be improved and Dedicated by the Applicant at its expense to the full width as required by these Subdivision regulations. Land reserved for any road purposes may not be counted in satisfying Yard or Area requirements contained in this Title. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.10.160 - Drainage and Storm Sewers. 
A.  General Requirements. Each Plat shall make adequate provision for storm or flood water runoff in compliance with Title 13 and the Construction Specifications and Standard Drawings. The storm water drainage system shall be separate from and independent of the sanitary sewer system. Storm sewers, where required, shall be designed by the Rational Method or other methods as approved by the City Engineer, and a copy of storm water system design computations shall be submitted along with plans. When calculations indicate that curb capacities are exceeded at a point, catch basins shall be used to intercept flow at that point. Surface water drainage patterns shall be shown for each and every Lot and Block. On-Site storm water detention is required. 
B.  Nature of Storm Water Facilities. 
1.  Location. Upon the recommendation of the City Engineer, the Planning Commission may require the Applicant to carry away by pipe or open channel any spring or surface water that may exist either previously to, or as a result of the Subdivision. Such drainage facilities shall be located in the road Right-of-Way where feasible, or in perpetual unobstructed easements of appropriate width Dedicated to the City and constructed in accordance with Title 13 and the Construction Standards and Specifications. 
2.  Accessibility to Public Storm Sewers. 
a.  Underground storm sewer systems shall be constructed throughout the Subdivision and be conducted to an approved out-fall, maintained by the Owner. Periodic inspection of facilities shall be conducted by the City Engineer over the life of the Development. 
b.  If a connection to a public storm sewer will be provided eventually, as determined by the City Engineer and the Planning Commission, the Applicant shall make arrangements for future storm water disposal by a public utility system at the time the Plat receives final approval. Provision for such connection shall be incorporated by inclusion in the performance Guaranty required for the Subdivision Plat. 
3.  Accommodation of Upstream Drainage Areas. A culvert or other drainage facility shall in each case be large enough to accommodate potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage Area, whether inside or outside the Subdivision. The Applicant shall hire a qualified engineer to determine the necessary size of the facility, based on the provisions of the current MS4 permit and Construction Standards and Specifications assuming conditions of maximum potential permitted Development. The City Engineer must review, recommend modifications where applicable, and approve the proposed design prior to Plat approval. 
4.  Effect on Downstream Drainage Areas. The City Engineer shall also require the Applicant's qualified engineer to study the effect of each Subdivision on existing downstream drainage facilities outside the Area of the Subdivision. City storm drainage studies together with such other studies as shall be appropriate, shall serve as a guide to any needed improvements required by the Development to City facilities prior to Development approval. No Subdivision shall be approved unless adequate storm/flood water drainage will be provided to an approved drainage watercourse or facility with capacity to serve the anticipated storm water flow. 
5.  Areas of Poor Drainage. Whenever a Plat is submitted for an Area that is subject to periodic flooding, the Planning Commission upon recommendation of the City Engineer, may approve such Subdivision provided that the Applicant fills the affected Area of said Subdivision with appropriate structural base materials to an elevation sufficient to place the elevation of Streets and Lots at a minimum of twelve inches (12") above the elevation of the maximum probable 100 year flood event. The Plat of such Subdivision shall provide for an overflow zone along the bank of any stream or watercourse, in a width that is sufficient in a time of high water to contain or move the flood water without damaging improved properties, including City Streets and facilities. No fill shall be placed in the overflow zone nor shall any Structure be erected or placed therein. 
6.  Flood Plain Areas. The Planning Commission may, upon recommendation of the City Engineer and when it deems it necessary for the health, safety, or welfare of the present and future population of the Area and necessary to the conservation of water, drainage, and sanitary facilities, prohibit the Subdivision of any portion of the Property which lies within the flood plain of any river, stream or drainage course. These flood plain Areas should be preserved from any and all destruction or damage resulting from clearing, Grading, or dumping of earth, waste material, or stumps. 
C.  Dedication of Drainage Easements. 
1.  General Requirements. Where a Subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel, or stream, the Owner shall Dedicate to the City a storm water easement or drainage Right-of-Way conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse, and of such width and construction or both as will be adequate for drainage in the 100 year flood event. The existing drainage will be maintained by an open channel with landscaped banks and adequate width for maximum potential volume of flow. 
2.  Drainage Easements. 
a.  Where topography or other conditions make impractical the inclusion of necessary drainage facilities within road Rights-of-Way, perpetual unobstructed easements at least twenty feet (20') in width for such drainage facilities shall be provided across the platted Property outside the platted road lines and with satisfactory access to the road. Drainage easements shall be indicated on the Plat. Drainage easements shall be carried from the road to a natural watercourse or to other drainage facility. 
b.  When a proposed drainage system will carry water across private land outside the Subdivision, appropriate drainage rights must be secured from the affected land Owner and must be indicated on the Plat. 
c.  The Applicant shall Dedicate, either in fee simple or by drainage easement, land on both sides of existing watercourses within the Subdivision. 
d.  Low-lying lands along watercourses subject to flooding or overflowing during storm periods, whether or not included in Areas for Dedication, shall be preserved and retained in their natural state as drainage ways. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.10.170 - Water Facilities. 
A.  General Requirements. 
1.  The Applicant shall extend the public culinary water-supply system for the purpose of providing an adequate water-supply to the Plat that is capable of providing domestic water Use and fire protection for the proposed land uses within the Plat without diminishing the water-supply to land uses outside of the Plat. 
2.  The Applicant shall install adequate water facilities, including fire hydrants, subject to the specifications of the City and Appendix C to the International Fire Code in effect in the state. All water mains shall be at least eight inches (8") in diameter. 
3.  Water main extensions shall meet the City's standards and shall be approved by the City Engineer, the City Water Manager and, where applicable, the culinary water provider. 
4.  Fire flow shall be approved by the Fire Marshal, consistent with Appendix B of the International Fire Code in effect in the state. 
5.  The location of all fire hydrants, all water and storage supply improvements, and the boundary lines of proposed districts, indicating all improvements proposed to be served, shall be shown on the Preliminary and Final Plat, and the cost of installing same shall be included in the performance Guaranty to be furnished by the Applicant. 
6.  Prior to approval of the Subdivision Plat by the City Engineer, a determination shall be made by the City Water Manager and City Engineer as to the location and extent of facilities to be maintained by South Salt Lake City. Private facilities may be required to be so noted on the Plat 
B.  Fire Hydrants. Fire hydrants are required for all Plats. Fire hydrants shall be located no more than one thousand feet (1,000') apart and within one hundred and fifty feet (150') of any Structure and shall be approved by the City Fire Marshal and City Engineer in accordance with Appendix D of the International Fire Code in effect in the state. To eliminate future Street openings, all underground utilities for fire hydrants, together with the fire hydrants themselves and all other water supply improvements shall be installed according to approved civil engineering plans before any final paving of a Street shown on the Subdivision Plat. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.10.180 - Sewer Facilities. 
A.  General Requirements. The Applicant shall install sanitary sewer facilities in manner prescribed by the applicable sanitary sewer authority's construction standards and specifications. All plans shall be designed in accordance with their rules, regulations, and standards. 
B.  Residential and Nonresidential Subdivisions. Sanitary sewer facilities shall connect with the public sanitary sewer at sizes required by the sanitary sewer authority. No individual disposal system or treatment plants, private or group disposal systems, shall be permitted. Sanitary sewer facilities, including the installation of laterals in the Right-of-Way, shall be subject to the sanitary sewer authority's specifications, rules, regulations, and guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.10.190 - Utilities 
A.  Location. Utility facilities including, but not limited to, gas, fiber, electric power, fiber, telephone, and cable TV, shall be located underground in new Subdivisions wherever underground location does not violate safety standards of the particular utility. Underground service connections for water and sewer shall be installed to the Street Property Line of each platted Lot at the expense of the Applicant, as shall adequate casings or conduits for fiber and all other underground utilities. 
B.  Easements. 
1.  Easements centered on Rear Lot Lines shall be provided for private and municipal utilities; such easements shall be at least ten feet (10') wide. Proper coordination shall be established by the Applicant between the applicable utility companies for the establishment of utility facilities and easements to adjoining Properties. 
2.  Where topographical or other conditions make impractical the inclusion of utilities within the Rear Lot Lines, perpetual unobstructed easements at least ten feet (10') in width shall be provided along Side Lot Lines with satisfactory Access to the road or Rear Lot Lines. All easements shall be indicated on the Plat. 
3.  Where necessary to ensure proper Access and maintenance, easement widths shall be increased as required by the City Engineer for the type of Development proposed. Easements for water lines shall be a minimum of thirty feet (30') wide. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.10.200 - Sidewalks, Trails, and Bike Paths. 
The following are required Improvements: 
A.  Sidewalks, Landscaping, bike lanes, curb, and gutter, shall be included within the Dedicated Right-of-Way of all roads, consistent with the applicable road profile, unless an alternate location has been specifically recommended by the City Engineer and approved by the Planning Commission. 
B.  Trails, pedestrian paths, and bike paths shall relate appropriately to topography, require a minimum of Site disturbance, permit efficient drainage, and provide safe Access. 
C.  Trails, pedestrian paths, and bike paths shall be provided by the Applicant in accordance with the Trails Master Plan and where otherwise necessary as determined by the Planning Commission. Trails should connect traffic generators such as schools, recreation facilities, commercial Areas, parks, and other significant natural features. Such trails shall be built to City specifications and easements shall be Dedicated for such trails. The trails shall be constructed at the time of road construction. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.10.210 - Nonresidential Subdivisions 
A.  In addition to the principles and standards for residential Subdivisions in this Chapter the Applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission that the Street, Parcel, and Block pattern proposed is specifically adapted to the Uses generally applicable in the District anticipated and other Uses in the vicinity. 
B.  The following principles and standards shall be observed: 
1.  Proposed industrial Parcels shall be suitable in Area and dimensions to the types of industrial Development anticipated. 
2.  Street Rights-of-Way subbase, pavement width, and pavement depth shall be adequate to accommodate the type, gross vehicle weight and volume of traffic anticipated to be placed thereupon. 
3.  Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential Areas from potential nuisance from a proposed commercial or industrial Subdivision, including the provision of extra depth in Parcels backing up on existing or potential residential Development and provisions for a permanently landscaped Buffer strip when necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.10.220 - Specifications for Documents to be Completed 
A.  Preliminary Plat Specifications. A Preliminary Plat shall include the following: 
1.  General. The Preliminary Plat shall be prepared by a licensed land surveyor at an engineers' scale not more than one inch (1") equals twenty feet (20'), may be prepared in pen, or pen and pencil, and the sheets shall be numbered in sequence if more than one (1) sheet is used and shall be twenty-four inches by thirty-six inches (24" x 36"). It should be noted that the map prepared for the Preliminary Plat may also be used during the preparation of the Final Plat and, therefore, should be drawn on mylar. 
2.  Name. 
a.  Name of Subdivision if Property is within an existing Subdivision. 
b.  Proposed name if not within a previously platted Subdivision. The proposed name shall not duplicate the name of any Plat previously recorded in Salt Lake County, Utah. 
c.  Name of Property if no Subdivision name has been chosen. This is commonly the name by which the Property is locally known. 
d.  Name, address, including telephone number and email address, of the professional person(s) responsible for Subdivision design, for the design of Public Improvements, and for surveys. 
e.  Proposed names of new Streets, subject to the approval by the Planning Commission. 
3.  Ownership. Name and address, including telephone number, of legal Owner or Owner's Agent of the Property, a Property title report, and citation of last instrument conveying any attribute of title to each Parcel of Property involved in the proposed Subdivision, giving grantor, grantee, date, and land records reference. 
a.  Citation and documentation of any existing legal Rights-of-Way or easements affecting the Property. 
b.  Existing recorded covenants on the Property, if any. 
c.  Name and address, including telephone number and email address, of the professional person(s) responsible for Subdivision design, for the design of Public Improvements, and for surveys. 
d.  Copy of any environmental report prepared for the Property. 
4.  Description. Location of Property by government Lot, section, township, range and county, graphic scale, north arrow, and acres. 
a.  Location of Property Lines; existing easements; burial grounds; physical hazards; known geologic hazards; hazardous materials, flood plains, railroad Rights-of-Way; water courses; wetlands; each tree of six inches (6") or more in diameter (measured four feet (4') above ground level), groves of five (5) or more smaller trees, or clumps of oak or maple covering an area of fifty square feet (50 ft 2 ), as measured to the canopy dripline; location, width, and names of all existing or platted Streets or other public ways within or immediately adjacent to the Property; and names of adjoining record Property Owners within six hundred feet (600') of any perimeter boundary of the proposed Subdivision. 
b.  Location, sizes, elevations, excess capacities, and Slopes of existing sewers, water mains, culverts, other underground Structures, and hydrants within the tract and immediately adjacent thereto; existing permanent Building and utility poles and lines on or immediately adjacent to the Site and utility Rights-of-Way. 
c.  Approximate topography, at the same scale as the Preliminary Plat with at least two-foot (2') contour intervals. 
d.  The approximate location and widths of proposed Streets. 
e.  Preliminary proposals for connection with existing municipal water supply and sanitary sewer systems; and preliminary provisions for collecting, detaining, and discharging surface water drainage. 
f.  The approximate location, dimensions, and areas of all proposed and/or existing Lots. 
g.  The approximate location, dimensions, and areas of all Parcels of land proposed to be set aside for park or playground Use or other public Use, or for the common Use of Property Owners in the proposed Subdivision. 
h.  The location of temporary stakes to enable the Planning Commission and staff to find and appraise features of the Preliminary Plat in the field. 
i.  Whenever the proposed Preliminary Plat covers only a part of an Applicant's contiguous holdings, the Applicant shall submit, at the scale of no more than twenty feet (20') to the inch, a sketch of the proposed Subdivision Area, together with its proposed Street and trail system, and an indication of the probable future Street and drainage system of the remaining portion of the tract owned by the Applicant or its affiliates. 
j.  A vicinity map showing Streets and other general Development of the surrounding Area. The Preliminary Plat shall show all school and special service district boundary lines. 
k.  A plan designating Limits of Disturbance for each Parcel and for Subdivision improvements, such as utilities and roads. 
5.  Features. 
a.  The location of Property with respect to surrounding Property and Streets, the names of all adjoining Property Owners of record or the names of adjoining Developments, the names of adjoining Streets. 
b.  Citation of any existing legal Rights-of-Way or easements affect the Property. 
c.  Existing covenants on the Property, if any. 
d.  The location and dimensions of all boundary lines of the Property to be expressed in feet and decimals of a foot. 
e.  The location of existing Streets, easements, water bodies, streams, and other pertinent features such as swamps, railroads, Buildings, parks, cemeteries, drainage ditches, physical hazards, identified hazardous materials, or bridges. 
f.  The location and width of all existing and proposed Streets and easements, Alleys, trails, and other public ways, and easement and proposed Street Rights-of-Ways and Building Setback lines. 
g.  The location, dimensions, and areas of all proposed or existing Lots. 
h.  The location and dimensions of all Property proposed to be set aside for park, playground, or other public or private reservation, with designation of the purpose thereof, and conditions, if any, of the Dedication or reservation. 
i.  The name and address of the Owner or Owners of land to be subdivided, the name and address of the Applicant, if other than the Owner, and the name of the land surveyor. 
j.  The date of the map, approximate true north point, scale, and title of the Subdivision. 
k.  Sufficient data acceptable to the City Engineer to determine readily the location, bearing, and length of all lines, and to reproduce such lines upon the ground. 
l.  Indication of the proposed Use of any Lot (i.e. Single-Family, two-Family, Multi-Family, Townhome) and all non-Residential Uses proposed by the Applicant. 
m.  All Lots in each Block shall be consecutively numbered. Reserved Lots shall be lettered in alphabetical order. 
n.  The following notation shall also be shown: 
i.  Explanation of drainage systems and easements and Dedication of a public right of access to inspect or maintain such systems, if any. 
ii.  Explanation of Site easements, if any. 
iii.  Explanation of reservations, if any. 
iv.  Owners' Dedication, if any, and Owners' consent to record as required by state law. 
o.  Any restrictions or requirements necessary to ensure solar access shall be defined. 
p.  All utility facilities existing and proposed throughout the Subdivision shall be shown on the Preliminary Plat or on accompanying engineering plans and specifications. 
q.  A plan designating Limits of Disturbance or Building Pads and utilities corridors and connections for each Parcel and for Subdivision improvements, such as utilities and roads. 
B.  Construction Plan Details. 
1.  General. Construction Plans shall be prepared for all required improvements. Plans shall be drawn at a scale of no more than one-inch (1") equals twenty feet (20'), and map sheets shall be of the same size as the Preliminary Plat. The following shall be shown: 
a.  Profiles showing existing and proposed elevations along the left and right edges of each road, and center lines of all roads. Where a proposed road intersects an existing road or roads, the elevation along the center line of the existing road or roads within one hundred feet (100') of the intersection shall be shown. Approximate radii of all curves, lengths of tangents, and central angles on all Streets. 
b.  Plans and profiles showing the locations and typical sidewalks, drainage easements, irrigation ditches, servitudes, Rights-of-Way, manholes, and catch basins; the locations of Street trees, Street lights, and Street signs; the location, size, and invert elevations of existing and proposed sanitary sewers, storm water drains, and fire hydrants, showing connections to any existing or proposed utility systems; and exact location and size of all water, gas, or other underground utilities or Structures. 
c.  Location, size, elevation, and other appropriate description of any existing facilities or utilities, including, but not limited to, existing Streets, sewers, drains, water mains, easements, water bodies or impoundments, streams, and other pertinent features such as wetlands, railroads, Buildings, features noted on the Official Land Use Map or Master Plans, at the point of connection to proposed facilities and utilities within the Subdivision, and each tree with a diameter of six inches (6") or more (measured four feet (4') above ground level), groves of five (5) or more smaller trees, or clumps of oak or maple covering an Area of fifty square feet (50 ft 2 ), as measured to the canopy dripline. The water elevations of adjoining ponds, rivers, or streams at the date of the survey, and the approximate high- and low-water elevations of such ponds, rivers or streams. All elevations shall be referred to the South Salt Lake City Engineer's or U.S.G.S. datum plane. If the Subdivision borders a pond, river, or stream, the distances and bearings of a meander line established not less than twenty feet (20') back from the ordinary high-water mark of such water ways. 
d.  Topography at the same scale as the Preliminary Plat with a contour interval of two feet (2'), referred to sea-level datum. All datum provided shall be latest applicable U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey datum and should be so noted on the Plat. 
e.  All other specifications, details, and references required by City Design Standards, Construction Specifications and Standard Drawings, including a Site-Grading plan for the entire Subdivision. 
f.  Notation of approval of the Preliminary Plat as follows: 
 
g.  Title, name, address, signature, and seal of professional engineer, and date, including revision dates. 
h.  A Limits of Disturbance and revegetation plan. 
C.  Final Subdivision Plat Requirements 
1.  General. The Final Plat shall be presented on reproducible mylar at the same scale and contain the same information required for a Preliminary Plat, except for any changes or additions required by the Planning Commission. All revision dates must be shown as well as the following: 
a.  Notation of any self-imposed restrictions, and locations of any Building Lines proposed to be established in this manner, if required by the Planning Commission in accordance with these regulations. 
b.  All survey monuments erected, corners, and other points established in the field in their proper places. The material of which the survey monuments, corners, or other points are made shall be noted at the representation thereof or by legend. The legend for metal monuments shall indicate the kind of metal, the diameter, length, and weight per lineal foot of the monuments. 
c.  Form for endorsements by the Planning Commission Chair, City Mayor, Community Development Director, City Recorder, City Engineer, City Attorney, culinary water authority, sanitary sewer authority, Salt Lake County Health Department (as applicable), all applicable utilities, and other entities as required by the City Engineer and the City Attorney. 
2.  Preparation. The final Subdivision Plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor licensed by the state of Utah. The surveyor shall certify that the survey of the Property described on the Plat is in accordance with Title 17, Chapter 23, Section 17 of the Utah Code Annotated (1953, as amended) and has verified all measurements and has placed monuments as represented on the Plat. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.10.230 - Assurance for Completion of Landscaping and Infrastructure Improvements. 
A.  Costs of Improvements. All required Landscaping and Infrastructure Improvements shall be completed by the Applicant. 
B.  Assurance for Landscaping and Infrastructure Improvements. The Applicant may post an Infrastructure Completion Assurance, in an amount estimated by the City Engineer, as sufficient to secure to the municipality the satisfactory construction, installation, and Dedication of any uncompleted portion of required Landscaping and Infrastructure Improvements and record a conforming the Final Plat prior to completion of all required Landscaping and Infrastructure Improvements. The Infrastructure Completion Assurance shall be satisfactory to the City Attorney as to form, sufficiency, and manner of execution. The period within which required improvements must be completed shall be specified by the Planning Commission in the decision approving the Final Plat and shall be incorporated in the Assurance and shall not in any event exceed two (2) years from date of Final Approval. 
1.  Reduction of Completion Assurance. An Infrastructure Improvement Assurance shall be reduced upon actual completion and acceptance of Landscaping and Infrastructure Improvements to the ratio that the accepted Landscaping and Infrastructure Improvements bears to the total Landscaping and Infrastructure Improvements for the Plat. 
2.  Governmental Units. Governmental units to which these Assurances apply may file in lieu of said Assurance a certified resolution or ordinance from officers or agencies authorized to act on their behalf, agreeing to comply with the provisions of this Title. 
C.  Prior to excavating or commencement of construction, the Applicant shall meet with the Community Development Director, the City Engineer, and other officials as required for a preconstruction meeting. The Applicant shall bring to the meeting all contractors responsible to build the Infrastructure Improvements associated with the project and to comply with a detailed construction management plan for the project. 
D.  Inspection of Improvements General Procedure and Fees. The Planning Commission, in consultation upon the advice of the City Engineer, shall provide for inspection of required Landscaping and Infrastructure Improvements during construction and insure their satisfactory completion. The Applicant shall, in accordance with the City's fee resolution, pay to the City an inspection fee and the Subdivision Plat shall not be signed by the Chairman of the Planning Commission unless such fee has been paid. These fees shall be due and payable upon demand of the City and no Building Permits or Certificates of Occupancy shall be issued until all fees are paid. If the City Engineer finds upon inspection that any of the required Landscaping or Infrastructure Improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the City's construction standards and specifications, the Applicant shall be responsible for completing the improvements. Wherever the cost of improvements is covered by an Infrastructure Completion Assurance, the Applicant and the Guarantor, if any, shall be severally and jointly liable for completing the improvements according to approved plans and specifications. Prior to commencement of construction on any Public Improvement or private improvement required to be built to public standards, the Applicant shall first obtain a Notice to Proceed from the Community Development Director or her designee. 
E.  Maintenance of Improvements. The Applicant/Owner shall be required to maintain all required Landscaping and Infrastructure Improvements and provide for maintenance and snow removal on Streets and sidewalks until acceptance of said Landscaping and Infrastructure Improvements by the Planning Commission. If there are any certificates of occupancy on a Street not Dedicated to the City, the City may on twelve (12) hours-notice, plow the Street or effect emergency repairs and charge same to Applicant/Owner. 
F.  Completion of Improvements. Before the Plat is signed by the Chairman of the Planning Commission, the Applicant shall complete, to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, all the Street, sanitary sewer, culinary water, power, and other improvements (e.g. storm drainage, trails, sidewalk, curb, gutter, Street signs, water lines, etc.) and to Dedicate same to the local government, free and clear of all liens, environmental contamination, and encumbrances on the Property and Improvements thus Dedicated. 
G.  Certificate of Satisfactory Completion. Subject to maintenance provisions contained in this Chapter, the City will not accept Dedication of required improvements, or release or reduce an Infrastructure Completion Assurance, until the City Engineer has submitted a certificate to the Planning Commission stating that all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed and until the Applicant's engineer or surveyor has certified to the City Engineer, through submission of detailed "as-built" construction drawings and survey Plats of the Subdivision, indicating location, dimensions, materials, and other information required by the Planning Commission and City Engineer, that the layout of the line and Grade of all Public Improvements is in accordance with the City approved construction plans for the Subdivision and that a commitment for a title policy or other acceptable evidence has been furnished to the City Attorney and City Engineer indicating that the improvements have been completed, are ready for Dedication to the local government and are free and clear of any and all environmental contamination, liens and encumbrances. 
H.  Warranty. Upon such approval and recommendation of the City Engineer, the Applicant shall submit an Infrastructure Improvement Warranty, warranting that the Infrastructure Improvements have been installed as described in the approved construction plans and specifications, and a 10% Cash Deposit. 
I.  Dedication. Upon the City Engineer's certification, approval, and recommendation, and the City Attorney's approval of the Infrastructure Improvement Warranty and 10% Cash Deposit, the Planning Commission shall thereafter accept the improvements for Dedication in accordance with the established policy and procedure. 
J.  Issuance of Building Permits and Certificates of Occupancy. 
1.  Building Permit. For any recorded Subdivision for which the City holds a current Infrastructure Completion Assurance, but the Infrastructure Improvements are not yet accepted, the extent of utilities and Street improvements shall be adequate for emergency response and vehicular Access by the prospective occupant and by police and fire equipment, prior to the issuance of any Building Permit. 
2.  Certificate of Occupancy. Where an Infrastructure Completion Assurance has been accepted for a Final Subdivision Plat, no Certificate of Occupancy for any Building in the Subdivision shall be issued prior to the completion of the Public Improvements and Dedication of same to the City, as required in the Planning Commission's final approval of the Subdivision Plat. This restriction can be waived upon Good Cause shown and adequate assurance revived. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
Chapter 17.11 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 
 
17.11.010 - Establishment and Duties of Planning Commission. 
A.  Appointment. The Mayor shall, subject to the approval of the City Council, appoint a Planning Commission to consist of seven members, plus two alternates who shall serve without pay, except for reasonable and legitimate expenses approved by the City Council. 
B.  Alternates. Alternates may act in the place of any absent member at any meeting of the commission. 
C.  Terms. The members shall be appointed for a period of four years and are subject to removal with or with cause by the City Council. The terms of two commissioners shall expire each year except in the year that mayoral election is held, when the terms of one commissioner plus both alternates shall expire. 
D.  Quorum. Four members shall constitute a quorum to conduct business. All actions taken shall be by majority vote of the membership present. 
E.  Attendance. Attendance of any member or members at regularly scheduled meetings may be enforced by the chairperson of the commission in the same manner as provided for enforcing the attendance of City Council members. 
F.  Clerk. The Community Development Department shall provide a person to act as clerk of the Planning Commission. 
G.  Training. The City shall provide initial and ongoing training regarding the duties, responsibilities and City regulations for all commission members and alternates. Attendance at training is required of members and alternates. 
H.  Bylaws. The Planning Commission may adopt a set of bylaws or rules of procedure. 
I.  Chairperson. The commission members, or commissioners, shall elect their own chairperson for a term and in the manner specified by the commission's bylaws. The chairperson of the Planning Commission: 
1.  Shall preside at all meetings of the commission; and 
2.  Shall vote as a regular member but shall not make or second motions. 
J.  Chairperson's Absence. During the temporary absence or disability of the chairperson, the Planning Commission shall elect one of its members to act as chairperson pro tem. 
K.  Responsibilities. 
1.  The Planning Commission makes recommendations to the City Council for: 
a.  The general plan and amendments to the general plan; 
b.  The Land Use Map, and amendments to the Land Use Map; 
c.  Amendments to land use ordinances; 
d.  Proposed Application processes and the delegation of power under the land use ordinance. 
2.  The Planning Commission acts as land use authority as specified in this Code. 
3.  The Planning Commission acts as appeal authority for certain Land Use Decisions, as specified in this Code. 
4.  The Planning Commission may provide public notice of a pending ordinance by scheduling the matter for consideration or by declaring a pending ordinance in an open public meeting. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.11.020 - Administrative Duties of Community Development Director. 
A.  The Community Development Director shall prepare staff reports for consideration by the Planning Commission and City Council and provides administrative support for the Planning Commission. 
B.  The Community Development Director accepts all and Use Applications and ensures they are forwarded to the designated Land Use Authority in a timely manner. 
C.  The Community Development Director may propose amendments to the South Salt Lake City General Plan, Land Use and Development Code, and Official Land Use Map. 
D.  The Community Development Director may provide public notice of a pending ordinance on the Public Notice Website. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.11.030 - Land Use Authority Designations. 
Pursuant to state law, the following administrative land use authority designations are made: 
A.  Planning Commission. The Planning Commission is the land use authority on issues of: Subdivision and Subdivision Plat approval; vacating, altering or amending a Subdivision Plat; Conditional Use permit Applications; design review for Building Heights as established in this Title; design review for projects on Parcels where any portion of the Parcel abuts any residential district; and the issuance of a Building or demolition permit in a Historic and Landmark district. 
B.  Community Development Director. The Community Development Director is designated as the land use authority on issues of Permitted Use Applications, Temporary Use permits, Sign permits, Home Occupation license approval, design review, reasonable accommodation, Nonconforming Use determinations, and decisions regarding amortization of legal, Nonconforming Uses. The Community Development Director issues Building Permits and business licenses. 
C.  The Community Development Director may certify a design review Application or a Permitted or Conditional Use Application to the Planning Commission if the Community Development Director finds that the Application raises unique problems or is likely to have a significant impact upon neighboring properties or the City as a whole. When such Applications are certified to the commission, the commission acts as the land use authority. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.11.040 - Permits and Applications. 
A.  Official Decisions in Writing. Decisions on each land use Application submitted to the Community Development Department shall be made in a timely manner by the land use authority and are not official until reduced to writing. 
B.  Applications Submitted to Department. All Applications related to land use must be submitted to the Community Development Department, who shall direct the Application to the proper land use authority for decision. 
C.  Director Authority Over Building Permits. No Building Permit shall be issued without the regulatory approval of the land use authority. 
D.  Pre-payment of Fees Required. Permits are not considered submitted unless the established fee has been paid by the Applicant and any of the City's projected out of pocket costs are deposited into the trust account. 
E.  Expiration. An Application shall expire if an Applicant fails to respond to a City request for information or revision to submitted materials for a period in excess of 180 days. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.11.050 - Fees. 
Fees for Applications and permit requests are established by resolution in the City's Consolidated Fee Schedule or by ordinance codifying such fees. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.11.060 - Public hearings and Meetings. 
A.  Public Hearings. Public hearings shall be conducted for the following Land Use Decisions: 
1.  When enacting or amending zoning ordinances or the Land Use Map, a hearing before the Planning Commission is required; 
2.  Vacation or amendment of platted Street, Right-of-Way or easement; 
3.  Annexation policy plans and Applications; 
4.  Vacating or changing a Subdivision Plat; 
5.  Any other Land Use Decision for which a public hearing is required by law. 
B.  Public Comment. Public comment may also be allowed in any public meeting at the discretion of the land use authority. Except as provided above, a land use authority need not allow public comment where a public hearing is not required by this Section or state law. 
C.  Public Meetings. All Land Use Decisions made by the Planning Commission shall be rendered during open and public meetings. The Community Development Director may also conduct public meetings related to land use Applications or other land use issues when the Community Development Director deems it appropriate to do so. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.11.070 - Public Notices. 
A.  Required Notice. The land use authority shall schedule and hold any required public hearing or public meeting according to the provisions of this Code and state statute. Public notices for Land Use Decisions shall be given in accordance to state statute. The City shall provide notice of the date, place, and time of public hearings or public meetings within the timeframes established by this Section, or such lesser or greater time as provided by state law. 
B.  Mailed Notices. Notice shall be provided by first class mail to property Owners and affected entities as established below: 
1.  Allowed Use Permits. Notice shall be mailed seven days prior to the public meeting to any property Owners abutting and across a public Right-of-Way from the property on which the Conditional Use is proposed. 
2.  Conditional Use Permits and Design Review Approvals. Notice shall be mailed seven days prior to the public meeting to any property Owners within a three-hundred-foot radius of the Property Lines of the Plat on which the Conditional Use or design review is proposed. 
3.  Right-of-Way Vacations. Notice shall be given in accordance to state statute. Notices shall be mailed ten days prior to the public hearing to the following parties: 
a.  Any property Owner whose property is accessed by the portion of the Right-of-Way that is proposed to be vacated. 
b.  Any property Owners within six hundred feet (600') of the portion of the public Right-of-Way that is proposed to be vacated. 
c.  All property Owners whose property is in between the portion of the Right-of-Way to be vacated and the nearest Street intersection. 
4.  Subdivision Plat Approvals and Amendments to Subdivision Plats. Notice shall be given in accordance to state statute. Additional notices shall be mailed ten days prior to the public hearing to any property Owners within a six-hundred-foot (600') radius of the boundary of the proposed Subdivision Plat. 
5.  Zoning and Future Land Use Map Amendments. Notice shall be given in accordance to state statute. Additional notices shall be mailed ten days prior to the public hearing to any property Owners within a six-hundred-foot (600') radius of the boundary of the proposed zoning or future Land Use Map amendment. 
6.  Ordinance and General Plan Amendments. Notice shall be given according to state statute. 
7.  Applicant/Agent Responsibility for Mailed Notices. An Applicant/agent seeking a decision by the land use authority for which a public notice is required shall submit to the City at the time directed by the Community Development Department, one set of printed address labels and a corresponding number of stamps and envelopes for mailed notices for property Owners as required by the municipal Code or state statute. It shall be the Applicant's sole responsibility to ensure that the list of property Owners and the address labels are accurate and complete. The list of property Owners shall be obtained from current records maintained by the Salt Lake County Recorder's Office. The City shall provide notice using the address labels and postage provided by the Applicant. 
C.  Publication of Notices. Notices shall be published by the following methods, unless otherwise provided for by state statute. 
1.  Public notices shall be published on the City's website and on the state's public notice website at least ten days prior to a public hearing, and at least seven days prior to a public meeting. 
2.  Notices for public hearings shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the area at least ten days prior to the public hearing. 
3.  A hard copy of any public notice issued by the land use authority shall be posted at City hall at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to a public hearing or a public meeting. 
D.  Posting on Site. Notification signage shall be posted on the property or land for which a Conditional Use permit, design review, Right-of-Way vacation, Subdivision Plat approval, amendment to a Subdivision Plat, or zoning or future Land Use Map amendment is considered. Notice shall be posted as directed by the Community Development Department and shall be clearly visible from the Right-of-Way. The sign(s) shall be provided to the Applicant/agent by the City and shall be posted by the Applicant/agent at least seven days prior to the scheduled public hearing or public meeting. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.11.080 - Development Committee. 
The Mayor may form a standing Development Committee composed of City staff, property Owners, or elected and appointed officials to comment on land use Applications and render advice to Applicants. The recommendations of the Development Committee are advisory only. Consideration by the Development Committee is not a pre-requisite for Application approval. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.11.090 - Enforcement. 
A.  Authority. The Community Development Director is authorized to enforce the provisions of this Code through either criminal or civil proceedings. 
B.  Delegation. The Community Development Director may delegate enforcement authority to any City official. No written delegation of power is necessary. 
C.  Violations. Any Building or Use of land or any construction thereon which was not authorized by or under the City Code which is illegal under such ordinances, shall remain unauthorized and illegal unless expressly authorized or permitted in the provisions of this Code. The Use or continuation of such a Use or construction is punishable under this Code. 
D.  Number of Offenses. Every person, firm or corporation shall be deemed responsible or guilty of a separate offense for each and every day that a violation is committed or continued. 
E.  Criminal Penalties. Violations of the provisions of this Code are class C misdemeanors, subject to criminal prosecution. 
F.  Civil Penalties. Violations of the provisions of this Code may also be pursued through administrative citation or summons, as provided in Title 8, Chapter 14, Code Enforcement Program. Orders of abatement may be issued by the City pursuant to those provisions. 
G.  Remedies. 
1.  The City, or any adversely affected Owner of real estate within the City in which violations of this Code occur or are about to occur, may, in addition to other remedies provided by law, institute: 
a.  Injunctions, mandamus, abatement, or any other appropriate action; or 
b.  Proceedings to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove the unlawful Building, Use, or act. 
2.  The City need only establish the violation to obtain an injunction. 
3.  The City may, in addition to other remedies provided by law, enforce the ordinance by: 
a.  Withholding Building Permits; or 
b.  Taking action to cancel any permit or approval for failure to comply with the terms of any permit or approval. The land use authority that issued the permit or approval shall consider the matter preceded by at least ten calendar days' notice. Cancellation or revocation of a permit or approval may be appealed in the same manner as the original action. 
H.  Nuisance and Abatement. All Buildings or Uses of land which are established, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this Code shall be and are declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. In addition to other remedies provided by the law, the City Attorney may immediately commence a court action or proceedings for abatement, removal or injunction to correct the nuisance. These remedies are cumulative to other civil and criminal actions, and not exclusive. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
Chapter 17.12 - VARIANCES AND APPEALS 
Sections: 
 
17.12.010 - Variances. 
A.  Where strict compliance with the provisions of this Title would cause an unusual and unnecessary hardship on the Applicant because of peculiarities regarding the size of the tract to be Developed, its topography, the condition or nature of adjoining areas or the existence of other unusual physical conditions, the Applicant may petition the Community Development Director for a variance from such provisions. 
B.  Granting variances. The Community Development Director may grant a variance only if: 
1.  Literal enforcement of the Land Use Regulations would cause an unreasonable hardship for the Applicant that is not necessary to carry out the general purpose of the Land Use Regulations; 
2.  There are special circumstances attached to the property that do not generally apply to other properties in the same district; 
3.  Granting the variance is essential to the enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed by other property in the same zoning district; 
4.  The variance will not substantially affect the general plan and will not be contrary to the public interest; and 
5.  The spirit of the land use ordinance is observed, and substantial justice done. 
C.  Variance determinations. In determining whether or not enforcement of the land use ordinance would cause unreasonable hardship under Subsection (B)(1), the appeal authority may not find an unreasonable hardship unless the alleged hardship: 
1.  Is located on or associated with the property for which the variance is sought; and 
2.  Comes from circumstances peculiar to the property, not from conditions that are general to the neighborhood. 
3.  In determining whether or not enforcement of the land use ordinance would cause unreasonable hardship under Subsection (B)(1), the appeal authority may not find an unreasonable hardship if the hardship is self-imposed or economic. 
4.  In determining whether or not there are special circumstances attached to the property under Subsection (B)(1), the appeal authority may find that special circumstances exist only if the special circumstances: 
a.  Relate to the hardship complained of; and 
b.  Deprive the property of privileges granted to other properties in the same zoning district. 
D.  The Applicant shall bear the burden of proving that all of the conditions justifying a variance have been met. 
E.  Variances run with the land. 
F.  The Community Development Director may not grant a Use variance. 
G.  In granting a variance, the appeal authority may impose additional requirements on the Applicant that will: 
1.  Mitigate any harmful effects of the variance; or 
2.  Serve the purpose of the standard or requirement that is waived or modified. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020)  
17.12.020 - Appeals. 
A.  Except as provided below, appeals from Land Use Decisions shall be made using the administrative hearing process outlined in Chapter 2.22 of the City Code. A hearing request must be made in writing and must be received by the City Recorded no later than ten days following the date of the appealed action. 
B.  An appeal from the Community Development Director's decision regarding an interpretation of this Title, or on any Land Use Application, shall be made to the Planning Commission by any person aggrieved by the interpretation or decision within 10 days of the Community Development Director's written Land Use Decision, stating each fact and every theory of relief on appeal. 
1.  The Planning Commission conducts each appeal de novo. 
2.  The Planning Commission shall act as a quasi-judicial body and shall afford due process to the parties on appeal. 
3.  Each party may prepare call such witnesses and present such evidence as it deems appropriate. 
4.  Only witnesses called by a party may testify. 
5.  After hearing all evidence and legal arguments presented by the parties, the Planning Commission shall apply the plain language of the Code and issue written finding of facts, conclusions of law, and a decision on the merits of all theories of relief the appellant has raised in the appeal. 
6.  If a Land Use Regulation does not plainly restrict a Land Use Application, the Planning Commission shall interpret and apply the Land Use Regulation to favor the Land Use Application. 
7.  The Planning Commission shall reverse the decision of the Community Development Director only if the Director's decision is not supported by substantial evidence in the record or is otherwise arbitrary, capricious or illegal. 
8.  Final Order of the Planning Commission acting as an appeal authority is a final decision, appealable to district court. 
9.  Unless otherwise stated in the Planning Commission's final decision, an order following a de novo review vacates any official determination made by the land use authority. 
10.  No further administrative appeals are permitted from a final order of an appellate authority and any subsequent review is to be made by the district court. 
11.  Appeals to district court shall be made within 30 days of the final decision. 
C.  Code Enforcement. An appeal from any enforcement action under the provisions of this Title, shall be made to the Administrative Law Judge by any person subject to the enforcement action, stating each fact and every theory of relief on appeal. 
1.  The Administrative Law Judge conducts each appeal de novo. 
2.  The Administrative Law Judge shall afford due process to the parties on appeal. 
3.  Each party may prepare call such witnesses and present such evidence as it deems appropriate. 
4.  Only witnesses called by a party may testify. 
5.  After hearing all evidence and legal arguments presented by the parties, the Administrative Law Judge shall apply the plain language of the Code and issue written finding of facts, conclusions of law, and a decision on the merits of all theories of relief the appellant has raised in the appeal. 
6.  The Administrative Law Judge shall reverse the decision of the Community Development Director only if the Director's decision is not supported by substantial evidence in the record or is otherwise arbitrary, capricious or illegal. 
7.  The order of the Administrative Law Judge is a final decision, appealable to district court. 
8.  Unless otherwise stated in the Administrative Law Judge's final decision, an order following a de novo review vacates any official determination made by the land use authority. 
9.  No further administrative appeals are permitted from a final order of an appellate authority and any subsequent review is to be made by the district court. 
10.  Appeals to district court shall be made within 30 days of the final decision. 
(Ord. No. 2020-02, § IV(Exh. C), 1-8-2020) 
