7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=Preface 1/1
Preface
In 2019, codification and administration of the Municipal Code began in- house under the direction of the
City Recorder with the assistance of Municipal Code Corporation. This Municipal Code shall be cited as
Spanish Fork Municipal Code or “SFMC" as an acronym, and should precede all internal references to
the Municipal Code. Any references to the Utah Code herein will be written as "U.C.A. § x-x-x".
This Municipal Code maintains a structure by subject matter using a decimal numbering system
referencing the title, chapter, and section (for example: 1.01.010).
? The first number in the sequence (1.01.010) designates the Title level.
? The second series of numbers (1.01.010) designates the Chapter level.
? The third series of number (1.01.010) designates the Section level.
? Because Title 15 Land Use is first broken into Parts, and then Chapters, there may be a fourth
series of numbers designating a reference to the section level.
These divisions appropriately categorize SFMC into a complete set of numbers, designed to aid in
searching the Municipal Code and to assist in subsequent codification as new ordinances are added to
the Municipal Code. Vacant titles, chapters, or sections may be designed for future use and may be
marked “Reserved” to ease internal expansion.
To outline, give structure, and more granularly reference the legislation herein, the following list order (or
pattern of ascending alphanumeric characters) is used: A, 1, a, (1), (A), (a). Drafting future legislation
with this same list style reconciles the alphanumeric numbering with this online code. The word
"Subparagraph" herein acts as an adjective to define specific alphanumeric characters of substantive
language.
The legislative history beneath the language content substantiates its accuracy and provenance.
The Municipal Code is supplemented from time to time with amendments and additions made by
Spanish Fork. The specific legal sources that comprise this Municipal Code have been adapted during
the codification process from the original formatting of the official hard copy. In the event of
discrepancies between the online Municipal Code and the official hard copy, the official hard copy
governs. Municipal Code Corporation, provides a searchable database of the Municipal Code for easy
reference and convenience.
NOTICE: THE MUNICIPAL CODE MAY NOT REFLECT ALL OR THE MOST CURRENT VERSION OF
LEGISLATION ADOPTED BY THE CITY COUNCIL THAT HAS YET TO BE UPDATED ONLINE. IN
THE EVENT OF CONFLICT BETWEEN THE MUNICIPAL CODE AND A WRITTEN ORDINANCE, THE
ORDINANCE TYPICALLY GOVERNS. ALSO, THE MUNICIPAL CODE MAY NOT REFLECT RULES
OR OTHER REGULATIONS PROMULGATED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE CODE, INCLUDING
TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT THE DEPUTY RECORDER.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=1_GENERAL_PROVISIONS 1/6
1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.01 Code Adopted
1.04 General Provisions
1.08 Right Of Entry For Inspection
1.12 City Seal
1.16 General Penalty
1.01 Code Adopted
1.01.010 Adoption
1.01.020 Title - Citation - Reference
1.01.030 Codification Authority
1.01.040 References Applies To All Amendments
1.01.050 Title, Chapter And Section Headings
1.01.060 Reference To Specific Ordinances
1.01.070 Effect Of Code On Past Actions And Obligations
1.01.075 Offenses And Failure To Appear
1.01.080 Effective Date
1.01.090 Constitutionality
1.01.010 Adoption
Pursuant to the provisions of Utah Code Annotated, '10-3-701 et. seq. there is adopted the "Spanish
Fork Municipal Code."
1.01.020 Title - Citation - Reference
This code shall be known as the "Spanish Fork Municipal Code"; and it is sufficient to refer to said code
as the "Spanish Fork Municipal Code" in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in
any proceeding at law or equity. It is sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending,
correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or
repeal of the Spanish Fork Municipal code. Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections
and subsections of the Spanish Fork Municipal Code and such references shall apply to that numbered
title, chapter, section and subsection as it appears in the code.
1.01.030 Codification Authority
The code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative
ordinances of the City of Spanish Fork, Utah, codified pursuant to the provisions of Utah Code
Annotated '10-3-701 et. seq.
1.01.040 References Applies To All Amendments
Whenever a reference is made to this code as the "Spanish Fork Municipal Code" or to any portion
thereof, or to any ordinance of the city of Spanish Fork, Utah, the reference shall apply to all
amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made.
1.01.050 Title, Chapter And Section Headings
Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in
any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof.
1.01.060 Reference To Specific Ordinances
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=1_GENERAL_PROVISIONS 2/6
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are
otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise
and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the
corresponding provisions contained within this code.
1.01.070 Effect Of Code On Past Actions And Obligations
Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendments hereby of any ordinance or part or
portion of any ordinance of the city shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of
ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a
waiver of any license, fee or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor
be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such
license, fee or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the
validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to
any ordinance and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and
effect.
1.01.075 Offenses And Failure To Appear
A. When an offense under this Code is described as an infraction, a class C misdemeanor, or a
class B misdemeanor, those designations shall have the same definitions and penalties as
described in the Utah Code.
B. Any person who, having signed a promise to appear to answer to criminal charges, and having
failed to appear, is subject to having a warrant of arrest issued by a judge of the court having
jurisdiction over such offense. Such a warrant may be issued in all cases arising under this Code,
whether the offense charged is an infraction or a misdemeanor. When a warrant of arrest is
issued, the judge issuing the warrant.
(Ord. No. 13-16, Created 08/11/2016)
1.01.080 Effective Date
This code shall become effective on the date the ordinance adopting this code as "Spanish Fork
Municipal Code" shall become effective.
1.01.090 Constitutionality
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or
unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The
council declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause
and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences,
clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should
be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and
effect.
1.04 General Provisions
1.04.010 Definitions
1.04.020 Construction
1.04.030 Ordinances - Enacting Clause
1.04.040 Liability Of Employers And Agents To Penalty For Violation
1.04.050 Ordinances - Publication And Effective Date
1.04.060 Conflict With State Law
1.04.010 Definitions
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=1_GENERAL_PROVISIONS 3/6
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings assigned to them:
"Bribe" signifies any money, goods, right in action, property, things of value or advantage, present or
prospective, or any promise or undertaking to give any, asked, given or accepted, with a corrupt intent to
influence unlawfully the person to whom it is given in his action, vote or opinion in any public or official
capacity.
"City" as used herein means Spanish Fork City.
"Corruptly" imparts a wrongful design to acquire or cause some pecuniary or other advantage to the
person guilty of the act or omission referred to, or to some other person.
"Highway" and "road" includes public bridges and may be held equivalent to the words "county way,"
"county road," "common road" and "state road."
"Knowingly" imparts only a knowledge that the facts exist which bring the act or omission within the
provisions of this code. It does not require any knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
"Land", "real estate" and "real property" includes lands, tenements, hereditaments, water rights,
possessory rights and claims.
"Malice" and "Maliciously" impart a wish to vex, annoy or injure another person, or an intent to do a
wrongful act, established either by proof or by presumption of law.
"Month" means calendar month unless otherwise expressed, and the word "year" or the abbreviation
"A.D." is equivalent to the expression "year of our Lord."
"Neglect", "negligence" and "negligently" impart a want of such attention to the nature or probable
consequences of the act or omission as a prudent man ordinarily bestows in action in his own concern.
"Oath" includes "Affirmation," and the word "swear" includes the word "affirm." Every mode of oral
statement under oath or affirmation is embraced in the term "testify" and every written one in the term
"depose."
"Officers" includes officers and boards in charge of departments and the members of such boards.
"Owner" applied to a building or land includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint
tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
"Person" includes bodies, politic and corporate, partnerships, associations and companies.
"Personal Property" includes every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidences or rights
in action, and all written instruments by which any pecuniary obligation, rights or title to property is
created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished, and every right or
interest therein.
"Property" includes both real and personal property.
"Signature" includes any name, mark or sign written with the intent to authenticate any instrument or
writing.
"Street" includes alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public squares, public places and
sidewalks.
"Tenant" or "occupant" applies to a building or land includes any person who occupies the whole or any
part of such buildings or land either alone or with others.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=1_GENERAL_PROVISIONS 4/6
"Willfully", when applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted, implies simply a purpose or
willingness to commit the act or make the omission referred to. It does not require any intent to violate or
to injure another or to acquire any advantage.
"Writing" includes printing, writing and typewriting.
"UCA" means Utah Code Annotated (1953, as amended).
1.04.020 Construction
In the construction of this code and all ordinances amendatory thereof the following rules shall be
observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the legislative body
or repugnant to the context of the ordinances:
A. The singular number includes the plural.
B. Words used in the masculine gender comprehend as well, the feminine and neuter.
C. Words used in the present tense include the future.
D. When any time is specified in this code, it shall mean standard time, as distinguished from solar
time, and the words "midnight" or "noon" shall be taken to be midnight or noon standard time.
E. Words prohibiting anything being done, except in accordance with a license or permit or authority
from a board or officer shall be construed as giving such board or officer power to license or
permit to authorize such things to be done.
1.04.030 Ordinances - Enacting Clause
The enacting clause of all ordinances of the city hereafter passed shall be in the following form: "Be it
ordained by the City Council of Spanish Fork City" and no enacting clause shall be used in any section
of any ordinance except the first.
1.04.040 Liability Of Employers And Agents To Penalty For Violation
When the provisions of an ordinance prohibit the commission or omission of an act not only the person
actually doing the prohibited thing or omitting the direct act, but also the employer and all other persons
concerned or aiding or abetting therein shall be guilty of the offense described and liable to the penalty
prescribed for the offense.
1.04.050 Ordinances - Publication And Effective Date
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=1_GENERAL_PROVISIONS 5/6
All ordinances before taking effect shall be deposited in the office of the city recorder and published at
least once in some newspaper published within Spanish Fork City, or if there is no newspaper published
therein, then by posting in three public places therein; provided, that whenever a revision is made and
the revised ordinances are published by authority of the city council, no further publication shall be
deemed necessary; and provided further, that ordinances establishing rules and regulations for the
construction of buildings, the minimum standards that must be met to qualify a house or building for
human habitation or occupancy, the installation of plumbing, the installation of electric wiring or other
related or similar work and rules and regulations controlling traffic and relating to the prevention of fires
within the corporate limits and other rules and regulations relating to municipal function and controls
where such rules and regulations have been printed as a code in book form, may be adopted and shall
take effect without further publication or posting thereof, if reference is made to such code and if not less
than three copies of such code have been filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the
recorder prior to the adoption of such ordinance by the city council. Ordinances shall not go into effect
until the twentieth day after their publication or posting, nor until the thirtieth day after their final passage;
but shall go into effect at the expiration of such twentieth day after publication or posting, or such thirtieth
day after such final passage, or whichever of said days is the most remote from the final passage of
such ordinance. Ordinances, if so provided therein, may take effect at a later date. Measures necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health or safety of the municipality may, if so provided in
the ordinance, may take effect at an earlier date. The city recorder shall record all resolutions and
ordinances in a book kept for that purpose, together with the affidavit of publication by the publisher or
his agent or, if posted, with the certificates of the due posting thereof, and said book, or a certified copy
of the ordinances and affidavit of publication or posting, under the seal of the city, shall be received as
evidence in all courts and places without further proof, or if printed in book or pamphlet form by authority
of the city council, they shall be so received.
1.04.060 Conflict With State Law
Whenever anything contained in this code becomes in conflict with any provision or provision of the laws
of the State of Utah, the duly enacted laws of the State of Utah shall take precedence over the Spanish
Fork City ordinances.
1.08 Right Of Entry For Inspection
1.08.010 Designated
1.08.010 Designated
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any ordinance or resolution, or whenever there is
reasonable cause to believe there exists an ordinance or resolution violation in any building or upon the
premises within the jurisdiction of this city, any authorized official of the city may, upon presentation of
proper credentials, enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to
perform any duty imposed upon him/her by ordinance; provided, that except in emergency situations or
when consent of the owner and/or occupant to the inspection has been otherwise obtained, he/she shall
give the owner and/or occupant, if they can be located after reasonable effort, twenty-for hours' written
notice of the authorized official's intention to inspect. The notice transmitted to the owner and/or
occupant shall state that the property owner has the right to refuse entry and that in the event such entry
is refused, inspection may be made only upon issuance of a search warrant by a duly authorized
magistrate. In the event the owner and/or occupant refuses entry after such request has been made, the
official is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining
such entry.
1.12 City Seal
1.12.010 City Seal Designated
1.12.010 City Seal Designated
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=1_GENERAL_PROVISIONS 6/6
The municipal seal of the City shall be as follows:
(Ord. No. 12-11, Amended 08/16/2011)
(Ord. No. 08-18, Amended 03/27/2018)
1.16 General Penalty
1.16.010 Designated
1.16.010 Designated
A. Whenever no other penalty is prescribed, a violation of any provision of ordinance duly enacted
by the city council shall be punished as a class B misdemeanor.
B. Whenever the penalty prescribed for a violation of any ordinance as set forth herein as an
infraction, a class C misdemeanor, a class B misdemeanor or a class A misdemeanor, the
penalty attaching to such designation shall be the same as that set forth by Utah state law in the
Utah Criminal Code for an infraction, a class C misdemeanor, or a class B misdemeanor or a
class A misdemeanor, respectively.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 1/43
2 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
2.04 General
2.08 City Council
2.12 Mayor
2.16 City Manager
2.20 City Recorder
2.24 City Treasurer
2.28 Chief Of Police (Repealed)
2.32 City Engineer (Repealed)
2.40 City Finance Director (Repealed)
2.44 City Attorney (Repealed)
2.48 Elections
2.52 Other Offices (Repealed)
2.56 Government Records Access And Management Act
2.60 Constitutional Taking Issues
2.64 Campaign Finance Disclosure
2.68 Municipal Ethics Commission
2.04 General
2.04.010 Officers - Generally
2.04.020 Legislative And Governing Body
2.04.030 Officers - Eligibility
2.04.040 Oaths And Bonds
2.04.050 Compensation Of Officers
2.04.060 Conflict Of Interest
2.04.070 Nepotism
2.04.080 Delivering Property To Successor In Office
2.04.090 Minutes Of Council Meetings
2.04.010 Officers - Generally
The municipal government of the city is vested in a mayor and city council, to be composed of five (5)
council members to be elected at large.
2.04.020 Legislative And Governing Body
The Mayor and City Council are and shall be the legislative and governing body of the City and as such
shall have, exercise and discharge all of the rights, powers, privileges and authority conferred by law
upon this city and shall perform all duties required of them by law or ordinance and shall perform such
other acts and take such other measures not inconsistent with law as may be necessary for the efficient
government of the City.
2.04.030 Officers - Eligibility
All elective officers shall be chosen by qualified voters of the City. No person shall be eligible for any
elective office who is not a qualified voter of the City. Any elective officer who moves their domicile
outside the city during their term of office shall forfeit their office.
2.04.040 Oaths And Bonds
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 2/43
All elected officials and officers appointed by the Governing Body, shall, before they enter upon the
duties of their respective office, take the constitutional oath of office. The City Treasurer shall post a
bond in the minimum amount set by the State Money Management Council. The City will provide an
Employee Theft and Faithful Performance of Duty bond for other employees in an amount it determines
adequate. The premium charged for any official bond shall be paid by the City.
(Ord. No. 08-19, Amended 04/16/2019)
2.04.050 Compensation Of Officers
A. The elected, appointed, and statutory officers shall receive such compensation for their services
as the city council may fix, adopting compensation or compensation schedules enacted after
public hearing, which hearing may be part of the budget hearing.
B. The council shall comply with Utah Code Annotated §10-3-818 in setting compensation for
elected and statutory officers.
2.04.060 Conflict Of Interest
No officer or employee of the City shall be directly or indirectly interested in any contract, work, project,
business or in the sale of any item involving the City without first disclosing this interest to the city
manager. All officers and employees of the city shall comply with and be bound by the "Municipal
Officer's and Employee's Ethics Act", (UCA §10 3 1301 et seq.) and the "Utah Public Officer's and
Employee's Ethics Act", (UCA §67 16 1 et seq.).
2.04.070 Nepotism
All officers and employees of the city with the responsibility for making appointments or hiring must
comply with and be bound by state law prohibiting the employment of relatives found in Utah Code
Annotated §52-3-1 et seq.
2.04.080 Delivering Property To Successor In Office
If any person having been an officer, employee, or other official of this city shall not, within five (5) days
after notification and request, deliver to his or her successor in office all property, papers, and effects of
every description in his or her actual or constructive possession belonging to the city or appertaining to
the office or position he or she held, he or she is guilty of a Class B Misdemeanor.
2.04.090 Minutes Of Council Meetings
The City Council shall cause minutes of its public meetings to be kept. The Council shall have the draft
minutes for approval at a regularly scheduled meeting after the public meeting for which minutes are
kept. If the Council does not take action to approve the draft minutes within sixty (60) days after the
public meeting, the draft minutes shall be deemed to have been approved by the Council and will stand
as approved.
(Ord. No. 14-14, Created 09/02/2014)
2.08 City Council
2.08.010 Powers And Duties
2.08.020 Council - Regular Meetings
2.08.030 Telecommunications Meetings
2.08.040 Council - Voting
2.08.050 Council - Special Meetings
2.08.060 Council - Quorum
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 3/43
2.08.070 Council - Rules - Member Expulsion
2.08.080 Members - Appointments To Other Offices
2.08.090 Audit Of Accounts - Report
2.08.100 Vacancies
2.08.110 Budgetary Process
2.08.120 Fiscal Year
2.08.130 Liability Claims Approval
2.08.140 Appointment Of Judges Of Election - Voting Places
2.08.150 Canvass Returns Of Election - Issuance Of Certificates
2.08.160 Evaluation Of Manager
2.08.010 Powers And Duties
The city council shall perform all duties that are prescribed by the statutes of this state or by the city
ordinances and shall perform such other acts and take such other measures not inconsistent with law as
may be necessary for the efficient government of the city.
2.08.020 Council - Regular Meetings
The City Council shall conduct business at two regular meetings each month, which shall be held on the
first and third Tuesdays of the month, at the Spanish Fork City office building, 40 South Main. Meetings
shall begin promptly at 6:00 p.m. If the meeting day is on a legal holiday, then the meeting may be held
at the city office building at another date and time established by the Council. The Council shall conform
to the state open meeting law in rescheduling meetings or calling special meetings.
2.08.030 Telecommunications Meetings
A. Definitions. As used herein, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
"Anchor Locations” means Spanish Fork City offices, or such other place where a public
meeting is held, as established by law;
“City” means Spanish Fork City;
“Council” means the Spanish Fork City Council;
“Member” means an individual who serves either on the Council or as staff of City;
“Real Time” means instantaneous communications such as speaking face to face, without undue
delays, hearing and/or seeing what is being said or done;
“Remote Location” means any place other than the anchor location, where a Member is at who
participates in a telecommunications meeting;
“Telecommunications Meeting” means a formal meeting of the City where one or more
Members participates from a remote location via-telephone, internet, television, or other
telecommunication means now known or yet to be developed.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 4/43
B. Telecommunications Meetings Authorized
1. Members may participate in meetings via telecommunications media.
2. Any form of telecommunication may be used, as long as it allows for real time interaction
in the way of discussions, questions and answers, and voting.
3. Members who desire to participate in a meeting of the City via telecommunications should
notify the City of their intent in advance of the meeting, as set forth in paragraph E (iii), so
that appropriate arrangements can be made to conduct the meeting via
telecommunications. The notice may be waived by the City in the event of emergency
conditions which preclude the ability to give notice.
4. Any member(s) participating from remote locations shall make contact with the City prior
to the start of the meeting to ensure the equipment to be used is in proper working order.
C. Notices
1. Notices of meetings are to be given in the manner and within the time frame set forth by
law.
2. Public notices, to the extent applicable, are to be given according to law, listing the
anchor location as the site of the meeting.
D. Quorum
1. Members participating via telecommunications are to be considered present for purposes
of establishing a quorum, as defined by law.
2. In the event of failure of equipment, or other factor, which causes a lack of
communications with a member(s) causing lack of a quorum, no additional business may
be conducted until the quorum can be reconstituted. Continuances may be granted as set
forth by law. Business already conducted remains valid and binding.
E. Location
1. Whenever a meeting is to be held with a member(s) via telecommunications, the anchor
location, identified in all notices, shall be the City offices, 40 South Main Spanish Fork,
Utah or such other location as determined by the Council in accordance with law.
2. Public participation is limited to the anchor location.
3. Members who desire to participate in a meeting of the City via telecommunications should
notify the City of their intent far enough in advance of the meeting so that appropriate
arrangements can be made to conduct the meeting via telecommunications. Notice shall
be given to the City Manager’s office, which office shall determine what is adequate
notice.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 5/43
F. Method
1. Any telecommunications method now known or hereafter developed may be used to
conduct a telecommunications meeting, so long as the criteria set forth herein can be
met.
2. All persons at the anchor location shall be required to have real time video and/or audio
contact with member(s) participating from remote locations, so as to know the entire
discussion and deliberations of the Council.
3. Members participating from remote locations shall have the obligation to use appropriate
equipment or take other precautions to eliminate static or other disturbances to the
orderly conduct of the meeting.
4. If available, and not cost prohibitive, an audio and video feed is the preferred method of
conducting a telecommunications meeting.
G. Costs
1. The City may elect to pay the costs of a telecommunications meeting.
2. If the City is paying the costs, it may make the arrangements and initiate the contact in
order to conduct the meeting.
2.08.040 Council - Voting
A roll call vote shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances and all propositions to create any
liability against the city and in all other cases at the request of any member of the City Council, which
shall be entered upon the journal of its proceedings. The concurrence of a majority of the members
present shall be necessary to the passage of any such ordinances or proposition, provided that at least
three votes are required to pass any matter.
2.08.050 Council - Special Meetings
The Mayor or any two (2) members of the Council may call a special meeting of the city council by giving
notice of it to each of the members of the Council, served personally or left at their usual place of abode.
No vote of the City Council shall be reconsidered or rescinded at a special meeting, unless at such
special meeting there is present as large a number of members as were present when the initial vote
was taken.
2.08.060 Council - Quorum
Three (3) members of the Council, constitute a quorum to do business but a smaller number may
adjourn from time to time and are in power to compel the attendance of an absent member and may,
when necessary, direct the chief of police or any police officer of the city to bring in such member or
members under arrest. Should any member of the Council be absent when notified by the chief of police
or other proper authority that his or her presence is necessary to form a quorum unless he or she
presents an excuse satisfactory to the Council at its next regular meeting, or should any member leave
the Council when in session without the consent of the Council, when said leaving would break the
quorum, he or she may be fined any sum not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
2.08.070 Council - Rules - Member Expulsion
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 6/43
The City Council shall determine its own rules of proceedings, may punish its members for disorderly
conduct, and, with the concurrence of two thirds of the members, may expel a member for cause. Cause
shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, conviction of a felony or conviction of any crime involving
moral turpitude.
2.08.080 Members - Appointments To Other Offices
No member of the City Council shall hold or be appointed to any office which shall have been created
during the term for which he or she was elected.
2.08.090 Audit Of Accounts - Report
The City Council shall require an annual audit of the accounts of all officers of the City having the care,
management, collection or disbursement of money belonging to the City or appropriated by law or
otherwise for the use and benefit of the City. The annual audit shall be performed by or under the
direction of a competent public accountant, not an officer of the City, and shall be prepared within one
hundred eighty (180) days following the close of the fiscal year. Copies of all audit reports made
pursuant to this section shall be filed in the office of the City Finance Director and with the State
Auditor's office, and may be used in addition to or in lieu of the annual report of the City Finance Director
as may be required by the City Council.
2.08.100 Vacancies
If any vacancy occurs in the office of a City council member, such vacancy shall be filled by appointment
by the City Council. The appointment shall be good until the next municipal election. The City will follow
the requirements of state law in making any such appointment.
2.08.110 Budgetary Process
The City shall prepare a budget for each fiscal year in conformance the "Utah Municipal Fiscal
Procedures Act".
2.08.120 Fiscal Year
The fiscal year shall begin July 1 and end June 30 of the following year.
2.08.130 Liability Claims Approval
All liability claims properly presented to the City shall be referred to Utah Risk Management Mutual
Association for their review. Any claims referred back to the city by U.R.M.M.A. shall be reviewed
pursuant to the liability policy of the City.
2.08.140 Appointment Of Judges Of Election - Voting Places
In all municipal elections, the City Council shall appoint election poll workers and designate the places of
voting. All elections must be conducted according to the general laws of the State, and all notices and
lists of names required to be posted by registry agents prior to any general election shall also be posted
by the registry agents prior to any municipal election, the necessary changes being made as to time of
posting the same.
2.08.150 Canvass Returns Of Election - Issuance Of Certificates
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 7/43
The City Council, acting as the municipal canvassers, no sooner than seven, nor later than fourteen
days following any municipal election, must convene and publicly canvass the result and issue
certificates of election to each person elected by a plurality of votes. When two or more persons have
received an equal number of votes for any of the offices voted for, and would be elected except for the
tie, the tie shall be decided by lot in the presence of the Mayor and City Recorder upon a day designated
by the Mayor.
2.08.160 Evaluation Of Manager
The Council and Mayor shall perform an annual performance evaluation of the City Manager.
2.12 Mayor
2.12.010 Powers And Duties
2.12.020 Temporary Absence - Appointment Of Mayor Pro Tempore
2.12.030 No Veto
2.12.040 Vacancy
2.12.010 Powers And Duties
A. The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the City Council, but shall not vote except in case of a
tie when he or she shall cast the deciding vote, or when the powers, duties, or functions of the
Mayor are being enlarged or restricted.
B. The Mayor has a vote, with the Council, to appoint or remove a city manager.
C. The mayor shall have such powers and duties as granted by state law or local ordinance and
shall perform all duties prescribed by law, ordinance, or resolution.
D. The Mayor has the power to appoint and remove the City Recorder and City Treasurer, which
appointments or removals must be approved by a majority of the Council.
E. The Mayor and Council shall perform an annual evaluation of the City Manager. The Mayor shall
be responsible to schedule the evaluation with the Council and Manager.
F. The Mayor shall appoint, with the consent of a majority of the Council, members of the
commissions, boards, and committees of the City, unless otherwise established by ordinance.
G. The Mayor is the Chief Executive Officer of the City and is the designated representative of the
City to execute all contracts, resolutions, ordinances, and other documents requiring a signature
of the City. All signatures are to be attested by the City Recorder indicating they have been
approved by the Council.
(Ordinance 31-17, Amended 12/12/2017)
2.12.020 Temporary Absence - Appointment Of Mayor Pro Tempore
In the absence of the Mayor or because of his or her inability or refusal to act, the Council may elect a
member from the Council to preside over the meeting as mayor pro tempore, who shall have all of the
powers and duties of the Mayor during the Mayors absence or disability. The election of a mayor pro
tempore shall be entered in the minutes of the meeting. The Mayor Pro Tempore shall retain his/her vote
as a member of the Council.
2.12.030 No Veto
The Mayor shall have no power to veto any act of the City Council unless otherwise specifically
authorized by state statute.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 8/43
2.12.040 Vacancy
Whenever a vacancy in the office of mayor occurs the City Council shall elect a mayor who shall serve
until the next municipal election and until his or her successor is elected and qualified.
2.16 City Manager
2.16.010 Creation Of City Manager
2.16.020 Powers And Duties
2.16.010 Creation Of City Manager
The City Council hereby creates the office of City Manager pursuant to Utah Code Annotated §10-3b-
303(1) (b) (iii). The Manager is appointed by the Governing Body in accordance with Utah Code Ann.
§10-3b-302 and 303.
2.16.020 Powers And Duties
A. The City Manager shall exercise said powers and perform said duties as set forth herein or
established by ordinance or resolution. The powers and duties of the Manager will be to:
1. Faithfully execute and enforce all applicable laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations of
the City, create and administer policies, rules, and regulations unless otherwise reserved
to the Council, and see that all franchises, leases, permits, contracts, licenses, and
privileges granted by the City are observed, having been delegated all administrative
powers belonging to the Mayor and Council;
2. Function as the chief administrative officer of the City, having authority, supervision and
direction over all departments directors and direct the officers and employees of the City
through the designated department directors;
3. Appoint, remove, promote and demote any and all officers and employees of the City,
subject to all applicable personnel ordinances, rules, and regulations, except for the City
Recorder and City Treasurer. Department directors shall be appointed and removed by
the Manager only after consultation with all members of the Governing Body;
4. Carry out all policies and programs as established by the Mayor and City Council;
5. Create all necessary departments, divisions, sections, and offices necessary for the
government of the City; prepare recommendations for the governing body regarding the
addition, deletion, or reduction in municipal services;
6. Attend all meetings of the City Council and take part in its discussions and deliberations,
but without the right to vote;
7. Prepare or have prepared for the Mayor and City Council the annual budget and be
responsible for the administration of the budget upon adoption;
8. Submit to the Mayor and City Council plans and programs relating to the development
and needs of the City, and annual and special reports concerning the financial,
administrative and operational activities of the City, together with his or her evaluation and
recommendations relating to them;
9. Discharge any other duties specified by ordinance or imposed by the Mayor and City
Council.
B. Nothing in this section shall be construed to delegate to the Manager the legislative and judicial
powers of the Mayor, the Mayor’s position as chairperson of the governing body, or any ex officio
position which the Mayor shall hold.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 9/43
2.20 City Recorder
2.20.010 Appointment
2.20.020 Supervision
2.20.030 Record Keeping
2.20.040 Countersigning Contract
2.20.050 General Duties
2.20.010 Appointment
The Mayor shall appoint, with the advice and consent of at least three members of the City Council, a
City Recorder who shall perform the duties required of him/her by law, the ordinances of the City, the
laws of the State of Utah, and such other duties as the City Council may require. The City Recorder shall
serve until his/her successor is appointed, qualified, and sworn in.
(Ordinance 13-17, Amended 5/16/2017)
2.20.020 Supervision
The City Recorder shall be under the direction and supervision of the City Manager.
2.20.030 Record Keeping
The City Recorder shall keep a record of the proceedings of the City Council, whose meetings it shall be
his or her duty to attend. He or she shall accurately record all ordinances and resolutions passed by the
City Council in a book kept for that purpose. He or she shall certify to the publication of all ordinances
and retain the affidavits of publication. He or she shall attest all papers signed by the Mayor in his/her
official capacity. He or she shall also keep, in a book provided for that purpose, the names of persons
elected or appointed to any office, commission, board or committee within the City, together with the
dates on which they entered upon the duties of their respective offices or positions and the date of their
resignation or removal therefrom.
2.20.040 Countersigning Contract
The City Recorder shall countersign all contracts made on behalf of the City. Every contract made on
behalf of the City or to which the City is a party shall be void unless countersigned by the Recorder. He
or she shall maintain a record of all contracts, properly indexed, which record shall be open to the
inspection of all interested persons.
2.20.050 General Duties
The City Recorder shall perform such other duties as may be required by city ordinance or state law.
2.24 City Treasurer
2.24.010 Appointment
2.24.020 Supervision
2.24.030 Duties Of Treasurer
2.24.040 Fiscal Procedures
2.24.010 Appointment
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 10/43
The Mayor shall appoint, with the advice and consent of at least three members of the City Council, a
City Treasurer who shall perform the duties required of him/her by law, the ordinances of the City, the
laws of the State of Utah, and such other duties as the City Council may require. The City Treasurer
shall serve until his/her successor is appointed, qualified, and sworn in.
(Ordinance 13-17, Amended 5/16/2017)
2.24.020 Supervision
The City Treasurer shall be under the direction and supervision of the City Finance Director.
2.24.030 Duties Of Treasurer
The City Treasurer shall: 1) be the custodian of all money, bonds or other securities of the City; 2)
determine the cash requirements of the City and provide for the investments of all idle cash; 3) receive
all public funds and money payable to the City, within three (3) business days after collection, including
all taxes, license's, fines, intergovernmental revenue, and keep an accurate detailed account thereof in
the manner provided in the Uniform Fiscal Procedures Act for Utah Cities, and as the City Council may,
by ordinance or resolution, from time to time direct; 4) collect all special taxes and assessments as
provided by law and ordinance.
2.24.040 Fiscal Procedures
The City Treasurer shall act in conformance with and comply with the procedures set forth in the Uniform
Fiscal Procedures Act for Utah Cities.
2.28 Chief Of Police (Repealed)
2.32 City Engineer (Repealed)
2.40 City Finance Director (Repealed)
2.44 City Attorney (Repealed)
2.48 Elections
2.48.010 General, Primary, And Special Elections
2.48.020 Elective Offices And Terms
2.48.030 Cancellation Of Elections
2.48.040 Candidates
2.48.050 Objections To And Withdrawal Of Candidacy
2.48.060 Conduct Of Elections
2.48.070 Election Offences
2.48.010 General, Primary, And Special Elections
General, primary, and special elections shall be held at the times and in the manner identified in Utah
Code Ann. §20A-1-202, 20A-1-203, and 20A-9-404.
2.48.020 Elective Offices And Terms
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 11/43
There shall be elected in the year 2013 a mayor, and two councilmembers for the term of four years and
quadrennially thereafter. In the year 2015, there shall be elected three council members for a term of
four years and quadrennially thereafter.
The officers so elected shall be required to take the oath of office on the first Monday in January,
following the election, or as soon thereafter as practically possible.
(Ordinance 14-17; Amended June 6, 2017)
2.48.030 Cancellation Of Elections
Pursuant to the provisions of Utah Code Ann. §20A-1-206, if the number of candidates for the at large
offices, including eligible write-in candidates, does not exceed the number of open at-large offices, and
there are no other ballot propositions, the City Recorder may cancel the election and declare the eligible
candidates elected to office.
2.48.040 Candidates
Persons become a candidate for elective office by meeting the qualifications and deadlines, and
following the procedures found in Utah Code Ann. §20A-9-203.
2.48.050 Objections To And Withdrawal Of Candidacy
A. A Declaration of Candidacy filed in conformity with §2.48.040 is valid unless written objection
thereto is made within three (3) days after the declaration is filed. If an objection is made, notice
of the objection shall be mailed or personally delivered to the affected candidate immediately. All
objections shall be decided within forty-eight (48) hours after they are filed with the City
Recorder. If the objection is sustained by the City Recorder, it may be cured by an amendment
whereby filing a new declaration within three (3) days after the objection is sustained but in no
event later that eighteen (18) days before the day of the election. The City Recorder's decision
upon objections to form is final. The City Recorder's decision upon substantive matters is
reviewable by a District Court if prompt application is made to the Court pursuant to state law.
B. Any person who has filed a declaration of candidacy or who has been otherwise nominated, may
at any time up to twenty-three (23) days before the election withdraw the nomination by written
affidavit filed with the City Recorder.
2.48.060 Conduct Of Elections
The City Recorder shall be the election officer of the City and shall follow the election requirements
found in Utah Code Annotated, Title 20A.
2.48.070 Election Offences
Violation by any person of any of the provisions of this chapter, or any person who violates the
provisions of Title 20A, Utah Code Ann. shall be punished as set forth by state law.
2.52 Other Offices (Repealed)
2.56 Government Records Access And Management Act
2.56.010 Short Title
2.56.020 Purpose And Intent
2.56.030 Definitions
2.56.040 Right Of Public Access
2.56.050 Access To Non Public Records
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 12/43
2.56.060 Fees
2.56.070 Procedures For Access
2.56.080 Denials
2.56.090 Public Records
2.56.100 Private Records
2.56.110 Controlled Records
2.56.120 Protected Records
2.56.130 Records Classification
2.56.140 Records Retention
2.56.150 Segregation Of Records
2.56.160 Appeals
2.56.170 Judicial Review
2.56.180 Confidential Treatment Of Records For Which No Exemption Applies
2.56.190 Request To Amend A Record
2.56.200 Criminal Penalties
2.56.010 Short Title
The Ordinance is known as the "Spanish Fork City Government Records Access and Management Act".
2.56.020 Purpose And Intent
A. In enacting this act, the city recognizes two fundamental constitutional rights:
1. the right of privacy in relation to personal data gathered by the City; and
2. the public's right of access to information concerning the conduct of the public's business.
B. It is the intent of the City to:
1. establish fair information practices to prevent abuse of personal information by the City
while protecting the public's right of easy and reasonable access to unrestricted public
records;
2. provide guidelines of openness to government information and privacy of personal
information consistent with nationwide standards.
3. Establish and maintain an active, continuing program for the economical and efficient
management of the city's records as provided in this ordinance.
2.56.030 Definitions
"Audit" means:
A. a systematic examination of financial, management, program, and related records for the
purpose of statements, adequacy of internal controls, or compliance with laws and regulations; or
B. a systematic examination of program procedures and operations for the purpose of determining
their effectiveness, economy, efficiency, and compliance with statutes and regulations.
"Chronological Logs" means the regular and customary summary records of law enforcement
agencies and other public safety agencies that show the time and general nature of police, fire, and
paramedic calls made to the agency and any arrests or jail bookings made by the agency.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 13/43
"Classification", "Classify", and their derivative forms mean determining whether a record series,
record, or information within a record is public, private, controlled, or protected, or exempt from
disclosure under Utah Code Annotated §63G-2-201(3)(b).
"Computer Program" means a series of instructions or statements that permit the functioning of a
computer system in a manner designed to provide storage, retrieval, and manipulation of data from the
computer system, and any associated documentation and source material that explain how to operate
the computer program.
A. "Computer Program" does not mean
1. the original data, including numbers, text, voice, graphics, and images;
2. analysis, compilation, and other manipulated forms of the original data produced by use
of the program; or
3. the mathematical or statistical formulas (excluding the underlying mathematical
algorithms contained in the program) that would be used if the manipulated forms of the
original data were to be produced manually.
"Controlled Record" means a record containing data on individuals that is controlled as provided by
§110.
"Contractor" means
A. any person who contracts with the city to provide goods or services directly to the City; or
B. any private, nonprofit organization that receives funds from the city.
C. "Contractor" does not mean a private provider.
"Gross Compensation" means every form of remuneration payable for a given period to an individual
for services provided including salaries, commissions, vacation pay, severance pay, bonuses, and any
board, rent, housing, lodging, payments in kind, and any similar benefit received from the individual's
employer.
"Designation", "Designate" and their derivative forms means indicating, based on the city's familiarity
with a record series or based on the city's review of a reasonable sample of a record series, the primary
classification that a majority of records in a record series would be given if classified and the
classification that other records typically present in the record series would be given if classified.
"Initial Contact Report" means an initial written or recorded report, however titled, prepared by peace
officers engaged in public patrol or response duties describing official actions initially taken in response
to either a public complaint about or the discovery of an apparent violation of law, which report may
describe:
A. the date, time, location, and nature of the complaint, the incident, or offense;
B. names of victims;
C. the nature or general scope of the agency's initial actions taken in response to the incident;
D. the name, address, and other identifying information about any person arrested or charged in
connection with the incident; and
E. the identity of the public safety personnel (except undercover personnel) or prosecuting attorney
involved in responding to the initial incident.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 14/43
F. "Initial Contact Reports" do not include follow up or investigative reports prepared after the initial
contact report. However, if the information specified in Subsection A appears in follow up or
investigative reports, it may only be treated confidentially if it is private, controlled, protected, or
exempt from disclosure under Utah Code Annotated §63G-2-201(3)(b).
"Individual" means a human being.
"Person" means any individual, nonprofit or profit corporation, partnership, limited liability company,
limited liability partnership, sole proprietorship, or other type of business organization.
"Private Record" means a record containing data on individuals that is classified private as provided by
§100.
"Private Provider" means any person who contracts with the City to provide services directly to the
public.
"Protected Record" means a record that is classified protected as provided by SFMC 2.56.120.
"Record" means all books, letters, documents, papers, maps, plans, photographs, films, cards, tapes,
recording, or other documentary materials, and electronic data regardless of physical form or
characteristics, prepared, owned, used, received, or retained by the city;
A. "Record" does not mean:
1. temporary drafts or similar materials prepared for the originator's personal use or
prepared by the originator for the personal use of an individual for whom he is working;
2. materials that are legally owned by an individual in his private capacity;
3. materials to which access is limited by the laws of copyright or patent unless the copyright
or patent is owned by the City;
4. proprietary software;
5. junk mail or commercial publications received by the City or an official or employee of the
City;
6. books and other materials that are catalogued, indexed, or inventoried and contained in
the collections of libraries open to the public, regardless of physical form or characteristics
of the material;
7. daily calendars and other personal notes prepared by the originator for the originator's
personal use or for the personal use of an individual for whom he is working; or
8. computer programs as defined that are developed or purchased by or for the City for its
own use;
9. notes or internal memoranda prepared as part of the deliberative process by a member of
the judiciary, an administrative law judge, or a member of any other body charged by law
with performing a quasi judicial function.
"Record Series" means a group of records that may be treated as a unit for purposes of designation,
description, management, or disposition.
"Records Officer" means the City Recorder unless another individual is appointed by the City Manager
to work in the care, maintenance, scheduling, designation, classification, disposal, and preservation of
records.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 15/43
"Summary Data" means statistical records and compilations that contain data derived from private,
controlled, or protected information but that do not disclose private, controlled, or protected information.
"UCA" means Utah Code Annotated.
2.56.040 Right Of Public Access
A. Every person has the right to inspect a public record free of charge and the right to take a copy of
a public record during normal working hours, subject to the payment of costs and fees pursuant
to §060 of this ordinance.
B. All records are public unless otherwise expressly provided by this ordinance or State or Federal
law or regulation.
C. The following records are not public:
1. records that are appropriately classified private, controlled, or protected as allowed by
§100, 110, and 120 of this ordinance; and
2. records to which access is restricted pursuant to court rule, another state statute, federal
statute, or federal regulation, including records for which access is governed or restricted
as a condition of participation in a state or federal program or for receiving state or federal
funds.
D. Only those records specified in §100, 110, and 120 may be classified private, controlled, or
protected.
E. The City may not disclose a record that is private, controlled, or protected to any person except
as provided in Subsection (5) (b) or §050.
1. The City may, at its discretion, disclose records that are private under Subsection 100.2
or protected under §120 to persons other than those specified in §050 if the City Council,
or a designee, determines that there is no interest in restricting access to the record, or
that the interests favoring access outweigh the interest favoring restriction of access.
F. The disclosure of records to which access is governed or limited pursuant to court rule, another
state statute, federal statute, or federal regulation, including records for which access is
governed or limited as a condition of participation in a state or federal program or for receiving
state or federal funds, is governed by the specific provisions of that statute, rule or regulation.
1. This chapter applied to records described in Subsection (a) insofar as this chapter is not
inconsistent with the statute, rule, or regulation.
G. The City shall provide a person with a certificated copy of a record if:
1. the person requesting the record has a right to inspect it;
2. has identified the record with reasonable specificity; and
3. pays the lawful fees.
H. The City is not required to create a record in response to a request.
1. Nothing in this ordinance requires the City to fulfill a person's records request if the
request unreasonably duplicates prior records requests from that person.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 16/43
I. If a person requests copied of more than fifty (50) pages of records, and if the records are
contained in files that do not contain records that are exempt from disclosure, the City may:
1. provide the requester with the facilities for copying the requested records and require that
the requester make the copies him/herself; or
2. allow the requester to provide his/her own copying facilities and personnel to make the
copies at the city offices, and waive the fees for copying the records.
J. If the City owns an intellectual property right and offers the intellectual property right for sale or
license, the City may control by ordinance or policy the duplication, and distribution of the
material based on terms the City considers to be in the public interest.
1. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to limit or repair the rights or protections
granted to the city under federal copyright or patent law as a result of its ownership of the
intellectual property right.
K. The City may not use the physical form, electronic or otherwise, in which a record is stored to
deny, or unreasonably hinder the rights of persons to inspect and receive copies of a record
under this ordinance.
2.56.050 Access To Non Public Records
A. Upon request the City shall disclose a private record to:
1. The subject of the record;
2. the parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor who is the subject of the record;
3. the legal guardian of a legally incapacitated individual who is the subject of the record;
4. any other individual who:
a. has a power of attorney from the subject of the record; or
b. submits a notarized release from the subject of the record of his/her legal
representative dated no later than 90 ninety (90) days before the date the request
is made; or
5. any person to whom the record must be provided pursuant to court order.
B. Upon request, the City shall disclose a controlled record to:
1. a physician, psychologist, or certified social worker upon submission of a notarized
release from the subject of the record that is dated no more than ninety (90) days prior to
the date the request is made and a signed acknowledgment of the terms of disclosure of
controlled information as provided by Subsection b; and
2. any person to whom a record must be disclosed pursuant to court order.
3. A person who receives a record from the City in accordance with Subsection 050(2) (a).
4. may not disclose controlled information from that record to any person, including the
subject of the record.
C. If there is more than one subject of a private or controlled record, the portion of the record that
pertains to another subject shall be segregated from the portion that the requester is entitled to
inspect.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 17/43
D. Upon request the City shall disclose a protected record to:
1. the person who submitted the information in the record;
2. any other individual who
a. has a power of attorney from all persons, governmental entities, or political
subdivisions whose interests were sought to be protected by the protected
classification; or
b. submits a notarized release from their legal representatives dated no more than
ninety (90) days prior to the date the request is made; or
3. any person to whom a record must be provided pursuant to a court order.
E. The City may disclose a record classified private, controlled, or protected to another
governmental entity, city, another state, the United States, or a foreign government only as
provided by Utah Code Annotated §63G-2-206.
F. Before releasing a private, controlled, or protected record, the City shall obtain evidence of the
requester's identity.
G. The City shall disclose a record pursuant to the terms of a court order signed by a judge from a
court of competent jurisdiction, provided that:
1. the record deals with a matter in controversy over which the court has jurisdiction.
2. the court has considered the merits of the request for access to the record; and
3. The court has considered and, where appropriate, limited the requester's use and further
disclosure of the record in order to protect privacy interests in the case of private or
controlled records, business confidentiality interests in the case of records protected
under UCA Subsections 63G-2-304(1) and (2), and privacy interests or the public interest
in the case of other protected records;
4. to the extent, the record is properly classified private, controlled, or protected, the
interests favoring access, considering limitations thereon, outweigh the interests favoring
restriction of access; and
5. where access is restricted by a rule, statute, or regulation referred to in Subsection
2.56.040(3)(b) the court has authority independent of this ordinance to order disclosure.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 18/43
H. The City may disclose or authorize disclosure of private or controlled records for research
purposes if the City:
1. determines that the research purpose cannot reasonably be accomplished without use of
disclosure of the information to the researcher in individually identifiable form;
2. determines that the proposed research is bona fide, and that the value of the research
outweighs the infringement upon personal privacy;
3. requires the researcher to assure the integrity, confidentiality, and security of the records
and requires the removal or destruction of the individual identifiers associated with the
records as soon as the purpose of the research project has been accomplished;
4. prohibits the researcher from disclosing the record in individually identifiable form except
as provided in Subsection (b), or from using the record for purposes other than the
research approved by the City; and
5. secures from the researcher a written statement of his understanding of and agreement to
conditions of this subsection and his understanding that violation of the terms of this
subsection may subject him to criminal prosecution under Utah Code Annotated §63G-2-
801.
6. A researcher may disclose a record in individually identifiable form if the record is
disclosed for the purpose of auditing or evaluating the research program and no
subsequent use or disclosure of the record in individually identifiable form will be made by
the auditor or evaluator except as provided by this section.
7. The City may require indemnification as a condition of permitting research under this
subsection.
I. Under Subsections 2.56.040(5)(b) and 2.56.160(4) the City may disclose records that are private
under §100, or protected under §120 to persons other than those specified in this section.
1. Under §160 the City Council may require the disclosure of records that are private under
§100, controlled under §110, or protected under §120 to persons other than those
specified in this section.
2. Under Utah Code Annotated §63G-2-404(8) the court may require the disclosure of
records that are private under §100, controlled under §110, or protected under §130 to
persons other than those specified in this section.
2.56.060 Fees
A. The City may charge a reasonable fee to cover the City's cost of duplicating a record or
compiling a record in a form other than that maintained by the City. The fees may be set by
Resolution. The initial fee, until changed by Resolution, is as set forth in Exhibit "A" hereto.
1. The City may fulfill a record request without charge when it determines that
a. releasing the record primarily benefits the public rather than a person;
b. the individual requesting the record is the subject of the record; and
c. the requester's legal rights are directly implicated by the information in the record,
and the requester is impecunious.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 19/43
2. The City may not charge a fee for
a. reviewing a record to determine whether it is subject to disclosure; or
b. inspecting a record.
2.56.070 Procedures For Access
A. A person making a request for a record shall furnish the City with a written request containing
his/her name, mailing address, daytime telephone number if available, and a description of the
records requested that identifies the record with reasonable specificity.
B. A soon as reasonably possible, but no later than ten business days after receiving a written
request, or five business days after receiving a written request if the requester demonstrates that
expedited response to the record request benefits the public rather than the person, the City shall
respond to the request by:
1. approving the request and providing the record;
2. denying the request;
3. notifying the requester that it does not maintain the record and providing, if known, the
name and address of where the record can be found; or
4. notifying the requester that because of one of the extraordinary circumstances listed in
Subsection 4, it, cannot immediately approve or deny the request. The notice shall
describe the circumstances relied upon and specify the earliest time and date when the
records will be available.
C. The following circumstances constitute "extraordinary circumstances" that allow the City to delay
approval or denial by an additional period of time as specified in Subsection 4 if the City
determines that due to the extraordinary circumstances it cannot respond within the time limits
provided in subsection 2:
1. another governmental entity is using the record, in which case the City shall promptly
request that the governmental entity currently in possession to return the record;
2. another governmental entity is using the record as part of an audit and returning the
record before the completion of the audit would impair the conduct of the audit;
3. the request is for a voluminous quantity of records;
4. the City is currently processing a large number of record requests;
5. the request requires the City to review a large number of records to locate the records
requested;
6. the decision to release a record involves legal issues that require the City to seek legal
counsel for the analysis of statutes, rules, ordinances, regulations, or case law;
7. segregating information that the requester is entitled to inspect from information that the
requester is not entitled to inspect requires computer programming.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 20/43
D. If one of the extraordinary circumstances listed in Subsection 4, precludes approval or denial
within the time specified in Subsection 2, the following time limits apply to the extraordinary
circumstances:
1. for claims under Subsection 3(a), the governmental entity currently in possession of the
record shall return the record to the originating entity within five business days of the
request for the return unless returning the record would impair the holder's work.
2. for claims under Subsection 3(b), the originating city shall notify the requester when the
record is available for inspection and copying;
3. for claims under Subsections 3(c), (d), and (e), the City shall:
a. disclose the records that it has located which the requester is entitled to inspect.
b. provide the requester with an estimate of the amount of time it will take to finish
the work required to respond to the request; and
c. complete the work and disclose those records that requester is entitled to inspect
as soon as reasonably possible;
4. for delays under Subsection 3(f), the City shall either approve or deny the request within
five business days after the response time specified for the original request has expired;
5. for delays under Subsection 3(g), the City shall fulfill the request within 15 business days
from the date of the original request; or
6. for delays under Subsection 3(h), the City shall complete its programming and disclose
the requested records as soon as reasonably possible.
E. If the City fails to provide the requested records or issue a denial within the specified time period,
that failure is considered the equivalent of a determination denying access to the records.
2.56.080 Denials
A. If the City denies the request in whole or part, it shall provide a notice of denial to the requester
either in person or by sending the notice to the requester's address.
B. The notice of denial shall contain the following information:
1. a description of the record or portions of the record to which access was denied, provided
that the description does not disclose private, controlled, or protected information or
records to which access is restricted pursuant to court rule, another state statute, federal
statute, or federal regulation, including records for which access is governed or restricted
as a condition of participation in a state or federal program or for receiving state or federal
funds.
2. citations to the provisions of this ordinance, another state statute, federal statute, court
rule or order or federal regulation that exempt the record or portions of the record from
disclosure, provided that the citations do not disclose private, controlled or protected
information;
3. a statement that the requester has the right to appeal the denial to the City Manager; and
4. a brief summary of the appeals process, and the time limits for filing an appeal.
C. Unless otherwise required by a court or agency of competent jurisdiction, the City may not
destroy or give up custody of any record to which access was denied until the period for an
appeal has expired or the end of the appeals process, including judicial appeal.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 21/43
2.56.090 Public Records
A. The following records are public.
1. laws and ordinances;
2. names, gender, gross compensation, job titles, job descriptions, business addresses,
business telephone numbers, number of hours worked per pay period, dates of
employment, and relevant education, previous employment, and relevant education,
previous employment, and similar job qualification of the City's former and present
employees and officers excluding undercover law enforcement personnel or investigative
personnel if disclosure could reasonably be expected to impair the effectiveness of
investigations or endanger any individual's safety.
3. final opinions, including concurring and dissenting opinions, and orders that are made by
the City in an administrative, adjudicative, or judicial proceeding except that if the
proceedings were properly closed to the public, the opinion and order may be withheld to
the extent that they obtain information that is private, protected, or controlled;
4. final interpretation of statutes or rules by the City unless classified as protected as
provided in §120 (15), (16) and (17).
5. information contained in or compiled from a transcript, minutes, or report of the open
portion of a meeting of the City.
6. judicial records unless a court orders the records to be restricted under the rules of civil or
criminal procedure or unless the records are private under this ordinance;
7. data on individuals that would otherwise be private under this ordinance if the individuals
that would otherwise be private under this ordinance if the individual who is the subject of
the record has given the City written permission to make the records available to the
public;
8. documentation of the compensation that the City pays to a contractor or private provider;
and
9. summary data.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 22/43
B. The following records are normally public, but to the extent that a record is expressly exempt
from disclosure, access may be restricted under Subsection 3(b) or §100, 110 or 120:
1. administrative staff manuals, instructions to staff, and statements of policy;
2. records documenting a contractor's or private provider's compliance with the terms of a
contract with the City;
3. records documenting the services provided by a contractor or a private provider to the
extent the records would be public if prepared by the City;
4. contracts entered into by the City;
5. any account, voucher, or contract that deals with the receipt or expenditure of funds by
the City;
6. records relating to governmental assistance or incentives publicly disclosed, contracted
for, or given by the City, encouraging a person to expand or relocate a business in Utah,
except as provided in §63G-2-304(34).
7. chronological logs and initial contact reports;
8. correspondence by and with the City in which the City determines or states an opinion
upon the rights of the state, a political subdivision, the public, or any person;
9. empirical data contained in drafts if:
a. the empirical data is not reasonably available to the requester elsewhere in similar
form; and
b. the City is given a reasonable opportunity to correct any errors or make nonsubstantive
changes before release;
10. drafts that are circulated to anyone other than the City, state or to anyone other than a
federal agency if the City, state or federal agency are jointly responsible for
implementation of a program or project that has been legislatively approved; and
11. drafts that have never been finalized but were relied upon by the City in carrying out
action or policy;
12. original data in a computer program if the City chooses not to disclose the program;
13. arrest warrants after issuance, except that, for good cause, a court may order restricted
access to arrest warrants prior to service;
14. search warrants after execution and filing of the return, except that a court, for good
cause, may order restricted access to search warrants prior to trial;
15. records that would disclose information relating to formal charges or disciplinary actions
against a past or present city employee if:
a. the disciplinary action has been completed and all time periods for administrative
appeal have expired; and
b. the formal charges were sustained;
16. final audit reports;
17. occupational and professional licenses;
18. business licenses; and
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 23/43
19. a notice of violation, a notice of agency action under Utah Code Annotated § 63G-4-201,
or similar records used to initiate proceedings for discipline or sanctions against persons
regulated by the city, but not including records that initiate employee discipline.
C. The list of public records in this section is not exhaustive and should not be used to limit access
to records.
2.56.100 Private Records
A. The following records are private:
1. records concerning an individual's eligibility for unemployment insurance benefits, social
services, welfare benefits, or the determination of benefit levels;
2. records containing data on individuals describing medical history, diagnosis, condition,
treatment, evaluation, or similar medical data;
3. records of publicly funded libraries that, when examined alone or with other records,
identify a patron;
4. records concerning a current or former employee of, or applicant for employment with the
city, that would disclose that individual's home address, home telephone number, social
security number, insurance coverage, marital status, or payroll deductions.
B. The following records are private if properly classified by the City:
1. records concerning a current or former employee of, or applicant for employment with the
City, including performance evaluations and personal status information such as race,
religion, or disabilities, but not including records that are public under §2.56.090(b),(2)(0)
or private under §2.56.100(1)(d).
2. records describing an individual's finances, except that the following are public:
a. records described in §2.56.090(1).
b. information provided to the city for the purpose of complying with a financial
assurance requirement; or
c. records that must be disclosed in accordance with another statute;
C. records of independent state agencies if the disclosure of those records would conflict with the
fiduciary obligations of the agency;
D. other records containing data on individuals, the disclosure of which constitutes a clearly
unwarranted invasion of personal privacy.
E. records provided by the United States or by a governmental entity outside the state that are
given with the requirement that the records be managed as private records, if the providing entity
states in writing that the record would not be subject to public disclosure if retained by it.
2.56.110 Controlled Records
A. A record is controlled if:
1. the record contains medical, psychiatric, or psychological data about an individual;
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 24/43
2. the City reasonably believes that:
a. releasing the information in the record to the subject of the record would be
detrimental to the subject's mental health or to the safety of any individual; or
b. releasing the information would constitute a violation of normal professional
practice and medical ethics; and
c. the City has properly classified the record.
2.56.120 Protected Records
A. The following records are protected:
1. trade secrets as defined in Utah Code Annotated §13-24-2, if the person submitting the
trade secret has provided the City with the information specified in §63G-2-308.
2. commercial information or nonindividual financial information obtained from a person if:
a. disclosure of the information could reasonably be expected to result in unfair
competitive injury to the person submitting the information or would impair that
ability of the City to obtain necessary information in the future;
b. the person submitting the information has a greater interest in prohibiting access
than the public in obtaining access; and
c. the person submitting the information has provided the City with the information
specified in Utah Code Annotated §63G-2-308.
3. commercial or financial information acquired or prepared by the City to the extent that a
disclosure would lead to financial speculations in
a. currencies, securities, or commodities that will interfere with a planned transaction
by the City or cause substantial financial injury to the City or cause substantial
financial injury to the City or state economy;
4. test questions and answers to be used in future license, certifications, registration,
employment, or academic examinations;
5. records, the disclosure of which would impair governmental procurement or give an unfair
advantage to any person proposing to enter into a contract or agreement with the City,
except that this subsection does not restrict the right of a person to see bids submitted to
or by the City after bidding has closed;
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 25/43
6. records that would identify real property or the appraisal or estimated value of real or
personal property, including intellectual property, under consideration for public
acquisition before any rights to the property are acquired unless;
a. public interest in obtaining access to the information outweighs the city's need to
acquire the property on the best terms possible;
b. the information has already been disclosed to persons not employed by or under a
duty of confidentiality to the entity;
c. on the case of records that would identify property, potential sellers of the property
described have already learned of the city's plans to acquire the property;
d. on the case of records that would identify the appraisal or estimated value of
property, the potential sellers have already learned of the City's estimated value of
the property;
7. records prepared in contemplation of sale, exchange, lease, rental, or other compensated
transaction of real or personal property including intellectual property, which, if disclosed
prior to completion of the transaction, would reveal the appraisal or estimated value of the
subject property, unless:
a. the public interest in access outweighs the interests in restricting access, including
the city's interest in maximizing the financial benefit of the transaction; or
b. when prepared by or on behalf of the City, appraisals or estimates of the value of
the subject property have already been disclosed to persons not employed by or
under a duty of confidentiality to the City.
8. records created or maintained for civil, criminal, or administrative enforcement purposes,
or for discipline, licensing, certification, or registration purposes if release of the records:
a. reasonably could be expected to interfere with investigations undertaken or for
enforcement, discipline, licensing, certification, or registration purposes;
b. reasonably could be expected to interfere with audits, disciplinary, or enforcement
proceedings;
c. would create a danger of depriving a person of a right to a fair trial or impartial
hearing;
d. reasonably could be expected to disclose the identity of a source who is not
generally known outside of government and, in the case of a record compiled in
the course of an investigation, disclose information furnished by a source not
generally known outside of government if disclosure would compromise the
source; or
e. reasonably could be expected to disclose investigative or audit techniques,
procedures, policies, or orders not generally known outside of government if
disclosure would interfere with enforcement or audit efforts;
9. records, the disclosure of which would jeopardize the life or safety of an individual;
10. records, the disclosure of which would jeopardize the security of governmental property,
governmental record keeping systems from damage, theft, or other appropriation or use
contrary to law or public policy;
11. records that, if disclosed, would jeopardize the security or safety of a correctional facility
or records relating to incarceration, treatment, probation or parole;
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 26/43
12. records that, if disclosed, would reveal recommendations made to the Board of Pardons.
13. records of a governmental audit agency relating to an ongoing or planned audit until the
final audit is released;
14. records prepared by or on behalf of the City solely in anticipation of litigation that are not
available under the rules of discovery;
15. records disclosing an attorney's work product, including the mental impressions or legal
theories of an attorney or other representative of the City concerning litigation;
16. records of communications between the city and an attorney representing, retained or
employed by the city if the communications would be privileged as provided in UCA §78B-
1-137(2).
17. drafts, unless otherwise classified as public;
18. records concerning the City's strategy about collective bargaining or pending litigation;
19. records of investigations of loss occurrences and analyses of loss occurrences.
20. records, other than personnel evaluations, that contain a personal recommendation
concerning an individual if disclosure would constitute
a. a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy, or disclosure is not in the
public interest.
21. records that reveal the location of historic, prehistoric, paleontological, or biological
resources that if known would jeopardize the security of those resources or of valuable
historic, scientific, educational, or cultural information;
22. records provided by the United States or by a government entity outside the state that are
given to the City with a requirement that they be managed as protected records if the
providing entity certifies that the record would not be subject to public disclosure if
retained by it;
23. transcripts, minutes, or reports of the closed portion of a meeting of a public body except
as provided in UCA §52-4-206.
24. records that would reveal the contents of settlement negotiations but not including final
settlements or empirical data to the extent that they are not otherwise exempt from
disclosure;
25. memoranda prepared by staff and used in the decision-making process by an
administrative law judge, or a member of any other body charged by law with performing
quasi-judicial function;
26. records that would reveal negotiations regarding assistance or incentives offered by or
requested from the city for the purpose of encouraging a person to expand or locate a
business in Utah, but only if disclosure would result in actual economic harm to the
person or place the City at a competitive disadvantage, but this section may not be used
to restrict access to a record evidencing a final contract; and
27. materials to which access must be limited for purposes of securing or maintaining the
city's proprietary protection of intellectual property rights including patents, copyrights,
and trade secrets.
2.56.130 Records Classification
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 27/43
A. The City shall:
1. evaluate all record series that it uses or creates;
2. designate those record series as provided by this Ordinance
3. report the designation of its record services to the state archives.
B. The City may classify a particular record, record or series or information within a record at any
time, but is not required to classify a particular record, record series, or information until access
to the record is requested.
C. The City may redesignate a record series or reclassify a record or record series, or information
within a record at any time.
2.56.140 Records Retention
The City shall use the retention schedule as established by the State Archivist.
2.56.150 Segregation Of Records
Notwithstanding any other provision in this Ordinance, if the City receives a request for access to a
record that contains both information that the requester is entitled to inspect and information that the
requester is not entitled to inspect under this Ordinance, and, if the information the requester is entitled
to inspect is intelligible, the City:
A. shall allow access to information in the record that the requester is entitled to inspect under this
Ordinance; and
B. may deny access to information in the record if the information is exempt from disclosure to the
requester, issuing a notice of denial.
2.56.160 Appeals
A. Any person aggrieved by the City's access determination under this ordinance, may appeal the
determination as set forth herein.
If the City claims extraordinary circumstances and specifies the date when the records will be
available and, if the requester believes the extraordinary circumstances do not exist or that the
time specified is unreasonable, the requester may appeal the City's claim of extraordinary
circumstances or date for compliance within thirty (30) days after notification of a claim of
extraordinary circumstances by the City, despite the lack of "determination" or its equivalent.
B. If the appeal involves a record that is the subject of a business confidentiality claim under UCA
§63G-2-308, the City recorder shall:
1. send notice of the requester's appeal to the business confidentiality claimant within three
business days after receiving notice, except that if notice under this section must be given
to more than 35 persons, it shall be given as soon as reasonably possible;
2. send notice of the business confidentiality claim and the schedule for the city recorder's
determination to the requester within three business days after receiving notice of the
requester's appeal.
The claimant shall have seven (7) business days after notice is sent by the City Recorder
to submit further support for the claim of business confidentiality.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 28/43
C. The City Manager shall make a determination on any appeal within the following period of time:
1. within five (5) business days after the City Manager's receipt of the notice of appeal; or
2. within twelve (12) business days after the City sends the requester's notice of appeal to a
person who submitted a claim of business confidentiality.
If the City Manager fails to make determination within the time specified in Subsection (a),
the failure shall be considered the equivalent of an order denying the appeal.
The provisions of this section notwithstanding, the parties participating in the proceeding
may, by agreement, extend the time periods specified in this section.
D. The City Manager may, upon consideration and weighing of the various interests and public
policies pertinent to the classification and disclosure or nondisclosure, order the disclosure of
information properly classified as private under §100.2 or protected under §120 if the interests
favoring access outweigh the interest favoring restriction of access.
E. The City shall send written notice of the determination of the City, and to all participants. If the
City Manger affirms the denial in whole or in part, the denial shall include a statement that the
requester has the right to appeal the denial to the City Council, and the time limits for filing an
appeal.
F. The duties of the City Manager under this section may be delegated.
G. The notice of appeal to the City Council must be filed with the City Recorder no later than 30
days after the City Manager has denied the appeal or fails to make a determination within the
time specified in Subsection 160(3)(a).
H. The notice of appeal shall contain the following information:
1. the petitioner's name, mailing address, and daytime telephone number: and
2. the relief sought.
I. The petitioner may file a short statement of facts, reasons, and legal authority in support of the
appeal.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 29/43
J. No later than three days after receiving a notice of appeal, the recorder shall:
1. schedule a hearing for the city council to discuss the appeal which shall be held no
sooner than 15 days and no later than 30 days from the date of the filing of the appeal;
2. At the hearing, the City Council shall allow the parties to testify, present evidence, and
comment on the issues. The City Council may allow other interested persons to comment
on the issues.
3. No later than three business days after the hearing, the City Council shall issue a signed
order either granting the petition in whole or in part or upholding the determination of the
City Manager in whole or in part.
4. The order of the City shall include:
a. a statement of reasons for the decision, including citations to this Ordinance or
federal regulation that governs disclosure of the record provided that the citations
do not disclose private, controlled, or protected information;
b. a description of the record or portions of the record to which access was ordered
or denied, provided that the description does not disclose private, controlled, or
protected information;
c. a statement that any party to the appeal may appeal the City's decision to the
district court of Utah County; and
d. a brief summary of the appeal, and a notice that in order to protect its rights on
appeal, the party may wish to seek advice from an attorney.
K. A person aggrieved by the City's classification or designation determination under this chapter,
may appeal that determination using the procedures provided in this section.
2.56.170 Judicial Review
A. Any party to proceeding before the City Council may petition for judicial review by the district
court of Utah County of the City Council's order. The petition shall be filed no later than 30 days
after the date of the City Council's order.
2.56.180 Confidential Treatment Of Records For Which No Exemption Applies
A. A court may, on appeal or in a declaratory or other action, order the confidential treatment of
records for which no exemption from disclosure applies if:
1. there are compelling interests favoring restriction of access to the record; and
2. the interests favoring restriction of access outweigh the interests favoring access.
B. This section does not apply to records that are specifically required to be public under §2.56.090
of this Ordinance or UCA §63G-2-301 of the Utah Code Ann., except as provided in U.C.A. 63G-
2-301(3).
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 30/43
C. Access to drafts may be limited under this section, but the court may consider, in its evaluation of
interests favoring restriction of access, only those interest that relate to the underlying
information, and not to the deliberative nature of the record.
Access to original data in a computer program may be limited under this section, but the court
may consider, in its evaluation of interests favoring restriction of access, only those interests that
relate to the underlying information, and not to the status of that data as part of a computer
program.
2.56.190 Request To Amend A Record
A. Subject to U.C.A. 63G-2-603(8), an individual may contest the accuracy or completeness of any
public, private, or protected record concerning him by requesting the city to amend the record.
However, this section does not affect the right of access to private or protected records.
The request shall contain the following information:
1. The requester's name, mailing address, and daytime telephone number; and
2. a brief statement explaining why the City should amend the record.
B. The City shall issue an order either approving or denying the request to amend no later than
thirty (30) days after receipt of the request.
C. If the City approves the request, it shall correct all of its records that contain the same incorrect
information as soon as practical. A City may not disclose the record until it has amended it.
D. If the City denies the request it shall:
1. inform the requestor in writing; and
2. provide a brief statement giving its reasons for denying the request.
E. If the City denies a request to amend a record, the requester may submit a written statement
contesting the information in the record.
The City shall:
1. file the requester's statement with the disputed record if the record is in a form such that
the statement can accompany the recorder make the statement accessible if the record is
no in a form such that the statement can accompany the record; and
2. disclose the requester's statement along with the information in the record whenever the
city discloses the disputed information.
F. The requester may appeal the denial of the request to amend a record pursuant to §2.56.160.
G. This section does not apply to records relating to title to real or personal property, medical
records, judicial case files, or any other records that the city determines must be maintained in
their original form to protect the public interest and to preserve the integrity of the record system.
2.56.200 Criminal Penalties
A. A public employee or other person who has lawful access to any private, controlled, or protected
record under this chapter, and who intentionally discloses or provides a copy of a private,
controlled or protected record to any person knowing that such disclosure is prohibited, is guilty
of a class B misdemeanor.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 31/43
It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (1)(a) that the actor released private, controlled
or protected information in the reasonable belief that the disclosure of the information was
necessary to expose a violation of law involving government corruption, abuse of office, or
misappropriation of public funds or property.
It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (1) (a) that the record could have lawfully been
released to the recipient if it had been properly classified.
B. A person who by false pretenses, bribery, or theft, gains access to or obtains a copy of any
private, controlled, or protected record to which he is not legally entitled is guilty of a class B
misdemeanor.
No person shall be guilty under Subsection (2) (a) who receives the record, information, or copy
after the fact and without prior knowledge of or participation in the false pretenses, bribery, or
theft.
C. A public employee who intentionally refuses to release a record the disclosure of which the
employee knows is required by law or by final unappealed order from a city, or a court, is guilty of
a class B misdemeanor.
SCHEDULE A - FEES
Copies per page $ 0.10
Certified copies per page $ 2.00
Compilation time shall be the wage, including benefits, of the lowest paid employee qualified to
provide the requested records.
SCHEDULE B - RETENTION SCHEDULE
The retention schedule of this municipality is the schedule promulgated by the Utah Division of
Archives and Record Service for local governments.
(Res. No. 15-17, Enacted 11/03/2015)
2.60 Constitutional Taking Issues
2.60.010 Policy Considerations
2.60.020 Definitions
2.60.030 Guidelines Advisory
2.60.040 Review Of Decision
2.60.050 Reviewing Guidelines
2.60.060 Results Of Review
2.60.010 Policy Considerations
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 32/43
There is an underlying policy in Spanish Fork City strongly favoring the careful consideration of matters
involving constitutional taking claims, in fairness to the owner of private property bringing the claim and
in view of the uncertainty and expense involved in defending law suits alleging such issues. At the same
time, the legitimate role of government in lawfully regulating real property must be preserved and the
public's right to require the dedication or exaction of property consistent with the Constitution. Consistent
with this policy, it is desired that a procedure be established for the review of actions that may involve
the issue of a constitutional taking. These provisions are to assist governments in considering decisions
that may involve constitutional takings. It is intended that a procedure for such a review be provided, as
well as guidelines for such considerations. This ordinance is further intended and shall be construed to
objectively and fairly review claims by citizens that a specific government action should require payment
of just compensation, yet preserve the ability of the City to lawfully regulate real property and fulfill its
other duties and functions.
2.60.020 Definitions
A. "Constitutional Taking" means actions by the City involving the physical taking or exaction of
private real property that might require compensation to private real property owners because of:
1. The Fifth or Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States;
2. Article I, Section 22, of the Utah Constitution;
3. Any court ruling governing the physical taking or exaction of private real property by a
government entity;
B. Actions by the City involving the physical taking or exaction of private real property is not a
Constitutional Taking if the physical taking or exaction:
1. Bears an essential nexus to legitimate governmental interests; and
2. Is roughly proportionate and reasonably related, on an individualized property basis, both
in nature and extent, to the impact of the proposed development on the legitimate
government interest.
2.60.030 Guidelines Advisory
The guidelines adopted and decisions rendered pursuant to the provisions of this section are advisory,
and shall not be construed to expand or limit the scope of the City's liability for a constitutional taking.
The reviewing body or person shall not be required to make any determination under this ordinance
expect pursuant to Section 2.60.040.
2.60.040 Review Of Decision
Any owner of private real property who claims there has been a constitutional taking of their private real
property shall request a review of the final decision of any officer, employee, board, commission, or
council. The following are specific procedures established for such a review:
A. The person requesting a review must have obtained a final and authoritative determination,
internally, within the City, relative to the decision from which they are requesting review.
B. Within thirty (30) days from the date of the final decision that gives rise to the concern that a
constitutional taking has occurred, the person requesting the review shall file in writing, in the
office of the City Manager, a request for review of that decision.
C. The City Council, or an individual or body designated by the City Council, shall immediately set a
time to review the decision that gave rise to the Constitutional takings claim.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 33/43
D. In addition to the written request for review, the applicant must submit, prior to the date of the
review, the following:
1. The name of the applicant requesting review;
2. The name and business address of the current owner of the property, form of ownership,
whether sole proprietorship, corporation, not-for-profit corporation, partnership, joint
venture or other, and if owned by a corporation, partnership, or joint venture, the name
and address of all principal shareholders or partners;
3. A detailed description of the grounds for the claim that there has been a constitutional
taking;
4. A detailed description of the property taken;
5. Evidence and documentation as to the value of the property taken, including the date and
cost at the date the property was acquired. This should include any evidence of the value
of that same property before and after the alleged constitutional taking, the name of the
party from whom purchased, including the relationship, if any, between the person
requesting a review and the party from whom the property was acquired;
6. The nature of the protectable interest claimed to be affected, such as, but not limited to,
fee simple ownership, leasehold interest, etc.;
7. The terms (including sale price) of any previous purchase or sale of a full or partial
interest in the property in the three years prior to the date of application;
8. All appraisals of the property prepared for any purpose, including financing, offering for
sale, or ad valorem taxation, within the three years prior to the date of application;
9. The assessed value of and ad valorem taxes on the property for the previous three years;
10. All information concerning current mortgages or other loans secured by the property,
including name of the mortgagee or lender, current interest rate, remaining loan balance
and term of the loan and other significant provisions, including but not limited to, the right
of purchasers to assume the loan;
11. All listings of the property for sale or rent, the price asked therefore, any offers received,
all within the previous three years;
12. All studies commissioned by the petitioner or agents of the petitioner within the previous
three years concerning the feasibility of development or utilization of the property;
13. For income producing property, itemized income and expense statements from the
property for the previous three years;
14. Information from a title policy or other source showing all recorded liens or encumbrances
affecting the property;
15. Such other information as may be requested by the City Council which is reasonably
necessary, in its opinion, to arrive at a conclusion concerning whether there has been a
constitutional taking.
E. An application shall not be deemed to be "complete" or "submitted" until the reviewing body or
official certifies to the applicant, that all the materials and information required have been
received by the City. The reviewing body or official shall promptly notify the applicant of any
incomplete application.
F. The City Council, or individual or body designated by them, shall hear all the evidence related to
and submitted by the applicant, the City, or any other interested party.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 34/43
G. A final decision on the review shall be rendered within twenty-one (21) days from the date the
complete application for review has been received by the City Manager. The decision of the City
Council, or its designee, regarding the results of the review shall be given in writing to the
applicant and the officer, employee, board, commission or council that rendered the final decision
that gave rise to the constitutional takings claim.
H. If the City Council fails to hear and decide the review within twenty-one (21) days, the decision
appealed from shall be presumed to be approved.
2.60.050 Reviewing Guidelines
The City Council shall review the facts and information presented by the applicant to determine whether
or not the action by the City constitutes a constitutional taking as defined in this chapter. In doing so,
they shall consider:
A. Whether the physical taking or exaction of the private real property bears an essential nexus to a
legitimate governmental interest;
B. Whether a legitimate governmental interest exists for the action taken by the City;
C. Is the property and exaction taken, roughly proportionate and reasonably related, on an
individual property basis, both in nature and extent, to the impact caused by the activities that are
the subject of the decision being reviewed.
2.60.060 Results Of Review
After completing the review, the reviewing body or person shall make a determination regarding the
above issues and where determined to be necessary and appropriate, shall make a recommendation to
the City Council, which recommendation is not binding on the Council, nor admissible in court, as to
whether or not there has been a constitutional taking.
2.64 Campaign Finance Disclosure
2.64.010 General
2.64.020 Definitions
2.64.030 Filing Of Disclosure Reports
2.64.040 At Time Of Filing
2.64.050 Contents Of Statements
2.64.060 Public Information
2.64.070 Penalty For Noncompliance
2.64.010 General
All candidates for elective municipal office shall comply with the campaign finance disclosure
requirements set forth in this chapter.
2.64.020 Definitions
The following definitions shall be applicable to this Chapter:
"Candidate" shall mean any person who files a declaration of candidacy for an elective office of the City;
or is nominated by petition; or received contributions or made expenditures or consents to another
person receiving contributions or making expenditures with a view to bringing about such person's
nomination or election to such office; or causes on his/her behalf, any written material or advertisement
to be printed published, broadcast, distributed or disseminated which indicates an intention to seek such
office.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 35/43
"Contribution" shall mean monetary and non-monetary contributions such as in-kind contributions and
contributions of tangible things but shall not include personal services provided without compensation by
individuals volunteering their time on behalf of a candidate.
"Expenditure" shall mean a purchase, payment distribution, loan, advance, deposit or gift of money or
anything of value made for the purpose of influencing the nomination or election of any candidate.
2.64.030 Filing Of Disclosure Reports
Each candidate for elective office shall file with the City Recorder dated and signed financial reports
which comply with this chapter. Forms shall be made available by the City. Other forms in substantially
the same format are also acceptable.
2.64.040 At Time Of Filing
The reports required by this Chapter shall be filed at least 7 days before the municipal primary and
general election and no later than 30 days after the municipal general election. A candidate eliminated in
the primary election shall file the required report within 30 days after the date of the primary election.
(Ordinance 14-17; Amended June 6, 2017)
2.64.050 Contents Of Statements
A. Except as set forth in subparagraph (B), the campaign finance statements required herein shall
include:
1. a list of each contribution, by amount and donor, made up to five days prior to the due
date of the campaign finance statement, excluding a contribution previously reported;
2. a list of each expenditure made up to five days prior to the due date of the campaign
finance statement, excluding an expenditure previously reported.
B. The campaign finance statement shall report, in aggregate, the total amount of all contributions
and expenditures if the total of all contributions and all expenditures is less than $500.00. If,
between a prior report and the next report due, total contributions or expenditures have
exceeded $500.00, all contributions and expenditures shall be accounted for as set forth in
subparagraph (A).
C. All contributions and expenditures related to the candidate's candidacy should be accounted for
between the pre-election and post-election statements.
(Ordinance 14-17; Amended June 6, 2017)
2.64.060 Public Information
The statements required by this chapter shall be public documents and shall be available for public
inspection and copying during regular business hours. Appropriate costs may be assessed pursuant to
the provisions of the Government Records Access and Management Act.
2.64.070 Penalty For Noncompliance
Any candidate who fails to comply with the provisions this chapter is guilty of an infraction.
(Ord. No. 07-12, Enacted 05/15/2012)
2.68 Municipal Ethics Commission
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 36/43
2.68.010 Purpose
2.68.020 Definitions
2.68.030 Municipal Officers' And Employees' Ethics Act
2.68.040 City Attorney Advisory Opinions
2.68.050 Municipal Ethics Commission
2.68.060 Filing Of Ethics Complaints With Commission
2.68.070 Privacy
2.68.080 Initial Review
2.68.090 Consideration Of Complaint After Acceptance
2.68.100 Contempt Powers
2.68.110 Request By Elected Or Appointed Official For Legal Representation
2.68.120 Determination By Commission
2.68.130 Action By City Council
2.68.140 Knowingly Filing Of False Complaint
2.68.150 Annual Commission Report
2.68.010 Purpose
The purpose of this Chapter is to create an independent means of investigating and making
recommendations concerning alleged violations of the Municipal Officers’ and Employees’ Ethics Act. It
also seeks to increase public confidence by assuring that governmental actions are taken ethically.
2.68.020 Definitions
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have these meanings:
"Commission" means the Municipal Ethics Commission formed pursuant to Section 2.68.050.
"Elected officials" includes only the Mayor and members of the City Council.
"Appointed official" means the City Manager.
2.68.030 Municipal Officers' And Employees' Ethics Act
Elected and appointed officials of the City are required to comply with the Municipal Officers' and
Employees' Ethics Act (Utah Code §10-3-1301 et seq. as amended), which is incorporated herein by
reference.
2.68.040 City Attorney Advisory Opinions
A. Elected and appointed officials of the City may request of the City Attorney an advisory opinion
concerning the application of the Municipal Officers' and Employees' Ethics Act. The City
Attorney shall accept and process these advisory opinion requests. The City Attorney shall
render a written opinion to the Mayor, City Council, and to the City Manager within 45 days of
receiving such a request. All advisory opinions shall be available for public review, but may be in
such form and with such deletions as may be necessary to prevent the disclosure of the identity
of the persons involved or to protect personal privacy interests.
B. An advisory opinion rendered by the City Attorney, until amended or revoked by the City
Attorney, shall be a defense in any action brought by a complainant against the elected or
appointed official and shall be binding on the City in any subsequent proceedings concerning the
person who requested the opinion and who acted in good faith upon it, unless material facts were
omitted or misstated by the person requesting the opinion.
2.68.050 Municipal Ethics Commission
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 37/43
A. The City, along with other Utah County cities, establishes a Municipal Ethics Commission
pursuant to Utah Code §10-3-1311 and Utah Code §11-13-101 et seq. The Commission shall be
a three (3) person commission as provided for in an Interlocal Agreement between the
participating municipalities. Upon receiving a complaint, the membership of the Commission shall
be determined by random selection from the pool of eligible participating municipalities.
B. The City Attorney’s Office shall provide the Commission such administrative or other support as
requested by the Commission.
2.68.060 Filing Of Ethics Complaints With Commission
A. A complaint may only be filed with the Commission under the following conditions:
1. The complaint must be against an elected or appointed official of the City who is currently
serving in their elected or appointed position. The complaint must allege a violation of the
Municipal Officers' and Employees' Ethics Act;
2. The complaint must be filed with the City Recorder;
3. The complaint must be made by either:
a. two or more registered voters who reside within the boundaries of the City; or
b. two or more registered voters who pay a fee or tax to the City; or
c. one or more registered voters who reside within the boundaries of the City plus
one or more registered voters who pay a fee or tax to the City;
4. The complaint must be based upon direct evidence or sworn statements by one or more
people with actual knowledge of the facts and circumstances supporting the alleged
ethics violation;
5. The complaint may not be filed during the sixty (60) calendar days immediately preceding
a municipal primary election, if the accused elected or appointed official is a candidate in
the primary election;
6. The complaint may not be filed during the sixty (60) calendar days immediately preceding
a municipal general election in which the accused elected or appointed official is a
candidate, unless the accused elected or appointed official is unopposed in the election;
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 38/43
7. The complaint must be in writing and contain:
a. the name and position of the elected or appointed official alleged to be in violation;
b. the name, address, and telephone number of each individual who is filing the
complaint;
c. a description of each alleged violation of the Municipal Officers' and Employees'
Ethics Act, including a reference to the section of the Act alleged to have been
violated;
d. with reasonable specificity, evidence supporting each allegation, which shall be
provided by copies of official records, documentary evidence, or affidavits that
include the required information;
e. a list of witnesses that a complainant wishes to have called or interviewed,
including for each witness: the name, address, and, if available, one or more
telephone numbers of the witness; a brief summary of the testimony to be
provided by the witness; a specific description of any documents or evidence a
complainant desires the witness to produce;
f. a statement that each complainant:
(1) has reviewed the allegations contained in the complaint and the sworn
statements and documents attached to the complaint;
(2) believes that the complaint is submitted in good faith and not for any
improper purpose such as harassing the named elected or appointed
official, causing unwarranted harm to the accused elected or appointed
official's reputation, or causing unnecessary expenditure of public funds;
and
(3) believes the allegations contained in the complaint to be true and accurate.
vii. a statement with the signature of each complainant.
B. Upon receipt of any ethics complaint, the City Recorder shall select the commission using the
procedures set forth in the Interlocal Agreement, inform the city attorneys from the selected cities
of their selection, then immediately refer the complaint to the commission. The City Recorder
shall not notify or inform any other person of the filing of the complaint.
C. A person filing a complaint under this Chapter is not entitled to reimbursement for attorney fees
or costs incurred, regardless of the outcome of the proceedings.
D. An administrative fee of $50 must be filed with the complaint. The $50 filing fee must be paid to
the city where the complaint is filed. After the selected commission elects a chairperson, the $50
administrative fee will be paid to the chairperson’s city to defray the costs of administering the
complaint.
2.68.070 Privacy
A. Once an ethics complaint has been filed with the City Recorder, neither the City Recorder, the
Commission, nor any City employee may disclose the existence of the complaint, any response
to the complaint, or any information concerning the alleged ethics violation that is the subject of
the complaint, unless otherwise provided in this Chapter.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 39/43
B. Nothing in the restrictions above may be construed to hinder or prevent a person or the City
Attorney from disclosing the facts or allegations about potential criminal violations to a law
enforcement authority.
C. Nothing in this Section may be construed to hinder or prevent the named elected or appointed
official from preparing a defense to a complaint, including contacting witnesses or taking other
actions in preparation for review by the Commission.
D. Nothing in this Section may be construed to hinder or prevent any person from disclosing public
records.
E. If any employee or official of the City publicly discloses any private information, appropriate
disciplinary action may be taken against such individual.
F. If a complainant publicly discloses any private records or information obtained from private
records, the Commission may summarily dismiss the complaint without prejudice.
G. All records, that are not public records, received by or generated by or for the Commission are
private and not subject to disclosure or release, except for the Commission's summary findings
and recommendation to the City Council or any document that is classified as public in
accordance with Utah Code §63G-2-301.
2.68.080 Initial Review
A. Within twenty (20) business days after receipt of an ethics complaint, the Commission shall
examine the complaint to determine if it is in compliance with the filing requirements of this
Chapter.
B. If the Commission determines that the complaint does not comply with the filing requirements of
this Chapter, the Commission shall return the complaint to the first complainant named on the
complaint with a statement detailing the reason(s) for non-compliance. At the same time, the
Commission shall notify the City Manager, Mayor, City Council, and the City Attorney that a
complaint filed against an unidentified elected or appointed official has been returned for noncompliance
with this Chapter and the fact that a complaint was filed and returned shall be kept
confidential as to any others. If a complaint is returned by the Commission, the complainants
may file another complaint if the new complaint independently meets the filing requirements of
this Chapter.
C. If the Commission determines that the complaint complies with the filing requirements of this
Chapter, the Commission shall:
1. Accept the complaint;
2. Promptly forward the complaint to the elected or appointed official who is named in the
complaint, together with directions for providing a response to the Commission;
3. If appropriate, request assistance from the Office of the City Attorney; and
4. Notify the complainants, the named elected or appointed official, the City Recorder, and
the employees in the Office of the City Attorney of the privacy requirements of this Article.
D. At its discretion, the Commission may determine whether the subject of the complaint should be
investigated by a law enforcement agency.
E. If the Commission learns that the subject of the complaint is under criminal investigation, the
Commission may suspend its review of the complaint pending the resolution of the criminal
investigation.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 40/43
F. The named elected or appointed official shall have the right to present an answer to the
complaint. The answer may contain statements, arguments, and evidence. The answer must be
filed within ten (10) business days from the date the complaint was forwarded to the elected or
appointed official.
G. The Commission shall dismiss an ethics complaint if:
1. The named elected or appointed official resigns or is removed from office;
2. The named elected or appointed official is charged with a criminal violation of the
Municipal Officers' and Employees' Ethics Act where the facts and allegations presented
in the ethics complaint assert substantially similar facts and allegations as those asserted
in the criminal charges; or
3. The allegations in the complaint, if assumed to be true, do not state a violation of the
Municipal Officer's and Employees' Ethics Act.
2.68.090 Consideration Of Complaint After Acceptance
A. After acceptance of a complaint, the Commission has the discretion to:
1. Conduct a confidential, independent administrative investigation of the complaint;
2. Refer the matter to an independent non-criminal investigator for fact finding and
investigation and consider the confidential report of the investigator;
3. Conduct a hearing in accordance with Subsection B of this Section; or
4. Any combination of the above.
B. If the Commission uses a hearing to review the complaint, the Commission shall:
1. Assure that the hearing includes opening arguments, presentation of evidence, witnesses
and rebuttal, consideration of motions, and closing arguments;
2. Close the hearing to the public;
3. Allow the complainants and the named elected or appointed official to retain legal
representation, at their discretion; and
4. Provide administrative subpoenas pursuant to its subpoena powers.
C. For any hearing the Commission must provide a notice to the first named complainant and the
named elected or appointed official at least five (5) business days prior to the hearing.
D. The Commission shall determine whether the subject matter of the complaint was previously the
subject of a filing, public disclosure, or a City Attorney ethics advisory opinion. The Commission
shall take into consideration efforts by the named elected or appointed official to seek legal
direction regarding the subject matter of the complaint and any good faith efforts by the named
elected or appointed official in response to legal advice received.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 41/43
E. The Commission shall ensure that a record of any Commission meeting or hearing is made,
which shall include:
1. Official summaries or minutes taken during the meeting or hearing;
2. Copies of all documents or other items admitted into evidence or considered by the
Commission;
3. Copies of a document or written order or ruling issued by the Commission;
4. Any other information the Commission deems relevant to the findings and
recommendation; and
5. The Commission has the discretion to make an Audio recording. If an audio recording is
made, it shall also be kept as part of the record.
6. The record shall be kept for the length of time required by the retention schedule
prepared by the State Archivist.
2.68.100 Contempt Powers
A. The Commission may hold a person in contempt if the person:
1. Refuses to answer a question, without legal justification, after being directed by the
Commission to answer; or
2. Fails to comply with a subpoena issued by the Commission.
B. Upon finding a person in contempt, the Commission shall report the person to the Fourth District
Court and request a warrant of attachment or order to show cause, as provided in Utah Code
§78B-6-313.
2.68.110 Request By Elected Or Appointed Official For Legal Representation
A. The named elected or appointed official may request that the City provide legal counsel to
defend the official if the complaint arises from an act or omission during the performance of
official duties, within the scope of employment, or under the color of authority.
B. The City is obligated to provide legal counsel, upon request, if the Council finds that the
allegations in the complaint arise from an act or omission during the performance of official
duties, within the scope of employment, or under the color of authority. If no request for legal
counsel is made prior to the filing of an answer to the complaint, the City has no obligation to
provide legal counsel, but has the discretion to provide part or all of the cost of legal counsel
despite the late request.
2.68.120 Determination By Commission
A. After review of the complaint, the Commission shall determine whether there is clear and
convincing evidence supporting a violation of the Municipal Officers' and Employees' Act by the
named elected or appointed official. If there are multiple alleged violations, the Commission shall
separately determine whether clear and convincing evidence supports each alleged violation.
The determination shall be by majority vote of the Commission.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 42/43
B. If the Commission determines that no allegations in the complaint were proved, the Commission
shall:
1. Issue an order that the complaint is dismissed because no allegations in the complaint
were found to have been proven;
2. Provide notice of the determination of no violation by an unidentified elected or appointed
official at a regular public meeting of the City Council; and
3. Provide written notice of the determination to the named elected or appointed official and
the first named complainant on the complaint.
C. If the Commission determines that one or more of the allegations in the complaint were proved,
the Commission shall:
1. Prepare written summary findings:
a. Listing the name of each complainant and the name of the elected or appointed
official;
b. For each allegation that was proven:
(1) Provide the reference to the Municipal Officers' and Employees' Act;
(2) Summarize the evidence supporting a violation by clear and convincing
evidence;
(3) Make factual findings; and
c. Recommend appropriate action to the City Council.
2. Notify the named elected or appointed official and the first complainant on the complaint
of the written summary findings and recommendation for the City Council; and
3. Report the summary findings and recommendation to the City Council in a regular
meeting of the City Council.
D. If the Commission finds a violation of the Municipal Officers' and Employees' Ethics Act, the
Commission may recommend to the City Council any appropriate action or remedy, including but
not limited to censure, reprimand, additional ethics training, or removal from office. The
Commission's recommendation may depend on the severity of the violation, the elected or
appointed official's intent, any history or pattern of abuse by the named elected or appointed
official, and any economic or other benefit received by the named elected or appointed official.
2.68.130 Action By City Council
A. Upon receipt of any finding of violation of the Municipal Officers' and Employees' Ethics Act and
recommendation by the Commission, the City Council shall review the recommendation and take
action at its discretion.
B. The elected or appointed official referred for a violation may not participate in the City Council's
deliberation or cast a vote as the City Council decides whether to take action and what action to
take.
2.68.140 Knowingly Filing Of False Complaint
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=2_ADMINISTRATION_OF_GOVERNMENT 43/43
Any person who files a complaint against an elected or appointed official pursuant to this Chapter,
knowing that such complaint is frivolous, malicious, false, or otherwise without merit, shall be guilty of a
class B misdemeanor.
2.68.150 Annual Commission Report
A. If there has been any activity by the Commission during the previous year involving an elected or
appointed official of the City, the Commission shall prepare a summary report that contains:
1. A general description of the activities of the Commission during the past year;
2. The number of ethics complaints filed with the Commission;
3. The number of ethics complaints dismissed; and
4. An executive summary of each complaint where the Commission found a violation of the
Municipal Officers' and Employees' Ethics Act or other applicable local ordinance.
B. The annual report of the Commission shall be filed with the Recorder and shall be a public
record.
(Ord. No. 11-14, Enacted 05/21/2014)
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=3_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 1/23
3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
3.04 Claims Against The City
3.08 Purchasing System
3.12 Collection Of Special Improvement Taxes
3.16 Special Improvement Guaranty Fund
3.20 Uniform Local Sales And Use Tax
3.24 Recreation, Arts, And Parks Tax
3.32 Municipal Energy Sales And Use Tax
3.36 Telecommunication Service Sales And Use Tax
3.40 Transient Room Tax
3.04 Claims Against The City
3.04.010 Claims Against The City In General
3.04.010 Claims Against The City In General
Every person asserting a claim against the City shall be required to comply in all respects with the
provisions of the Utah Governmental Immunity Act, Utah Code Ann. §63-30-1 et seq. Any such claim
received by the City shall be submitted to Utah Risk Management Mutual Association for review and
handling. Any claimant shall be required to provide such additional information as may be requested by
URMMA. Any claim referred back to the City by URMMA, on the basis that the City lacks coverage for
that particular claim, shall be referred to the City council for review and disposal. The City council shall
have full authority to settle and/or litigate any such claim.
3.08 Purchasing System
3.08.010 System Adopted
3.08.020 Definitions
3.08.030 Administration
3.08.040 Bid Process
3.08.050 Choice Of Bid Process
3.08.060 Awarding Of Bids And RFP's
3.08.070 Exceptions To Bidding Requirements
3.08.080 Interlocal Agreements In Letting Of Contracts For Commodities Or Services
3.08.090 Disposal Or Lease Of Public Property
3.08.100 Penalties
3.08.010 System Adopted
Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated §10-6-122, §10-7-20, §10-8-1, §10-8-2, and other pertinent provisions
of the laws of the state of Utah, there is adopted and established a purchasing system for Spanish Fork
City Corporation which shall be based on the following principles.
(Ord. No. 01-99, Amended, 01/05/1999)
3.08.020 Definitions
Unless the context requires otherwise, the terms as used in this chapter, shall have the following
meanings:
"Adequate Appropriation Balance" means sufficient fund balance which must exist in the line item
appropriation in the approved budget against which the purchase order is to be charged.
"Bidding" means the procedure used to solicit quotations on price and delivery from various prospective
suppliers of supplies, equipment and contractual services.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=3_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 2/23
“Bid Process” means the process used by the City to solicit and award bids or contracts. Examples of
bid processes used in this chapter include formal competitive bidding, competitive sealed proposals in
lieu of bids and open market procedure.
“Capital Improvements Projects” means any construction which adds to or improves infrastructure or
buildings of the City.
"Construction" means the process of building, renovating or demolishing any public structure or
building, major developmental work, or landscaping of public real property. It does not include the
routine operations, routine repair, or routine maintenance of existing structures, buildings or real
property.
“Line Item Change Order” means changes to the quantities of existing line items with unit pricing
approved according to the purchasing system.
"Local Bidder" means a firm or individual who regularly maintains a place of business and transacts
business in, or maintains an inventory of merchandise for sale in, or is licensed by, or pays business
taxes to the City.
“Professional Services” means, but not be limited to, the following: auditing, architecture, banking,
insurance, engineering, appraisals, legal services, and other consulting services.
"Public Property" Any item of real or personal property owned by the City.
"Responsible Bid" means an offer, submitted by a responsible bidder to furnish supplies, equipment or
contractual services in conformity with the specifications, delivery terms and conditions, and other
requirements included in the invitation for bids.
"Lowest Responsible bidder" means a person or firm who has the capability in all respects to perform
fully the contract requirements and who has the integrity and reliability which will assure good faith
performance. The lowest responsible bidder is a bidder who has submitted the lowest bid to furnish
supplies or contractual services to the City, and who meets the standards set forth in this definition. The
lowest responsible bidder's bid shall comply with the specifications, delivery terms and conditions, and
other qualifications and requirements included in the invitation for bids, and shall be accompanied by
any bonds required by the City or other applicable law. In determining the lowest responsible bidder, the
City shall give primary emphasis to bid price, but may also consider the following items in addition to the
actual bid price:
A. The ability, capacity, experience and skill of the bidder to perform the service required.
B. Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide his or her services within the time
specified.
C. The quality and performance of previous services by the bidder, either to the City or another
entity.
D. Quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or contractual services to the particular use
required.
E. The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service.
F. The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid or price quotation.
G. The maintenance history of the product, the parts and service costs of the product, existing
inventory, mechanic's expertise, and ease of maintenance.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=3_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 3/23
All bidders shall furnish information and data requested by the City that will assist the City in determining
whether or not a particular bidder is the "lowest responsible bidder".
"Supplies, Materials and Equipment" means any tangible and all articles of personal property or things
which shall be furnished to or used by any City department or by any City employee in the performance
of his or her duties. For purposes of brevity, supplies, materials and equipment shall hereafter be
collectively referred to as "supplies".
(Ord. No. 01-99, Rep/Reenact 01/05/1999)
3.08.030 Administration
The City Finance Director or his/her designee, shall function as the chief procurement officer for the City.
He/she shall administer the purchasing system provided by this chapter, shall perform the duties and
have the powers concerning purchasing as follows:
A. Administer and maintain the purchasing system;
B. Recommend to the City such new or revised purchasing requirements as are deemed desirable
and in conformance with other statutory requirements;
C. Negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for the purchase of supplies, equipment and
contractual services;
D. Seek to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases;
E. Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, i.e., prices, market conditions,
new products, etc.;
F. Prescribe and maintain such forms as are reasonably necessary to the operation of this chapter
and other rules and regulations;
G. Supervise the inspection of all supplies and equipment to assure conformance with
specifications;
H. Transfer surplus or unused supplies and equipment between departments as needed;
I. Maintain a bidders' list, vendors' catalog file, and other records needed for the efficient operation
of the purchasing system.
(Ord. No. 01-99, Amended 01/05/1999)
(Ord. No. 09-10, Amended 06/04/2010)
3.08.040 Bid Process
The City shall substantially comply with the following guidelines for the specific bid process used:
A. Formal Competitive Bidding.
1. Notice Inviting Bids Issued
a. Notice includes a general description of the articles to be purchased or the work to
be performed, the location where bid plans and specifications may be secured,
and the time and place for opening bids.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=3_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 4/23
b. The notice inviting bids shall be:
(1) In cases involving building improvements or public works projects over the
bid limit as defined in Utah Code Ann. §11-39-101:
(A) Published twice (2) in a newspaper of general circulation within the
City five (5) days before the date of the opening of the bids and, at
the discretion of the City, may be;
(a) Delivered to all known responsible prospective bidders,
including those whose names are on a bidders' list or who
have made a written request that their names be added to
the bidders' list.
(b) Posted on an electronic bid page which is accessible to
large numbers of potential bidders.
(2) In cases involving building improvements or public works projects less than
the bid limit, or the purchase of any supplies, materials and equipment:
(A) Perform the work itself, purchase off the State Bid, or, at the
discretion of the City, bid requests may be;
(B) Delivered to all known responsible prospective bidders and/or
suppliers, including those whose names are on a bidders' list or
who have made a written request that their names be added to the
bidders' list, or
(C) Post on an electronic bid page which is accessible to large
numbers of potential bidders.
2. State Bid List. If there is a quotation for the item desired to be purchased on the State
bid list, the City may invite prospective bidders to bid against the price quoted in the State
bid list.
3. Bid Procedure
a. Sealed bids shall be submitted as designated in the notice with the statement "Bid
for (item or project)" on the envelope.
b. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the notice.
c. A tabulation of all bids received shall be open for public inspection during regular
business hours for a period of not less than thirty (30) days after the bid opening.
d. Bids submitted to the City shall be evaluated on the basis of compliance with
specifications and other relevant criteria.
4. Bid Award. Bids shall be awarded or rejected as set forth in Section 3.08.060.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=3_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 5/23
B. Competitive Sealed Proposals in Lieu of Bids (RFP) This bid process may only be used when
the City Finance Director or designee determines that the use of formal competitive bidding is
either impractical or not advantageous to the City, or for professional service contracts.
1. Notice shall be given by:
a. Solicitation through a request for proposals. Request are to be delivered to all
known responsible prospective bidders or suppliers, including those whose names
are on a bidders' list or who have made a written request that their names be
added to the bidders' list, and/or
b. Public notice of the request for proposals may be given by publication once in a
newspaper, magazine or journal likely to give notice to qualified bidders or
suppliers five (5) days prior to the date of bid opening and/or
c. Posting on an electronic bid page which is accessible to large numbers of
potential bidders.
2. Request for Proposals. The request for proposals shall state the relative importance of
price and other evaluating factors.
3. Opening of Proposals
a. Proposals shall be opened so as to avoid disclosure of contents to competing
bidders during the process of negotiation.
b. A register of proposals shall be maintained by the City for thirty (30) days after the
contract award and shall be open for public inspection.
4. Revision of Proposals
a. As provided in the request for proposals, discussions may be conducted with
responsible bidders who submit proposals determined to be reasonably
susceptible of being selected for award. The purpose of the discussion is to
assure full understanding of and responsiveness to the solicitation requirements.
b. Bidders shall be accorded fair and equal treatment with respect to any opportunity
for discussion and revision of proposals. Any revision may be permitted after
submissions and prior to award for the purpose of obtaining best and final offers.
c. In conducting discussions, there shall be no disclosure of any information derived
from proposals submitted by competing bidders.
5. Award of Proposal. Award shall be made to the responsible bidder whose proposal is
determined to be the most advantageous to the City, taking into consideration price, the
evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals, and other criteria set forth herein.
The City may further negotiate terms in order to comply with budgets, specific
services/products sought, and other matters beneficial to the City. The award shall be in
accordance with section 3.08.060.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=3_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 6/23
C. Open Market Procedure
1. Supplies may be purchased through supplier accounts the City has opened with various
vendors. Employees are encouraged to use sales events for those common supplies sold
through various public vendors.
2. Purchases shall, whenever possible, be based on at least three (3) bids (price quotations)
and shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder.
3. Bids (price quotations) shall be solicited from prospective vendors by written or oral
request.
4. The City Finance Director or his/her designee may approve purchases on the open
market.
(Ord. No. 01-99, Amended 01/05/1999)
(Ord. No. 17-11, Amended 12/20/2011)
3.08.050 Choice Of Bid Process
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter or by provisions of State or Federal law, purchases of
supplies, services, or equipment shall follow one of the bid or rfp processes outlined below for the
appropriate dollar amount. In cases where more than one alternative is listed as acceptable for a given
dollar amount, any of the listed alternatives shall be acceptable. The City shall not incur any liability for
choosing one alternative over another. The choices of bid process are as follows:
A. Purchases of supplies or services having an estimated value in excess of seventy five thousand
dollars ($75,000.00) shall be pursuant to one of the following procedures:
1. State bid.
2. Formal competitive bidding, without the requirement of publishing notice.
3. Competitive sealed proposals in lieu of bids.
B. Purchases of supplies or services having an estimated value of greater than five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00) but less than or equal to seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) shall be
pursuant to one of the following procedures:
1. State bid.
2. Formal competitive bidding, without the requirement of publishing notice.
3. Competitive sealed proposals in lieu of bids.
4. Open market procedure.
C. Whenever the supplies or services have an estimated value of $5,000.00 or less, all bid
processes and price solicitation procedures may be dispensed with.
(Ord. No. 01-99, Amended 01/05/1999)
(Ord. No. 17-11, Amended 12/20/2011)
3.08.060 Awarding Of Bids And RFP's
A. Bids/Purchases in Relation to Budget. Except as otherwise required by law, building
improvement or public works projects and supplies, services, and equipment, no more than the
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=3_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 7/23
lesser of $10,000.00 or 10% of the appropriation balance, and within the scope of the project, as
budgeted by the City Council, may be accepted and awarded by the City Finance Director or
designee. Bids which exceed the budgeted amounts by more than the lesser of $10,000.00 or
10% of the appropriation balance must be approved and awarded by the City Council.
B. Professional Services. Contracts for professional services in an estimated amount no more
than the lesser of $10,000.00 or 10% of the appropriation balance, and within the scope of or
related to the project, as budgeted by the City Council, may be accepted and awarded by the
City Finance Director or designee. Proposals which exceed the budgeted amounts by more than
the lesser of $10,000.00 or 10% of the appropriation balance must be approved and awarded by
the City Council.
C. Rejection of Bids. The City Council or the City Finance Director or his/her designee, or others
authorized to accept and award bids may reject any and all bids presented, and may resolicit for
bids as set forth in this Chapter. The City may proceed to do any work itself after rejecting all
bids, by following the procedures set forth in Utah Code Ann. §11-39-103.
D. Lowest Responsible Bidder. Except as otherwise allowed or required, the City shall award the
contract or bid to the lowest responsible bidder.
E. Negotiation of Bids. Where a bid exceeds available funds and time or economic considerations
preclude re-solicitation of work or purchase of a reduced scope or quantity, the City Finance
Director or designee may negotiate an adjustment of the bid price, including changes in the bid
requirements, with the lowest responsible bidder, in order to bring the low bid within the amount
of available funds.
F. Tie Bids. If two (2) or more of the bids received are for the same total amount or list price, quality
and service being equal, the City Finance Director or designee may negotiate with the bidders
and obtain the best bid possible and/or give a preference to a local bidder.
G. Single Bids. The City Finance Director or his/her designee may require a price or cost analysis if
only one bid is received. The bidder may be required to furnish a detailed cost proposal, and the
bid award shall be subject to subsequent negotiation.
H. Bonds. Before entering a contract, the City shall have authority to require performance,
payment, or other bonds in such amounts as deemed necessary to protect the interests of the
City. The types and amounts of the bonds to be required shall be described in the notice inviting
bids.
I. Change orders. Change orders which increase the contract price in an amount of the lesser of
$10,000.00 or 10% of the contract amount may be approved by the City Finance Director or
designee, as long as the overall project budget is not exceeded by more than the lesser of
$10,000.00 or 10% of the contract price, and provided further that the sum of all change orders
does not increase the contract price by more than the lesser of $10,000.00 or 10% of the
contract amount. Line item change orders may be approved by the City Finance Director or
designee as long as the overall project budget is not exceeded by more than the lesser of
$10,000.00 or 10% of the contract price.
(Ord. No. 01-99, Rep/Reenact 01/05/1999)
(Ord. No. 15-05, Amended 12/06/2005)
(Ord. No. 17-11, Amended 12/20/2011)
(Ord. No. 10-13, Amended 07/16/2013)
3.08.070 Exceptions To Bidding Requirements
Unless otherwise required by State or Federal law, the bid process requirements set forth in section
3.08.050 do not apply in the following situations.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=3_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 8/23
A. Professional service contracts
1. Professional services shall include, but not be limited to, the following: auditing,
architecture, banking, insurance, engineering, appraisals, legal services, and other
consulting services. Professional service contracts shall be awarded based on
professional qualifications, service ability, cost of service, and other criteria deemed
important by the City.
2. A professional services contract for the annual fiscal year financial audit shall only be
awarded by the City Council. This contract may be awarded for multiple years. The
performance of the auditing firm may be reviewed periodically to determine whether to
continue the contract or put it back out to bid.
B. Contracts Not Suited to Competitive Bidding. Contracts, which by their nature are not suited
to award by competitive bidding, shall not be subject to the competitive bidding requirements of
Section 3.08.040. These contracts include, but are not necessarily limited to:
1. Contracts for items which may only be purchased from a single or sole source.
2. Contracts for additions to and repairs and maintenance of equipment owned by the City
which may be more efficiently added to, repaired or maintained by a particular person or
firm.
3. Contracts for equipment which, by reason of the training of City personnel or the inventory
of replacement parts maintained by the City, is more compatible with the existing
equipment owned by the City.
C. Library Purchases. The purchase of library books, records, tapes, films, publications,
periodicals and subscriptions are specifically exempted from competitive bidding requirements.
D. Auction, Closeout, Bankruptcy Sales. If the City Finance Director or designee determines that
supplies, materials or equipment can be purchased at any public auction, closeout sale,
bankruptcy sale or other similar sale, and if the City Manager or his/her designee finds that a
purchase at any such auction or sale will be made at a cost below the market cost in the county,
a contract or contracts may be let, or the purchase made, without complying with the competitive
bidding requirements of this Chapter.
E. Exchanges. Exchanges of supplies, material or equipment between the City and any other
public agency which are not by sale or auction shall be by mutual agreement of the respective
public agencies.
F. Projects Performed by City Employees. City employees may be used to complete City
projects, provided that the City complies with State statutory requirements governing contracts
for building improvements and public works projects.
G. State Bid List. The City may purchase supplies from the vendor who has submitted the lowest
bid price for such items to the State of Utah Purchasing Office at the quoted price, without any
solicitation or price quotation or invitation to bid. For such purposes, the quoted price shall be
deemed to be the lowest price available for such items and the City need not follow any other
bidding requirements.
H. Utah Correctional Industries Division. Goods and services produced by the Utah Correctional
Industries Division may be purchased from the Utah Correctional Industries Division without
following any of the bidding requirements set forth herein.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=3_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 9/23
I. Emergency Purchases. Notwithstanding any other section of this Chapter, competitive bidding
may be suspended in the event of an emergency when supplies, services, and/or contracts are
needed immediately in order to respond to the emergency. A state of emergency must have
been declared by the Mayor, City Manager, Public Safety Director, or Public Works Director, or
their next in command if they are not available. In order to suspend competitive bidding, the
emergency must require immediate action and/or response in order to protect the life, health, or
safety of persons or property, or, in the event of an improvement bond forfeiture, the need to
complete the bonded improvements in a certain time frame, given all factors, including weather
considerations
(Ord. No. 01-99, Amended 01/05/1999)
(Ord. No. 01-02, Amended 05/07/2002)
(Ord. No. 17-11, Amended 12/20/2011)
3.08.080 Interlocal Agreements In Letting Of Contracts For Commodities Or Services
The City shall have the power to enter into joint purchase agreements with any or all other public
agencies within the state for the purchase of any commodity or service, whenever it is determined by the
City Council to be in the best interest of the City.
(Ord. No. 01-99, Amended 01/05/1999)
3.08.090 Disposal Or Lease Of Public Property
A. No public property having an estimated value in excess of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be
disposed of or released to anyone other than the City, unless such property has been declared
surplus by the City Finance Director or designee.
B. Whenever public property is surplus, unused, obsolete, unsuitable or otherwise no longer
needed, the department head having control of such property shall notify the City Finance
Director or designee. The City Finance Director or designee may notify other City departments of
the availability of such property. The City Finance Director or designee shall supervise any
transfer of such property to any other department. If no use can be made or can be expected to
be made within the reasonably foreseeable future, the property shall be disposed of in
accordance with this section.
C. The City Finance Director or designee shall prepare a listing of all City owned property which
s/he feels is no longer needed by the City and which can be declared surplus. After an item has
been declared surplus, the property may be disposed of or leased. If an item has an estimated
salvage value over twenty thousand dollars ($20,000), the City Council shall approve its disposal.
All disposals, leases and/or subleases of public property shall be made, in accordance with law,
under the direction of the City Finance Director or designee.
D. Except as otherwise required by State law, boundary line agreements and deeds conveying
unneeded portions of rights of way or easements may be executed without declaring the property
surplus.
E. Before disposing of a significant parcel of real property, the City shall comply with the provisions
of Utah Code Ann. §10-8-2(4). For purposes of this section, a significant parcel of real property is
defined to be any parcel with a value equal to or greater than $100,000.00. Reasonable notice
shall constitute posting the property thirty (30) days prior and publishing notice in a newspaper of
local circulation fourteen (14) days prior to a public hearing concerning the disposition.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=3_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 10/23
(Ord. No. 01-99, Amended 01/05/1999)
(Ord. No. 02-06, Amended 2/21/2006)
(Ord. No. 17-11, Amended 12/20/2011)
3.08.100 Penalties
A. It is unlawful:
1. For any bidder or prospective bidder, or any employee or officer thereof, in restraint of
freedom of competition or otherwise, by agreement with any other person, bidder, or
prospective bidder, to bid a fixed price, or to "rotate" bidding practices among
competitors.
2. For any person to offer or to give to any elected official, officer or employee of the City or
any member of his immediate family, any gift, whether in the form of money, services,
loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality, promise, or other form, under circumstances in
which it could reasonably be intended to influence him/her or could reasonably be
expected to influence him/her in his/her duties concerning the award of any contract or
order of purchase, or for any elected official, officer or employee to directly or indirectly
solicit or directly or indirectly accept any such gift for such purpose.
3. For any elected official, officer or employee to disclose, in advance of the opening of the
bids, the content of any bid invited through the formal competitive bidding procedure.
4. For any elected official, officer or employee to actively participate in the awarding of a
contract from which s/he will directly benefit, without fully disclosing any interest s/he has
therein.
5. For any elected official, officer or employee or other person to appropriate for personal or
private use any item of public property.
6. To purchase supplies or equipment for the personal use of any elected official, officer or
employee unless the item or items are required parts of a worker's equipment and are
necessary to the successful performance of the duties of such official, officer or
employee. Other personal purchases shall not be permitted and will be cause for
disciplinary action.
B. The following contracts are, in the discretion of the City Manager, voidable:
1. Contracts which result from a conflict of interest under this Chapter or other applicable
law.
2. Contracts awarded to a person or firm that tried to influence the award of such contract by
offering something of value to any elected official, officer or employee.
C. A violation of this section by a City employee shall be cause for disciplinary action. A violation of
this section by an elected official shall be malfeasance in office.
(Ord. No. 01-99, Rep/Reenact 01/05/1999)
3.12 Collection Of Special Improvement Taxes
3.12.010 Purpose
3.12.020 Acceleration Of Unpaid Balance
3.12.030 Sale Of Property Upon Delinquency
3.12.010 Purpose
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=3_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 11/23
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the summary sale of property assessed under Utah law
after a delinquency shall have occurred in the payment of any assessment or any part or installment of
it, pursuant to Utah Code Annotated §17A-3-323.
(Ord. No. 08 93, Amended 09/01/1993)
3.12.020 Acceleration Of Unpaid Balance
A. When an assessment is payable in installments and a default occurs in the payment of any
installment when due, the City Council, by resolution may declare the unpaid amount to be
delinquent, immediate due, and subject to collection as provided in this chapter. In addition, it
may accelerate payment of the total unpaid balance of the assessment and declare the whole of
the unpaid principal and the interest then due to be immediately due and payable. Interest shall
accrue and be paid on all amounts declared to be delinquent or accelerated and immediately due
and payable, and shall be paid at such a rate as shall be determined by the City Council until the
next succeeding date after payment or collection on which interest is payable on any bonds
issued. Costs of collection as approved by the City Council or require by law shall be charged
and paid on all amounts declared to be delinquent or accelerated and immediately due and
payable.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, if prior to the final date that
payment may be legally made under a final sale or foreclosure of the property to collect
delinquent assessment installments, the owner pays the amount of all unpaid installments which
are past due and delinquent, with interest at the rate determined by the City Council to the date
of payment, plus all approved or required costs, the owner shall then be restored to the right to
pay in installments in the same manner as if default had not occurred.
3.12.030 Sale Of Property Upon Delinquency
Following acceleration of the balance due on the special improvement levy or upon resolution of the City
Council acknowledging a deficiency or default under special improvement obligations, the lien of the City
upon real property to guarantee the payments of special improvement bond assessments shall be
foreclosed in the same manner as a deed of trust as set forth in Utah Code Annotated §57-1-19, et.seq.
The City attorney is hereby designated trustee and shall be authorized to file a notice of default with the
Utah County Recorder and proceed in accordance with the provisions of Utah law.
3.16 Special Improvement Guaranty Fund
3.16.010 Created - Use
3.16.020 Maintenance
3.16.030 Interest And Penalties Deposit In Fund
3.16.040 Payment Of Bonds Or Warrants
3.16.050 Replenishment Of Fund
3.16.060 Recorder To Issue Warrants
3.16.070 Subrogation Of City
3.16.010 Created - Use
There is created a special fund to be known as the "Special Improvement Guaranty Fund." Said fund
shall be used for the purpose of guaranteeing to the extent of said fund the payment of special
improvement bonds or special improvement warrants and interest thereon heretofore or hereafter issued
against the local improvement districts for the payment of local improvements therein and for the
purchase of property sold to the City at tax sales or under foreclosure for delinquent special
improvement taxes.
3.16.020 Maintenance
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=3_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 12/23
The City Council shall create and maintain said special improvement guaranty fund by appropriations
from the general fund or by the levy of a tax not to exceed one mill in any one year or by the issuance of
general obligation bonds or by appropriation from such other sources as may be determined by the City
Council to provide the money necessary for that purpose. Said fund shall be held by the City Treasurer
and shall be kept by him or her separate and apart from all other funds held by him or her. Payments out
of said fund shall be made only by checks or warrants drawn by the City Finance Director.
(Ord. No. 18-09, Amended 11/03/2009)
3.16.030 Interest And Penalties Deposit In Fund
All excess charges and penalties collected by the City Treasurer for the benefit of or credit of any special
improvement fund and remaining on hand after all the bonds or warrants, together with interest thereon,
drawn against said special improvement fund have been fully paid and cancelled, shall be transferred by
the City Finance Director to the said special improvement guaranty fund.
(Ord. No. 18-09, Amended 11/03/2009)
3.16.040 Payment Of Bonds Or Warrants
When any bond, warrant or coupon drawn against any special improvement fund is presented to the City
Treasurer for payment and there is not a sufficient amount in said special improvement fund against
which it is drawn to pay the same, unless otherwise requested by the holder, payment therefore shall be
made by warrant drawn upon the City Finance Director against the special improvement guaranty fund.
(Ord. No. 18-09, Amended 11/03/2009)
3.16.050 Replenishment Of Fund
Whenever there is not a sufficient amount of cash in said special improvement guaranty fund at any time
to make any and all purchases of property bid in by the City at sales of property for delinquent special
improvement taxes, the City Council shall replenish said special improvement guaranty fund by transfer
of appropriation from the general fund or other available sources as may be determined by the City
Council.
3.16.060 Recorder To Issue Warrants
Warrants drawing interest at a rate not to exceed eight percent (8%) per annum year may be issued by
the City Finance Director against said fund to meet any financial liabilities accruing against it; but at the
time of making its annual tax levy, the City Council shall provide for the levy of a sum sufficient with the
other resources of the fund to pay warrants so issued and outstanding, the tax for this purpose not to
exceed one mill in any one year.
(Ord. No. 18-09, Amended 11/03/2009)
3.16.070 Subrogation Of City
Whenever the City has paid under its guaranty any sum on account of principal or interest on the bonds
or warrants of any district, it shall be subrogated to the rights of the holders of such bonds or warrants or
interest coupons so paid, and such bonds or warrants or coupons and the proceeds thereof shall
become a part of the guaranty fund.
3.20 Uniform Local Sales And Use Tax
3.20.010 Title
3.20.020 Purpose
3.20.030 Effective Date
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=3_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 13/23
3.20.040 Sales And Use Tax
3.20.050 Mayor Authorized To Execute Documents
3.20.060 Contract With State
3.20.010 Title
This chapter shall be known as the "Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance of Spanish Fork City."
3.20.020 Purpose
The 48th Session of the Utah Legislature of Utah has authorized the counties and municipalities of the
State of Utah to enact sales and use tax ordinances imposing a one percent tax.
It is the purpose of this ordinance to conform the Sales and Use Tax of the municipality to the
requirements of the Sales and Utah Tax Act, Utah Code Annotated., 1953.
3.20.030 Effective Date
This ordinance shall become effective as of 12:01 o'clock a.m., January 1, 1990.
3.20.040 Sales And Use Tax
A. 1. From and after the effective date of this ordinance, there is levied and there shall be
collected and paid a tax upon every retail sale of tangible personal property, services and
meals made within the municipality at the rate of one percent.
2. An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use, or other consumption in this
municipality of tangible personal property from any retailer on or after the operative date
of this ordinance at the rate of one percent of the sales price of the property.
3. For the purpose of this ordinance all retail sales shall be presumed to have been
consummated at the place of business delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an
out of state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out of state destination.
In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business, the place or places at which
the retail sales are consummated shall be as determined under the rules and regulations
prescribed by and adopted by the State Tax Commission. Public utilities as defined by
Title 54, Utah Code Annotated, shall not be obligated to determine the place or places
within any county or municipality where public utilities services are rendered, but the
place of sale or the sales tax revenue arising from such service allocable to the City shall
be as determined by the State Tax Commission pursuant to an appropriate formula and
other rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by it.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=3_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 14/23
B. 1. Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the
provisions of the Sales and Use Tax Act, all of the provisions of Chapter 12, Title 59, Utah
Code Annotated, and in force and affect on the effective date of this ordinance, insofar as
they relate to sales taxes, excepting §59-12-101 and §59-12-119 thereof, are hereby
adopted and made a part of the ordinance as though fully set forth herein.
2. Wherever, and to the extent that in Chapter 12 of Title 59, Utah Code Annotated, the
State of Utah is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this municipality
shall be substituted therefore. Nothing in subparagraph (b) shall be deemed to require
substitution of the name of the municipality for the word "State" when that word is used as
part of the title of the State Tax Commission, or of the Constitution of the State of Utah,
nor shall the name of the municipality be substituted for that of the State in any section
when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the
municipality or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Tax Commission in
performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of the ordinance.
3. If an annual license has been issued to a retailer under Utah Code Annotated §59-12-
106, an additional license shall not be required by reason of this section.
4. There shall be excluded from the purchase price paid or changed by which the tax is
measured:
a. The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State of Utah upon a retailer
or consumer;
b. The gross receipts from the sale of or the cost of storage, use or other
consumption of tangible personal property upon which a sales or use tax has
become due by reason of the sale transaction to any other municipality and any
county in the State of Utah, under the sales or use tax ordinance enacted by that
county or municipality in accordance with the Sales and Use Tax Act.
3.20.050 Mayor Authorized To Execute Documents
The mayor is authorized to execute whatever documents are necessary to distribute sales and use tax
revenues on the combination of point of sale and population factors set forth in Utah Code Annotated,
§59-12-203.
(Ordinance 01-19 - amended 1/8/2019)
3.20.060 Contract With State
Heretofore, this municipality has entered into an agreement with the State Tax Commission to perform
all functions incident to the administration or operation of the sales and use tax ordinance of the
municipality. That contract is confirmed and the mayor is authorized to enter into such supplementary
agreement with the State Tax Commission as may be necessary to the continued administration and
operation of the local sales and use tax ordinance of the municipality as reenacted by this chapter.
3.24 Recreation, Arts, And Parks Tax
3.24.010 Title
3.24.020 Purpose
3.24.030 RAP Tax
3.24.040 Citizens Advisory Committee
3.24.050 Effective Date
3.24.060 Mayor Authorized To Execute Documents
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=3_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 15/23
3.24.010 Title
This chapter shall be known as the “Recreation, Arts, and Parks Tax” of Spanish Fork City, or
alternatively, as the RAP Tax Chapter of the Municipal Code.
3.24.020 Purpose
It is the purpose of this Chapter to establish, impose, and levy a RAP tax in accordance with Utah Code
Annotated §59-12-1401 et seq., as such code may be amended from time to time.
3.24.030 RAP Tax
A. There is hereby imposed and levied, and there shall be collected, a local sales and use tax of
1/10 of 1% (0.1%) of the sales price upon all retail sales transactions, including personal
property, services, and meals, made within Spanish Fork City, except for the exempt transactions
listed in Utah Code Ann. §59-12-104.
B. For purposes of this Chapter, all retail sales shall be presumed to have been consummated at
the place of business delivered by the retailer or their agent to an out-of-state destination or to a
common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. In the event a retailer has no
permanent place of business, the place of places at which the retail sales are consummated shall
be as determined under the rules and regulations adopted by the Utah State Tax Commission.
C. The tax revenues earned by the RAP tax shall be used to fund City or non-profit projects within
the City for recreational, cultural, and/or botanical facilities, including, but not limited to, capital
projects, programs, and ongoing operating expenses of recreational and cultural facilities as such
terms are defined in Utah Code Ann. §59-12-1401 et seq.
D. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council, shall appoint a citizens committee
consisting of nine members. The members shall be made up of an elected official, the parks and
recreation director, the chair of the Recreation Committee, the chair of the Arts Council, and five
at large members who are residents of Spanish Fork City. The elected official and the parks and
recreation director shall have no vote.
3.24.040 Citizens Advisory Committee
The Citizens Advisory Committee shall receive and review applications for funding for projects eligible
for RAP tax monies. The Committee shall make a recommendation to the Council for projects and
amounts to be funded. The Committee shall function based on policies adopted by the City.
3.24.050 Effective Date
The effective date of the Spanish Fork RAP tax shall be April 1, 2019.
3.24.060 Mayor Authorized To Execute Documents
The Mayor is authorized to execute any and all documents necessary for the State Tax Commission to
collect the RAP tax and distribute it to the City for the purposes outlined in this Chapter.
(Ordinance 22-18, Enacted 12/11/2018)
3.32 Municipal Energy Sales And Use Tax
3.32.010 Title
3.32.020 Purpose
3.32.030 Energy Sales And Use Tax
3.32.040 Mayor Authorized To Execute Documents
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=3_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 16/23
3.32.050 Collection Of Taxes
3.32.060 Remittance
3.32.070 Inspection
3.32.080 Condition Of Service
3.32.090 Effective Date
3.32.010 Title
This chapter shall be known as the Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax Ordinance of Spanish Fork
City.
(Ord. No. 12-97, Enacted 06/17/1997)
3.32.020 Purpose
The 1996 Utah Legislature has authorized municipalities of the State of Utah to enact a sales and use
tax as defined by Utah law in an amount up to 6% of the value of energy delivered to consumers.
It is the purpose of this ordinance to conform the energy sales and use tax of Spanish Fork City to the
requirements of the Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax Act, Utah Code Ann. §10-1-301 et.seq.
(Ord. No. 12-97, Enacted 06/17/1997)
3.32.030 Energy Sales And Use Tax
A. 1. From and after the effective date of this ordinance, there is levied and there shall be
collected and paid a tax upon every delivery of taxable energy, as defined by Utah law,
which is delivered to a customer within Spanish Fork City. The amount of the Municipal
Energy Sales and Use Tax shall be six percent (6%) of the value of the delivered energy
to the consumer.
2. For purposes of determining the tax and the value of delivered energy, regulations as
promulgated by the Utah State Tax Commission shall be applicable and are adopted
herein, by this reference.
B. 1. The definitions set forth in U.C.A. §10-1-303 are adopted and made a part of this
ordinance as though fully set forth herein.
2. This ordinance does not affect any contractual franchise fee, which shall continue to be
collected.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=3_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 17/23
C. There shall be excluded from the purchase price paid or charged by which the tax is measured:
1. The sales and use of aviation fuel, motor fuel, or special fuel subject to taxation under the
Utah Motor and Special Fuel Tax Act;
2. The sales and use of taxable energy that the municipality is prohibited from taxing under
federal law or the Constitution of United States or the Constitution of the State of Utah;
3. The sales and use of taxable energy purchased or stored in the state for resale;
4. The sales or use of taxable energy to a person if the primary use is for use for
compounding or producing taxable energy or fuel subject to taxation under the Utah
Motor and Special Fuel Tax Act;
5. The taxable energy brought into the state by a nonresident for the nonresident's own
personal use or enjoyment while within the state, except a taxable energy purchased for
use in the state by a nonresident living or working in the state at the time of purchase;
6. The sales or use of taxable energy for any purpose other than use as fuel energy; and
7. The sale of taxable energy for use outside of the municipality.
D. An additional license to collect the tax is not required if one has been issued under Utah Code
Ann. §59-12-206.
(Ord. No. 12-97, Enacted 06/17/1997)
3.32.040 Mayor Authorized To Execute Documents
The Mayor is authorized to execute whatever documents are necessary to distribute the energy sales
and use tax revenues in compliance with the Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax Act.
(Ord. No. 12-97, Enacted 06/17/1997)
3.32.050 Collection Of Taxes
A. In those instances when the energy supplier is a municipality, the municipality shall be obligated
to collect the tax from its customers and to pay the same directly to Spanish Fork City.
B. In those instances, when the energy supplier estimates that the municipal energy sales and use
tax collected annually from its Utah customers equals one million dollars or more, the energy
supplier shall collect the tax and remit it directly to Spanish Fork City.
C. In those instances when the energy supplier does not estimate that the municipal energy sales
and use tax collected annually from its Utah customers equals one million dollars or more, the
energy supplier shall collect the tax and shall remit the same to Utah State Tax Commission for
disbursement to Spanish Fork City, or may disburse directly to Spanish Fork City if authorized by
the Utah State Tax Commission.
D. In those instances when the energy supplier is paying the tax to Spanish Fork City directly under
this part, the energy supplier may retain the percentage of the tax authorized under Utah Code
Ann. §59-12-208 (3) for its costs of collecting and remitting the tax.
(Ord. No. 12-97, Enacted 06/17/1997)
3.32.060 Remittance
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=3_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 18/23
The energy supplier incurring an energy sales or use tax under this chapter shall submit a report to the
City within forty-five days after the end of each calendar month. The report shall indicate the gross
revenues received from the delivery of taxable energy within Spanish Fork City during the applicable
month. Together with the report, payment of the six percent (6%) energy sales and use tax shall be
remitted to Spanish Fork City except those sums authorized to be retained by Utah Code Ann. §59-12-
208(3).
(Ord. No. 12-97, Enacted 06/17/1997)
3.32.070 Inspection
Spanish Fork City shall have the right, after giving reasonable notice, to inspect the books and records
of any energy supplier delivering energy within the City to determine the accuracy of the monthly reports
submitted to the City. The inspection shall be limited to books and records pertaining to the customers
receiving taxable energy within the City boundaries.
(Ord. No. 12-97, Enacted 06/17/1997)
3.32.080 Condition Of Service
Compliance with all of the requirements of this chapter is a condition precedent to providing or delivering
taxable energy within Spanish Fork City.
(Ord. No. 12-97, Enacted 06/17/1997)
3.32.090 Effective Date
The Municipal Energy Sale and Use Tax, as imposed herein, shall commence as of the 30th day of
June, 1997.
(Ord. No. 12 97, Enacted 06/17/1997)
3.36 Telecommunication Service Sales And Use Tax
3.36.010 Definitions
3.36.020 Levy Of Tax
3.36.030 Rate
3.36.040 Rate Limitation
3.36.050 Changes In Rate Or Repeal Of The Tax
3.36.060 Procedures For Taxes Erroneously Recovered From Customers
3.36.010 Definitions
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows:
A. “Commission” means the State Tax Commission.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=3_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 19/23
B. 1. Subject to Subsections (B)(2) and (3), “customer” means the person who is obligated
under a contract with a telecommunications provider to pay for telecommunications
service received under the contract.
2. For purposes of this chapter, “customer” means:
a. the person who is obligated under a contract with a telecommunications provider
to pay for telecommunications service received under the contract; or
b. if the end user is not the person described in Subsection (B)(2)(a), the end user of
telecommunications service.
3. “Customer” does not include a reseller:
a. of telecommunications service; or
b. for mobile telecommunications service, of a serving carrier under an agreement to
serve the customer outside the telecommunications providers licensed service
area.
C. 1. “End user” means the person who uses a telecommunications service.
2. For purposes of telecommunications service provided to a person who is not an
individual, “end user” means the individual who uses the telecommunications service on
behalf of the person who is provided the telecommunications service.
D. “Gross Receipts attributed to the municipality” means those gross receipts form a transaction for
telecommunications services that is located within the municipality for the purposes of sales and
use taxes under Utah Code Title 59, Chapter 12, Sales and Use Tax Act and determined in
accordance with Utah Code section §59-12-207.
E. “Gross receipts from telecommunications service” means the revenue that a telecommunications
provider receives for telecommunications service rendered except for the amounts collected or
paid as:
1. a tax, fee, or charge:
a. imposed by a governmental entity;
b. separately identified as a tax, fee, or charge in the transaction with the customer
for the telecommunications service; and
c. imposed only on a telecommunications provider;
2. sales and use taxes collected by the telecommunications provider from a customer under
Title 59, Chapter 12. Sales and Use Tax Act; or
3. interest, a fee, or a charge that is charged by a telecommunications provider on a
customer for failure to pay for telecommunications service when payment is due.
F. “Mobile telecommunications service” is as defined in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing
Act, 4 U.S.C. Sec. 124.
G. “Municipality” means Spanish Fork City.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=3_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 20/23
H. “Place of primary use”;
1. for telecommunications service other than mobile telecommunications service, means the
street address representative of where the customer's use of the telecommunications
service primarily occurs, which shall be;
a. the residential street address of the customer; or
b. the primary business street address of the customer; or
2. for mobile telecommunications service, as defined in the Mobile Telecommunications
Sourcing Act, 4 U.S.C. Sec. 124.
I. Notwithstanding where a telephone call is billed or paid, "service address" means:
1. if the location described in the Subsection (I)(1) is not known, the location of the
telecommunications equipment:
a. to which a call is charged; and
b. from which the call originates or terminates;
2. if the location described in Subsection (I)(1) is not known but the location described in this
Subsection (I)(2) is known, the location of the origination point of the signal of the
telecommunications service first identified by:
a. the telecommunications system of the telecommunications provider; or
b. if the system used to transport the signal is not a system of the
telecommunications provider, information received by the telecommunications
provider form its service provider; or
3. if the locations described in Subsection (I)(1) or (2) are not known, the location of a
customer’s place of primary use.
J. 1. Subject to Subsections (J)(2) and (J)8, “telecommunications provider” means a person
that:
a. owns, controls, operates, or manages a telecommunications service; or
b. engages in an activity described in Subsection (J)(1)(a) for the shared use with or
resale to any person of the telecommunications service.
2. A person described in Subsection (J)(1) is a telecommunications provider whether or not
the Public Service Commission of Utah regulates:
a. that person; or
b. the telecommunications service that the person owns, controls, operates, or
manages.
3. “Telecommunications provider” does not include an aggregator as defined in Utah Code
Ann. §54-8b-2.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=3_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 21/23
K. “Telecommunications service” means:
1. telephone service, as defined in Utah Code Ann. §59-12-102, other than mobile
telecommunications service, that originates and terminates within the boundaries of this
state and
2. mobile telecommunications service, as defined in Utah Code Ann. §59-12-102:
a. that originates and terminates within the boundaries of one state; and
b. only to the extent permitted by the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act, 4
U.S.C. §116 et seq.
3.36.020 Levy Of Tax
There is hereby levied a municipal telecommunications license tax on the gross receipts from
telecommunications service attributed to this municipality.
3.36.030 Rate
The rate of the tax levy shall be three and one-half percent (3.5%) of the telecommunication provider's
gross receipts from telecommunications service that are attributed to the municipality. If the location of
transaction is determined to be other than this municipality then the rate imposed on the gross receipts
for telecommunications services shall be determined pursuant to the provisions of Utah Code Ann. §10-
1-407.
(Ord. No. 09-08, Amended 06/17/2008)
(Ord. No. 10-10, Amended 06/15/2010)
3.36.040 Rate Limitation
The rate of this levy shall not exceed three and one-half (3.5%) of the telecommunication provider’s
gross receipts from telecommunication service attributed to the municipality.
(Ord. No. 10-10, Amended 06/15/2010)
3.36.050 Changes In Rate Or Repeal Of The Tax
This ordinance is subject to the requirements of Utah Code Ann. §10-1-403. If the tax rate is changed or
the tax is repealed, then the appropriate notice shall be given as provided in section.
3.36.060 Procedures For Taxes Erroneously Recovered From Customers
Pursuant to the provisions of Utah Code Ann. §10-1-408, a customer may not bring a cause of action
against a telecommunications provider on the basis that the telecommunications provider erroneously
recovered from the customer the municipal telecommunication license tax, except as provided in §10-1-
408.
(Ord. No. 09-04, Enacted 06/15/2004)
3.40 Transient Room Tax
3.40.010 Definitions
3.40.020 Transient Room Tax
3.40.030 Records
3.40.040 Penalties
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=3_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 22/23
3.40.010 Definitions
The following definitions apply to this Chapter:
"Person" means any individual, person, partnership, firm, association, corporation, limited liability
company, limited liability partnership, or other entity.
"Public Transient Facilities" means a place providing temporary sleeping accommodations or
temporary living arrangements to the public and includes, but is not necessarily limited, to the following:
A. A Hotel;
B. A Motel;
C. An Inn;
D. A bed and breakfast;
E. A trailer park offering Short Term Rentals;
F. A home, condominium, apartment, townhome, or other similar facility offering Short Term
Rentals.
"Rents" means monies or other items of value exchanged for the right to use Public Transient Facilities
for Short Term Rentals.
"Short Term Rentals" means a Public Transient Facility offering sleeping accommodations or
temporary living arrangements for a period of less than thirty (30) consecutive days.
3.40.020 Transient Room Tax
There is hereby levied, on Persons occupying Short Term Rentals, a transient room tax of one percent
(1%) of the value of Rents charged for the use of the Short-Term Rentals. This tax is in addition to any
other taxes or fees to which the Short-Term Rentals are subject. Persons operating Short Term Rentals
are responsible to collect the tax and remit it monthly to the Utah State Tax Commission.
3.40.030 Records
Persons operating Short Term Rentals shall maintain records kept in conformity with generally accepted
accounting principles for the purpose of disclosing and verifying the gross revenues derived from
providing Short Term Rentals subject to this Chapter. Such records must be maintained for a minimum
of three years from the date services were provided. The records shall be available to Spanish Fork City
or the Utah State Tax Commission for review and inspection during normal operating hours.
3.40.040 Penalties
A. Any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject a monetary penalty in the
amount of ten percent (10%) of the amount due.
B. Sums due under this Chapter, and not paid in a timely fashion, shall incur interest at the rate of
twelve percent (12%) per annum.
C. In addition to the monetary penalty, a Person or Short-Term Rental violating this policy is subject
to having their business license revoked.
D. Failure to collect or remit the tax when due shall make the Person operating the Short-Term
Rental personally liable for the sums due, including attorney’s fees and costs incurred in
collecting the sums.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=3_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 23/23
(Ord. No. 23-17, Enacted 09/19/2017)
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=4_EMPLOYEE_PERSONNEL_SYSTEM 1/4
4 EMPLOYEE PERSONNEL SYSTEM
4.04 Employee Personnel System
4.08 Volunteer Firefighter Retirement
4.04 Employee Personnel System
4.04.010 Established - Provisions
4.04.020 Merit Service
4.04.030 Administration - Powers And Duties
4.04.040 Appeal Board
4.04.050 Compliance With Federal And State Law - Liabilities - Legality
4.04.010 Established - Provisions
Pursuant to Utah Code Ann. §10-3-1101 et seq., and other pertinent provisions of the laws of the State
of Utah, there is adopted and established an employee personnel system for Spanish Fork City which
shall be based on the following principles and provide for:
A. A system free from political and personal considerations;
B. Equitable employment without discrimination;
C. Incentives and conditions of employment;
D. Positions classified and compensated on justifiable and uniform bases;
E. Establishment of merit principles;
F. Just and fair administration of policies, rules, and regulations;
G. A formal plan of adopted policies, rules, and regulations.
4.04.020 Merit Service
A. Except for department directors, assistant city manager, and employees appointed by the
governing body, each employee of Spanish Fork City shall hold employment without limitation of
time. Discharge (termination), involuntary transfer to a position with less remuneration
(demotion), or suspension of over two days without pay may occur only for cause and in
compliance with state law and in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Spanish Fork
City Personnel Policy Manual. All other grievance and/or disciplinary matters shall be handled as
set forth in the Personnel Policy Manual.
B. The following positions are department directors and shall be considered as the head of the
department: Finance Director, Public Works Director, Public Safety Director, City Attorney,
Community Development Director, Information Technology Director, Parks and Recreation
Director, and Library Director.
C. Department directors and the assistant city manager are entitled to severance pay upon
involuntary separation from the City based upon gross salary, health insurance cost, dental
insurance cost, life insurance cost, sick leave accrual, and retirement accrual. Department
directors are awarded three months’ severance benefit upon hire and earn an additional one
week of severance for every year worked, up to a total of six months’ severance.
D. The following positions are supervisory positions appointed by the governing body pursuant to
Title 2 and are entitled to a contract with the City outlining the terms and conditions of their
employment, including severance benefits identical to the severance benefit granted to
department directors: City Manager, Recorder, Treasurer.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=4_EMPLOYEE_PERSONNEL_SYSTEM 2/4
4.04.030 Administration - Powers And Duties
A. The City Manager, or his/her designee, shall administer the personnel system provided by this
chapter.
B. The City Manager shall perform the duties and have the powers concerning personnel matters as
follows:
1. Administer and enforce the personnel system and other pertinent rules and regulations
established by this chapter and by its authority;
2. Develop, maintain and apply procedures for the recruitment, compensation, promotion,
training, and discipline of personnel management for all employees of the City, subject to
the ordinances, policies, and rules and regulations stated in this chapter or adopted
pursuant to this chapter;
3. Issue other supplemental personnel directives as are necessary for the effective
implementation of this chapter, policies, or rules and regulations stated in this chapter or
adopted pursuant to this chapter;
4. Recommend changes to this chapter or to the Personnel Policy to the Council for their
consideration. Recommendations may include, but are not necessarily limited to:
a. The classification of all city positions, based on duties, authority, responsibility,
working conditions, know-how, and accountability of each position whenever
warranted by changed circumstances,
b. A pay range for each position,
c. Methods for determining the merit and fitness of candidates for appointment or
promotion,
d. Policies and procedures regulating reduction in force, demotions, transfers,
removal, separation, or discharge of employees,
e. Hours of work, standards of conduct, probationary period requirements,
attendance regulations, and provisions for sick, vacation, and other types of leave,
f. Policies and procedures governing persons holding provisional appointments,
g. Policies and procedures governing employee-management relationships,
h. Policies regarding of training and education programs,
i. Other practices and procedures necessary for the administration of the personnel
system;
5. Recommend to the council contractual arrangements with any qualified person or agency
for the performance of such technical services as may be desired in the establishment
and operation of the personnel system.
4.04.040 Appeal Board
A. There is hereby created an Appeal Board, which shall consist of three persons, independent of
the City, who have expertise in municipal employee law, such as city attorneys, human resource
directors and assistant directors, mediators, or city managers. Upon notice of appeal, the City
Manager shall appoint three qualified persons to serve as the Appeal Board for that hearing.
They shall follow the procedures and timelines set forth in the Spanish Fork City Employee
Personnel Policy.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=4_EMPLOYEE_PERSONNEL_SYSTEM 3/4
B. Any employee afforded merit protection under this chapter shall be entitled to appeal discharge
(termination), involuntary transfer to another position with less remuneration (demotion), or
suspension without pay for more than two days, to the Appeal Board. The procedures for an
appeal shall be set forth in the Spanish Fork City Personnel Policy Manual. Exhaustion of all
appeal procedures set forth in the Personnel Policy Manual shall be a prerequisite to filing an
appeal with the Appeal Board, including meeting all time deadlines.
(Ordinance 30-17, Amended 12/12/2017)
4.04.050 Compliance With Federal And State Law - Liabilities - Legality
A. Nothing in this chapter, or in the rules and regulations developed under this chapter, shall in any
way conflict with any federal or state laws, rules, regulations or requirements which are or may
become binding on the City because of either the statutory existence of such laws and
regulations or contracts into which the City has entered or may enter with other units of
government.
B. All officers and employees of the City, whether elected or appointed, shall not be held personally
liable for any decisions made under this chapter where such decisions and the results thereof are
determined to be in conflict with state, federal or other statutory requirements, except where such
decision is an intentional violation of state, federal, or other statutory requirement.
C. Should any part of this chapter be subsequently declared illegal, the Council declares that all
other provisions and remaining parts of the chapter, notwithstanding such illegality of a part, shall
remain in effect.
(Ord. No. 07-12 Amended 05/15/2012)
4.08 Volunteer Firefighter Retirement
4.08.010 Funding Of Retirement System
4.08.020 Management Of Fund
4.08.030 Retirement Qualifications
4.08.040 Retirement Benefit
4.08.010 Funding Of Retirement System
Spanish Fork City shall budget for and fund on a yearly basis a fund used for providing the qualified
volunteer firefighters of the City with retirement benefits.
4.08.020 Management Of Fund
The volunteer firefighter retirement fund shall be managed by the city finance director. The fund shall be
funded and managed in such a manner so as to be actuarially sound in order to provide the benefits
provided for herein.
4.08.030 Retirement Qualifications
In order to qualify to receive the retirement benefits as provided for herein, a firefighter shall have 20
years of service and be at least 62 years of age.
4.08.040 Retirement Benefit
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=4_EMPLOYEE_PERSONNEL_SYSTEM 4/4
The retirement benefit provided to each qualified firefighter shall be in the amount of $106.00 per month
through December, 2013. Commencing January 2014, the monthly amount shall increase to $109.00
and shall increase in January each year thereafter by the monthly amount of $3.00 until the retirement
benefit amount reaches $130.00 per month.
(Ord. No. 06-94, Amended 02/16/1994)
(Ord. No. 10-01, Amended 11/06/2001)
(Ord. No. 16-11, Amended 12/06/2011)
(Ord. No. 02-13, Amended 02/05/2013)
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 1/74
5 BUSINESS LICENSES
5.04 Business Licenses
5.08 Auctioneers
5.12 Beer
5.16 Franchises And Special Privileges
5.18 Cable Television Franchises
5.20 Pawnbrokers
5.24 Secondhand, Junk And Antique Dealers
5.28 Sexually Oriented Business And Employee Licensing Act
5.32 Telecommunications Rights-Of-Way
5.36 Signs
5.40 Home Occupations
5.04 Business Licenses
5.04.010 Unlawful To Transact Business Without License
5.04.020 Definitions
5.04.030 License Assessor And Collector
5.04.040 Payment Dates
5.04.050 Applications
5.04.060 Penalty For Late Payment
5.04.070 Certificate
5.04.080 Display
5.04.090 Transferability
5.04.100 Revocation
5.04.110 Fee Schedule
5.04.120 Multiple Business Locations
5.04.130 Multiple Licenses
5.04.140 Site Improvements
5.04.150 Inspections
5.04.010 Unlawful To Transact Business Without License
It is a Class C misdemeanor for any person to engage in or carry on any business, trade, profession, or
calling within the City without first obtaining a business license when required by the ordinances of the
City. Each separate business entity is required to have its own business license. A business license
does not authorize the license holder to conduct business on City property or facilities. No business may
be conducted on City owned property or facilities without entering a lease agreement with the City for
that purpose and obtaining a business license.
(Ord. No. 02-17, Amended 1/03/2017)
5.04.020 Definitions
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 2/74
"Canvasser / Solicitor / Peddler / Hawker / Huckster" any individual whether or not a resident of the
municipality, traveling either by foot, wagon, motor vehicle, or other type of conveyance, from place to
place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders, or placing fliers,
for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever, or carrying,
conveying, or transporting meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck, farm products or provisions,
whether or not payment and delivery are made simultaneously or whether payment is taken for future
delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has,
carries, or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale, or whether he or she is collecting
advance payments on such sales, provided that such definition shall include any person who, for
himself, or for another person, firm or corporation, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building,
structure, tent, railroad boxcar, hotel or motel room, lodging house, apartment, shop or any other place
within the municipality for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery.
"Fireworks Merchant" any person, firm, corporation, or other entity whose primary and principal
business is selling fireworks in accordance with the provisions of Utah Code Annotated §11-3-1 et seq.
"Home Child Day Care" care provided to five or more unrelated children 0-13 years of age in lieu of
care ordinarily provided by a parent, which care is for four (4) or more hours per day at regularly
scheduled times for direct or indirect compensation.
"Mobile Food Vendor" any business which sells edible goods from a non-stationary location within the
City. The term shall include, but not be limited to:
A. Mobile food trucks: a self-contained motorized vehicle selling food items;
B. Concession carts: mobile vending units selling food items that must be moved by non-motorized
means;
C. Concession trailer: a vending unit selling food items which is pulled by a motorized unit and has
no power to move on its own.
"Transient merchant / Itinerant merchant / Itinerant vendor" any person, firm or corporation, whether
as owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether or not a resident of the municipality, who engages in
a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares and merchandise within the municipality for
a period of time up to 180 days, and who, in furtherance of such purpose, does not conduct the activity
substantially within a permanent building or structure but who does in furtherance of such purpose hire,
lease, use or occupy a nonpermanent building or structure, motor vehicle, tent, railroad boxcar, public
room in any hotel, motel, lodging house, apartment, shop or any street, alley or other place within the
municipality, other than within a permanent building or structure, for the exhibition and sale of such
goods, wares and merchandise, either privately or at public auction. The person, firm or corporation so
engaged shall not be relieved from complying with the provisions of this chapter merely by reason of
associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, or by conducting such
transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or
auctioneer.
(Ord. No. 16-15, Amended 11/03/2015)
5.04.030 License Assessor And Collector
The Community Development Director, or designee, is designated and appointed as ex officio assessor
of business licenses for the City. Upon receipt of any application for a business license, the Community
Development Director, or designee, shall assess the amount due thereon and shall collect all business
license administrative fees based upon the rates established by ordinance.
5.04.040 Payment Dates
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 3/74
All licenses shall be payable before each calendar year, in advance, shall commence from the first day
of January of each year and shall expire on the 31st day of December of each year.
All business license administrative fees shall be due the first day of each calendar year and shall
become delinquent if not paid by January 15th of each year. The proceeds of all administrative fees shall
be remitted by the Community Development Department to the City Treasurer.
5.04.050 Applications
A. All applications for business licenses for businesses which shall be permanently located and
conducted within Spanish Fork City on a long-term basis shall specify:
1. The name of the person desiring a license;
2. The kind of license desired, stating the business, calling, trade, or profession to be
performed, practiced, or carried on;
3. The class of license desired, if such licenses are divided into classes;
4. The place where such business, calling, trade, or profession is to be carried on, giving the
street number of where the business, calling, trade, or profession is to be carried on in
any building or enclosure having such number;
5. The application shall state such other matter or things required by ordinance or statute.
B. Applicants for licenses to conduct business as an itinerant merchant shall provide the following
information to the Community Development Department, or designee;
1. The name of the applicant, and if the applicant is an employee or agent of a corporation,
the name of the corporation;
2. The address of the applicant, and if the applicant is an agent or employee of a corporation
or limited liability company, the address of the corporation or limited liability company;
3. A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold and from whom
or where the applicant obtains the goods to be sold;
4. If the applicant is employed by or an agent of another person, the name and permanent
address of such other person or persons;
5. The length of time for which the applicant desires to engage in business within the
municipality;
6. The property address within the municipality (which is required to be located in a
commercial zoning district) where the applicant proposes to carry on his or her business;
7. A site plan detailing the location on the property where the merchant will conduct
business;
8. If the applicant is employed by another person, firm or corporation, documents showing
that the person, firm or corporation for which the applicant proposes to do business is
authorized to do business within the State of Utah;
9. A current and active sales tax number, having been issued by the Utah State Tax
Commission to the applicant to do business within the State of Utah;
10. Any person or entity selling foods or food items must comply in all respects with the rules
and regulations of the Utah State Board of Health and/or the Utah County Health
Department.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 4/74
(Ord. No. 16-15, Amended 11/03/2015)
5.04.060 Penalty For Late Payment
If any business license administrative fee is not paid within 15 days of the due date, a penalty of $15.00
shall be added to the original amount thereof for each month the administrative fee remains unpaid. No
license shall be issued until all penalties legally assessed have been paid in full. If the license has not
been renewed within 30 days of the due date, the business shall be placed on an inactive list and shall
be considered to be doing business without a license in violation of this chapter and is subject to the
criminal penalties set forth in this chapter. Businesses placed on the inactive list must apply for a new
business license and pay all fees associated with a new business license application.
5.04.070 Certificate
All certificates of license shall be signed by the Community Development Director, or designee, and shall
contain the following information:
A. The business name to whom such certificate has been issued.
B. The amount paid to the City Treasurer;
C. The term of the license with the commencing date and the date of its expiration;
D. The place where such business, calling, trade, or profession is to be carried on.
5.04.080 Display
A. Every certificate of license issued under this section shall be posted by the licensee in a
conspicuous place upon the wall of the building, room, or office of said place of business so that
the same may be easily seen. When such certificate of license has expired, it shall be removed
by the licensee from such place in which it has been posted and no certificate of license which is
not in force and effect shall be permitted to remain posted upon the wall or any part of any room
within the place of business. If the licensee's business is such that a license cannot be displayed
due to the transient or mobile nature of said business, then the licensee shall carry the license on
his person ready to be displayed upon request by an authorized officer during all such time or
times while the licensee is engaged in or pursuing the business for which a license is granted.
B. A violation of any provision of this section is punishable as a Class C misdemeanor.
5.04.090 Transferability
No license granted or issued under this section shall be in any manner assignable or transferable. It
shall not be deemed to authorize any person other than the therein named to do business or to
authorize any other business, calling, trade, or profession than is therein named.
5.04.100 Revocation
A. The issuance of a license under this Title grants only a revocable privilege to engage in business
and confers no vested rights of any kind upon a licensee. The licensee agrees, as a condition of
license issuance, to operate the licensed business or activity in conformity with the ordinances of
the City and other applicable laws.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 5/74
B. Licenses issued under the provisions of this Title may be revoked for failure upon the part of the
licensee to comply with the conditions and requirements under which said license is granted,
because of illegal activities thereunder, or for the following causes:
1. The violation of any provision in this Title;
2. The failure to pay, when due, any administrative fee (including renewal fee), tax, charge,
or penalty provided for by City ordinance or State statute;
3. Any fraud or misrepresentation of a material fact in the procurement of the license,
including falsification of any information or supporting documentation provided by the
licensee with the license application;
4. Noncompliance with building, fire, or health codes;
5. Any conduct at the licensed premises tending to render the premises a private or public
nuisance, as defined in the Spanish Fork Municipal Code, or a menace to the health,
peace, or general welfare of the City or its residents;
6. Activities, under the guise of conducting a business, that are fraudulent, deceptive, or
constituting a violation of City ordinances or other applicable law;
7. Failure of the licensee to retain the legal qualifications necessary for the license;
8. Violation of the zoning ordinances governing the licensed business or activity, including,
but not limited to, parking and landscaping requirements;
9. Conviction of any crime related to the licensed business, after the issuance of the license;
10. Refusal to allow City employees to make inspection of the licensed premises during the
business’ operating hours.
C. No license shall be revoked under the provisions of this Title except after notice and hearing. The
hearing shall be conducted by the Community Development Director. The decision of the
Director is final and non-appealable. Notice shall be given by sending a copy of the notice by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant at the address shown on the applicant's
last application for a business license. The notice shall specify the date, time, and place of the
hearing and contain a brief description of the reasons why the license is subject to revocation. It
is the applicant's duty to maintain a current address at all times with the city business license
administrator. Notice is deemed received if notice is sent to the last address on file with the City
and is returned unclaimed, unknown, moved, or for any other reason identified by the postal
service. The hearing shall be held within 20 days after mailing of the notice. The applicant may
appear in person or may send a representative. The applicant has a right to be represented by
counsel, but has no right to be appointed counsel.
D. Licenses revoked shall be for a period of one year, unless they are for violations of numbers 2, 4,
7, 8, or 10 of the causes set forth in paragraph B, in which event the licensee may reapply when
compliance with those provisions has been met.
E. For purposes of revoking a business license, the licensee is responsible for the acts of their
employees, agents, or others acting under the license issued.
(Ord. No. 08-14, Amended 05/06/2014)
5.04.110 Fee Schedule
A. There is levied upon every business, location, trade, or calling of every person engaged in
business in the City an annual business license administrative fee based upon the administrative
cost to the City to issue a business license. The initial fee shall be $60.00 and shall be subject to
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 6/74
change based on changing costs, as estimated by the City Council in the annual budget. In
addition to the business license administrative fee, businesses requiring inspection(s) shall pay
an inspection fee based on the cost for the City to conduct the inspection(s).
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 7/74
B. Where the business is that of an itinerant merchant, the administrative fee shall be $50.00 per
day unless proceeds from the sale of any merchandise shall be returned to or used for the
purpose of a charitable or otherwise non-taxed institution with permanent and substantial ties to
the community. Such institutions shall include, but not be limited to, churches, scouting
organizations, schools, local associations and service clubs. In the latter event, the administrative
fee shall be five dollars ($5.00) per day. The maximum license fee in any calendar year is
$300.00. Temporary sales or display of goods are allowed for a period not to exceed 180
calendar days. The license shall designate the dates the license is valid. An itinerant merchant
license is subject to the following criteria:
1. The nature, location, and manner of operation of the activity or event may not be on
public property and does not constitute a health or safety hazard to the public.
2. The merchant has permission from the property owner where the goods are to be sold
and/or displayed. A copy of the lease or letter from the property owner granting
permission shall be submitted with the application for a business license.
3. The goods or services sold and/or displayed are customarily and traditionally related to a
seasonal activity, event, or holiday.
4. The sales/display activity must be located in a commercial zoning district and the specific
use must be consistent with other uses permitted in the zoning district.
5. The use does not interfere with pedestrian access-ways, fire lanes, driveways, or traffic
visibility.
6. Parking on the property is adequate to serve any existing permanent uses and the
proposed itinerant merchant use.
7. No itinerant merchant license shall be valid within 2,000 feet of the perimeter of the parcel
of property of a City sanctioned event, except as allowed in §5.04.110(8), including but
not limited to the following events as determined by the Community Development
Director, or designee:
a. Fiesta Days Celebration
b. Champions Challenge Rodeo
c. Harvest Moon Hurrah
d. Farmer’s Market
e. Utah County Fair
f. Major athletic events as determined by the Recreation Director
8. An applicant for an itinerant merchant license that will be valid during the period of a City
sanctioned event as authorized in §5.04.110(7) must:
a. obtain a business license and inspection at least 30 days prior to the
commencement of the authorized event; and
b. set up the business within one week of receiving a City license and continuously
operate the business through the commencement of the sanctioned event; or
c. be located at least 2000 feet from the perimeter of the parcel of property where a
sanctioned event is taking or will take place.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 8/74
C. The amount for a business license administrative fee for a canvasser or a solicitor shall be
$100.00 per calendar year, unless the proceeds from the solicitation are only used for the benefit
of a charitable organization with substantial ties to the community. Such institutions shall include,
but not be limited to churches, scouting organizations, schools, service clubs, and similar
charitable organizations. For such charitable organizations, the administrative fee shall be
waived. No canvasser or solicitor license shall be valid during the period of the Fiesta Days
celebration.
D. Person(s) conducting, garage sales, yard sales, or activities relating to City authorized or
sponsored events shall be exempt from the licensing requirements of this section, provided that
any garage or yard sale shall not operate for more than three (3) events of 48 hours or less
within a 12-month period at the same residence or street address, and shall be conducted by
bona fide residents of the premises, selling personal belongings of such resident. Goods offered
for sale shall not be placed over a public sidewalk or a public right-of-way unless a permit for the
same has been obtained.
E. The business license administrative fee for a fireworks merchant shall be $300.00 per year,
which amount shall not be prorated for a partial year.
F. A mobile food vendor business license shall be required for each mobile food truck, concession
cart, concession trailer, or other mobile vending unit. A mobile food vendor business license shall
be required for each mobile food truck, concession cart, concession trailer, or other mobile
vending unit. The permit fee for a mobile food vendor business license is $60.00, plus $25.00 for
a fire safety inspection. In the event a mobile food vendor is already licensed in another city in
Utah County, the administrative fee of $15.00 is assessed to cover the costs of reviewing a copy
of the license from the other city, a copy of the health department food truck permit issued by the
Utah County Health Department, and a copy of the fire safety inspection conducted on the
mobile food truck, concession cart, or concession trailer. The permit is good for the calendar year
in which it is issued. A mobile food vendor business license must be renewed each year,
following the procedures for a business license.
A mobile food vendor license is subject to the following criteria:
1. The nature, location, and manner of operation of the activity or event may not be in or on
public rights-of-way and does not constitute a health or safety hazard to the public.
2. The mobile food vendor has permission from the property owner where the foods are to
be sold.
3. The food truck, concession cart, or concession trailer must have a health department food
truck permit issued by the Utah County Health Department and a fire safety inspection.
4. Workers preparing food for immediate consumption, whether on premises, or “to go” must
have a valid food handler permit issued by the Utah County Health Department.
5. The sales must be located in a commercial, industrial, or public facilities zoning district.
Home deliveries are also allowed in any residential zone.
6. The use does not interfere with pedestrian access-ways, fire lanes, driveways, or traffic
visibility.
7. Parking on the property is adequate to serve any existing permanent uses and the
proposed mobile food vendor use.
8. No Mobile food vendor license shall be issued or valid during the period of the Fiesta
Days celebrations.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 9/74
G. Concession and booth permits for the Fiesta Days celebration shall be limited to the number
established by the City Council. The cost of concession and booth permits shall be in the
amounts set by the City Council. No person shall operate concessions or booths during the
Fiesta Days celebration without a permit issued by the City. Any person violating the provisions
of this paragraph is guilty of a Class C misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 04-13, Amended 02/19/2013)
(Ord. No. 16-15, Amended 11/03/2015)
(Ord. No. 09-18, Amended 04/17/2018)
5.04.120 Multiple Business Locations
Any person, company, firm, partnership, or corporation conducting business in more than one location
shall obtain a business license and pay a fee for each location.
5.04.130 Multiple Licenses
Any person, business, corporation or other entity carrying on business within the City who is required to
have any other type of license by local, state, or federal law shall be required to obtain a business
license in addition to the other required license(s), including beer or alcohol license, federal firearm
license, and/or other similar licenses.
5.04.140 Site Improvements
A. All new businesses, or existing businesses changing locations, shall be required to install site
improvements in compliance with the construction and development standards and
comprehensive zoning ordinances of the City, to the extent possible given existing structures and
site configurations, prior to receiving a business license. A new business license is required to
show the new location. In the event of a changed location, there shall be no business license
administrative fee for that license.
B. Inspections of the new location are required, together with payment of the inspection fee(s).
C. Exceptions based on existing structures and site configurations shall be granted by the
Development Review Committee.
5.04.150 Inspections
As a condition of the issuance, continuation, or renewal of a business license, an applicant shall permit
inspections of the place of business or other activity to ensure compliance with all applicable zoning,
building code, fire code, health, or safety regulations.
The cost of the inspection(s) fee shall be estimated by the City Council in the annual budget to reflect
the cost to the City to conduct inspection(s).
(Ord. No. 15-12, Amended 10/16/2012)
5.08 Auctioneers
5.08.010 Defined - License Required
5.08.020 Charitable Or Church Auctions
5.08.030 License - Not Transferable
5.08.040 False Representations
5.08.050 License - Revocation
5.08.060 Violation
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 10/74
5.08.010 Defined - License Required
An auctioneer as contemplated in this chapter is a person who conducts a public competitive sale of
property by outcry to the highest bona fide bidder. An auctioneer’s license administrative fee shall be
$50.00 per day. It is an infraction for any person to engage in the business of an auctioneer within the
City without first procuring a business license to do so as provided in Chapter 5.04 of this title. Such
auctioneer shall execute a bond to the City, with corporate surety in the sum of $1,000.00, conditional for
the faithful observance of all laws and ordinances of the City and the honest performance of all duties
required by ordinance, and the protection of all persons dealing with such auctioneer against all fraud,
deception, and imposition, said bond to be approved by the City Council and filed with the Community
Development Director, or designee.
(Ord. No. 18-09, Amended 11/03/2009)
5.08.020 Charitable Or Church Auctions
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any auction held for charitable or benevolent purposes
or for any church fair, festival or bazaar.
5.08.030 License - Not Transferable
The license granted under the provisions of Chapter 5.04 of this title shall not be transferable, nor shall
the same be loaned or used by any other person.
5.08.040 False Representations
It is an infraction for any auctioneer when selling or offering for sale at public auction any goods, wares
or merchandise under the provisions of this chapter, while describing said goods, wares or merchandise
with respect to character, quality, kind or value or otherwise, to make any fraudulent, untruthful or
unwarranted statements tending in any way to mislead bidders, or to substitute an article sold for
another.
5.08.050 License - Revocation
Licenses may be revoked on the failure of the licensee to comply with the conditions and requirements
of said license upon a hearing as set forth in §5.04.100.
5.08.060 Violation
Every person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction.
5.12 Beer
5.12.010 Definitions
5.12.020 Permit Required
5.12.030 Categories Of Permits
5.12.040 Non-Transferable
5.12.050 Administrative Fees
5.12.060 Revocation - Hearing Examiner
5.12.070 Duties
5.12.080 Inspections
5.12.090 Violations
5.12.010 Definitions
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 11/74
The words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings specified in the Utah Alcoholic
Beverage Control Act unless a different meaning is clearly evident. Said definitions are adopted and
incorporated by reference. The provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act [Title 32A of the Utah
Code] shall govern the selling and dispensing of alcoholic beverages within the City, except where
otherwise allowed by said act and set forth herein.
5.12.020 Permit Required
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell, or provide to the public any type of alcoholic
beverage without first obtaining a permit to do so from the City. An applicant need not have a permit
issued by the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, but shall be qualified in all respects to obtain a
State License from the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control upon the issuance of a City license.
All licensees shall comply with the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, Utah Code Annotated §32-A-1-101
et.seq., as it may from time to time be amended, and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder
by the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. An alcoholic beverage permit shall be in addition to
the business license required under Title 5 of the Spanish Fork City Municipal Code. The permit granted
herein shall expire on the 31st day of December of each year. A new permit is required each year. A
new permit must be obtained within 30 days of the expiration of any prior permit.
Applications shall be made available at the City offices and permits may be issued by the Community
Development Director’s office upon a showing of meeting all of the requirements set forth herein and the
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
A permitee holding a Class A Permit (as defined in the next section) for off-premise consumption shall
require any and all employees involved in the transaction of retail beer sales to obtain a beer handlers
permit from the Utah County Health Department, complying with all of the ordinances, rules, and
regulations promulgated by the Health Department for issuance of such permits. All employees of a
permitee involved in the transaction of retail beer sales will be required to possess and wear a beer
handler permit while on duty. This permit shall be worn in a conspicuous place such that the permit shall
be clearly visible to any person.
New employees of a permitee shall obtain a beer handler permit within 30 days of hire. During this 30-
day period, the employee may sell alcoholic beverages in accordance with the Utah Alcoholic Beverage
Control Act, the regulations of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission, and the provisions of this
Chapter.
The permitee is required to inform the Utah County Health Department of any employee possessing a
beer handler’s permit whose employment is terminated for conduct that would be punishable under the
statues or ordinances regulating alcoholic beverages. Permitees shall permit law enforcement officers
and Utah County Health Department employees to conduct random beer handlers permit compliance
checks on permitee’s premises.
An employee possessing a beer handler’s permit who is convicted of any law involving the sale of an
alcoholic beverage is not only subject to the penalties in §5.12.090 of this chapter, but shall incur a
suspension of the employee’s beer handler’s permit in accordance with the ordinances, rules, and
regulations adopted by the Utah County Health Department applicable to such permit.
(Ord. No. 10-04, Amended 06/15/2004)
(Ord. No. 18-09, Amended 11/03/2009)
5.12.030 Categories Of Permits
Permits shall be issued as follows:
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 12/74
"Class A" permits shall entitle the holder thereof to sell beer, light beer, malt liquor, or malted beverages
for consumption off the premises in accordance with the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
"Class B" permits shall entitle the holder thereof to sell beer, light beer, malt liquor, or malted beverages
for consumption on the premises in accordance with the Alcohol Beverage Control Act. Such permit will
also allow consumers to consume beverages off premises in those instances where it is permitted by the
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
"Class C" permits shall entitle the holder thereof to sell alcoholic beverages in conjunction with the
operation of a private club in accordance with the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
"Class D" permits shall entitle the holder thereof to sell alcoholic beverages in conjunction with the
operation of a restaurant in accordance with the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
"Class E" permits shall entitle the holder thereof to sell alcoholic beverages of the type specified in the
application for a single event in accordance with the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, and with such
restrictions as may be imposed in the permit. The City shall have the discretion to grant or deny such a
permit, taking into account the type of event, the type of persons expected to attend such event, the
location of the event, the time of the event, the proximity to residential areas, public areas, schools, and
churches.
"Class F" permits shall entitle the holder thereof to manufacture, warehouse, or sell wholesale alcoholic
beverages in accordance with the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
5.12.040 Non-Transferable
Permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be non-transferable.
5.12.050 Administrative Fees
Prior to the issuance of any permit hereunder, the applicant shall pay an annual fee in the amount of
$300.00. Said fee must be paid each year before the permit may be renewed. An initial permit obtained
during the first quarter of the calendar year shall be the full $300.00. An initial permit obtained during the
second quarter of the calendar year shall be $225.00, one obtained during the third quarter of the
calendar year shall be $150.00, and one obtained during the fourth quarter of the calendar year shall be
$75.00. A single event permit fee shall be $100.00 per permit.
5.12.060 Revocation - Hearing Examiner
A. Any permit issued hereunder may be revoked following notice and a hearing before a Hearing
Examiner. The Community Development Director is hereby appointed to act as Hearing
Examiner. Appeals from the decision of the Hearing Examiner shall be filed, in writing, within ten
(10) days of the decision of the hearing examiner. A filing fee of $150.00 shall accompany the
notice of appeal. Appeals shall be heard before the City Council. Decisions by the City Council
are final and non-appealable.
B. Permits may be revoked for any violation of this Chapter, any violation of the Alcoholic Beverage
Control Act, or upon losing a State issued license.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 13/74
C. Except for cases involving sales of alcohol to underage persons by offsite beer retailers, the
Hearing Examiner, or City Council, shall follow the following criteria when holding revocation
hearings:
1. The City license shall be revoked if the State license has been revoked.
2. The permit holder shall receive a warning for a first violation of this Chapter or of the
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
3. The permit holder shall have the permit revoked for a period of up to six (6) months if the
violation is a second violation within two (2) years of the first violation and shall be subject
to a civil penalty of up to $250.00.
4. The permit holder shall have the permit revoked indefinitely if the violation is a third (3)
violation within two (2) years of two (2) prior violations and shall be subject to a civil
penalty of up to $500.00. The permit holder will not be allowed to reapply for a permit for
a period of time up to one (1) year as designated by the Hearing Examiner or City
Council. The City is not required to grant a permit upon reapplication.
D. In cases of sales of alcohol to underage persons by offsite beer retailers, the Hearing Examiner,
or City Council, shall follow the requirements set forth in Utah Code Ann. §32B-7-302(3).
E. For purposes of revoking a permit, the permit holder is responsible for the acts of its employees,
agents, or others acting under the permit issued.
(Ord. No. 02-01, Repealed, Reenacted 03/06/2001)
(Ord. No. 10-04, Amended 06/15/2004)
(Ord. No. 11-05, Amended 09/06/2005)
(Ord. No. 18-09, Amended 11/03/2009)
(Ord. No. 16-12, Amended 11/06/2012)
5.12.070 Duties
No permit holder shall permit beer, light beer, malt liquor, or malted beverages, or other type of alcoholic
beverage to be sold from drive up windows. In addition, thereto, each person or entity granted a permit
under this chapter shall abide by the following:
A. A Class A permit holder:
1. Shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act;
2. Who holds either a state issued restaurant liquor license or a state issued limited
restaurant license may operate within either of the 300-foot or the 200-foot restrictions
from public or private schools, churches, public libraries, public playgrounds, or parks if
the permit holder is located in a commercial or industrial zone of the City. This shall
constitute the local written consent contemplated by Utah Code Annotated §32A-4-101(4)
(c)(i)(A) and §32A-4-302(4)(c)(i)(A)(1953, as amended). The Community Development
Director is authorized to issue to the State Liquor Control Commission a letter authorizing
any such uses when an applicant is located within the applicable zones.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 14/74
B. A Class B permit holder:
1. Shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act;
2. Shall not permit performers or entertainers from wearing any costume or attire or to
engage in any conduct prohibited by one serving alcoholic beverages as set forth in Utah
Code Annotated §32A-10-206(10);
3. Shall not permit the sell of beer, light beer, malt liquors, or malted beverages to be sold
on Sundays.
C. A Class C permit holder:
1. Shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act;
2. Shall not allow any person under the age of 21 years on the premises;
3. Shall keep a daily register showing the names of members, visitors, and guests entering
the premises on that day, together with the member or visitor card number; and in the
event of guests, the sponsoring member or visitor card number.
D. A Class D permit holder:
1. Shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act;
E. A Class E permit holder:
1. Shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act;
2. Shall comply with all of the restrictions imposed by his or her single event permit as
granted by the City.
3. Shall not permit any person under the age of 21 years to remain in or about the club
premises or facilities.
F. A Class F permit holder:
1. Shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
(Ord. No.02-97, Amended 01/07/1997)
(Ord. No.05-97, Amended 03/18/97)
(Ord. No.14-99, Amended (1)(b); Repealed (3)(b) 08/03/1999)
(Ord. No.01-00, Enacted (3)(b)(c) 01/04/2000)
(Ord. No.13-04, Amended (1)(b), Repealed (4)(b) 10/19/2004)
(Ord. No. 01-06, Amended 02/21/2006)
5.12.080 Inspections
All permitees under this chapter shall allow access, at reasonable hours, to the premises and business
records to verify compliance with this chapter and/or with the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. Such
access shall be allowed to any police officer of the City. Failure to allow an inspection when requested
shall result in revocation of the permit in addition to any sanctions authorized by the Alcoholic Beverage
Control Act.
5.12.090 Violations
Unless otherwise set forth in the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, each violation of this chapter is a Class
B misdemeanor.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 15/74
5.16 Franchises And Special Privileges
5.16.010 Requirement Of Franchise
5.16.020 Application Copies
5.16.030 Criteria For Grant Of A Franchise
5.16.040 Franchise Agreements
5.16.050 Non-Assignable - Exception
5.16.060 Revocation Of Grant
5.16.010 Requirement Of Franchise
It shall be unlawful to install, construct, or maintain any wires, cables, fibers, poles, pipes, or other
equipment for the provision of public utility service or telecommunications in, on, under, or over any
street, alley, sidewalk, parkway, or other public place within the municipal limits of Spanish Fork City
without having first obtained a franchise for use of the public way from Spanish Fork City.
(Ord. No. 15-95, Rep/Reenact 10/04/1995)
5.16.020 Application Copies
Whenever application is made to the City Council for a franchise or grant of special privilege, or for an
extension or renewal of any existing franchise or grant of special privilege, the applicant shall furnish to
the City Manager for the use of the City Council ten (10) copies of the proposed ordinance or ordinances
and pay to the City treasury a fee as established from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. No. 15-95, Rep/Reenact 10/04/1995)
5.16.030 Criteria For Grant Of A Franchise
A. No person, corporation, or other entity may receive a franchise to construct, maintain, or operate
facilities to be used to provide any public utility, service, or telecommunications within the limits of
the City unless the City Council has determined that granting such franchise is in the public
interest, as determined by:
1. The franchise is consistent with the safety and health and will promote the prosperity,
comfort, and convenience of the City and its residents; and
2. It is consistent with the protection of property in the City.
No person, corporation, or other entity may receive a franchise to construct, maintain, or operate
facilities used or to be used to provide any public utility, service, or telecommunications within the
limits of the City to an area where such service is provided from the City, or an area where the
City has incurred expenses in providing such service, until satisfactory provision has been made,
on terms and conditions approved by the City Council, for payment by the prospective franchisee
to the City of the fair market value of those facilities dedicated to provide said service to the area
being franchised. In the event the City and the prospective franchisee cannot agree upon the fair
market value of said facilities, the franchise may not be granted until the agreement is reached.
(Ord. No. 15-95, Rep/Reenact 10/04/1995)
5.16.040 Franchise Agreements
A. Spanish Fork City may, by written agreement, grant one or more non-exclusive franchises for
use of public streets, public easements, and public right-of-ways. Said agreements should take
the form of both contract and uncodified municipal ordinance.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 16/74
B. Unless the City Council shall otherwise consent by resolution, each agreement and granting of
franchise shall include, but not be limited to, provisions related to the following items:
1. The term of the franchise;
2. The amount of any franchise fee or other fees to be paid for use of the public streets,
easements, or right-of-ways;
3. The rights and limitations on the use by the franchisee of City-owned or controlled streets,
easements, poles, or other publicly-owned property;
4. Public or governmental use, if any, of the franchised system;
5. A description of the area or customers who are to be served by the franchisee, including
obligations to expand service.
C. No franchise contract shall take effect until it has been approved by the City Council.
D. Any franchise granted pursuant to this section shall remain subject to the right of the City Council
to adopt ordinances or other laws regulating the same, including but not limited to, the following:
1. The commencement, interruption, or discontinuation of customer service;
2. The quality of service received by customers;
3. Customer billing practices;
4. The handling of customer complaints.
(Ord. No. 15-95, Rep/Reenact, 10/04/1995)
5.16.050 Non-Assignable - Exception
All franchises and grants of special privilege shall be deemed to be non-assignable, without the express
permission of the City Council, whether or not such limitation is set forth in the body of the franchise or
grant.
Any attempt at assignment or transfer of a franchise or a special privilege not made in accordance with
the provisions of this section shall operate as a forfeiture of all the rights and grants therein given.
(Ord. No. 15-95, Rep/Reenact 10/04/1995)
5.16.060 Revocation Of Grant
The grant of any franchise may be revoked by the City upon the violation of any provision of this chapter
or any condition of the franchise agreement or ordinance. Notice of any violation shall be given to the
franchisee at least 15 days prior to any action being taken to revoke the franchise. If the violation is not
corrected within the 15 days, the City Council may schedule a hearing to take evidence concerning the
violation. If a violation is found, the council may impose sanctions, including fines, probation, revocation
of the grant of franchise, or such other remedy that satisfies the demands of justice.
(Ord. No. 15-95, Rep/Reenact 10/04/1995)
5.18 Cable Television Franchises
5.18.010 Legislative Intent
5.18.020 Definitions
5.18.030 Unlawful Activity
5.18.040 Grant Of Franchise
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 17/74
5.18.050 Required Extensions Of Service
5.18.060 Two-Way Capability
5.18.070 Procedure For Remedying Franchise Violations
5.18.080 Alternative Remedies
5.18.090 Franchise Fee
5.18.100 Application
5.18.110 Application Fee
5.18.010 Legislative Intent
The City finds that the continuation and development of cable television and communications system
has great benefit and impact upon the residents of Spanish Fork City. Because of the complex and
rapidly changing technology associated with cable television, the City further finds that the public
convenience, safety and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers which
should be vested in the City or such persons as the City shall designate. It is the City's intent to ensure
that City residents receive a high-quality cable television and communications service comparable to the
best offered in any community in Utah County; that any inconvenience to residents in the development,
operation, and maintenance of a cable system or systems be minimized; and that the City is properly
compensated for the administration of cable television and communication franchises and the use of the
public facilities permitted by this Chapter. It is the intent of this Chapter to provide for the means to attain
the best possible public interest in these matters, and any franchise issued pursuant to this Chapter shall
be deemed to include this finding as an integral part thereof.
(Ord. No. 29-94, Enacted 12/07/1994)
5.18.020 Definitions
"Basic Cable" The lowest priced tier of service that includes the retransmission of local broadcast
television signals.
"Cable Act" Collectively means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 (Public Law No. 98-549,
47 USC 5221 (Supp.)) as amended, and the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act
of 1992, as amended.
"Cable Communications System, System, or Systems" Also referred to as "Cable Television
System", "Cable System", "CATV System", or "Community Antenna TV System", shall have the meaning
specified for "Cable Communication System" in the Cable Act. Unless otherwise specified it shall in this
document refer to the cable communications system constructed and operated in the City under this
ordinance.
"City" The City of Spanish Fork.
"FCC" Federal Communications Commission or successor governmental entity thereto.
"Franchise" The non-exclusive, revocable right granted to the Grantee by which the City authorizes the
Grantee to erect, construct, reconstruct, operate, dismantle, test, use and maintain a Cable
Communications System in the City.
"Franchising Authority" The City of Spanish Fork, Utah.
"Grantee" TCI Cablevision of Utah, Inc., or the lawful successor, transferee, or assignee thereof.
"Grantor" The City of Spanish Fork, Utah.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 18/74
"Gross Revenues" All cash, credits, property of any kind or nature or other consideration received
directly or indirectly by the Grantee, arising from or attributable to the operation of the Cable Television
System in the City.
"Person" An individual, corporation, partnership, association, joint venture or organization of any kind
and the lawful trustee, successor, assignee, transferee, joint stock company, trust, corporation,
governmental entity, or personal representative thereof.
"Public Way or Street" The surface of, and the space above and below, any public street, highway,
freeway, bridge, land path, alley, court, boulevard, sidewalk, parkway, way, lane, public way, drive,
circle, or other public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, public utility easements, dedicated utility
strips, or rights-of-way dedicated for compatible uses and any temporary or permanent fixtures or
improvements located thereon now or hereafter held by the Franchising Authority in the Service Area
which shall entitle the Franchising Authority and the Grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of
installing, operating, repairing, and maintaining the System. Public Way shall also mean any easement
now or hereafter held by the Franchising Authority within the Service Area for the purpose of public
travel, or for utility or public service use dedicated for compatible uses, and shall include other
easements or rights-of-way as shall within their proper use and meaning entitle the Franchising Authority
and the Grantee to the use thereof for the purposes of installing and operating the Grantee's System
over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances,
attachments, and other property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to the System.
"Service Area" The present municipal boundaries of the Franchising Authority, and shall include any
additions thereto by annexation or other legal means.
"Subscriber" A person or user of the System who lawfully receives communications and other services
therefrom with the Grantee's express permission.
(Ord. No. 29-94, Enacted 12/07/1994)
5.18.030 Unlawful Activity
A. It is unlawful to operate a Cable Communications System within the City without first obtaining
from the City a Franchise to do so.
B. No Cable Communications System shall be allowed to occupy or use the streets of the City
without a franchise.
C. In addition to the criminal and civil remedies provided by the Federal and State law, it is a
misdemeanor for any person, firm or corporation to create or make use of any unauthorized
connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively, or otherwise, with any part
of the System without the express consent of the Grantee. It is a misdemeanor for any person to
tamper with, remove, or injure any property, equipment, or part of the System or any means of
receiving services provided thereto, without the express consent of the Grantee.
(Ord. No. 29-94, Enacted 12/07/1994)
5.18.040 Grant Of Franchise
A. Subject to the requirements of this ordinance, the City may grant to any Grantee a nonexclusive,
revocable Franchise to construct, operate, maintain, and reconstruct a Cable Communications
System within part or all of the City. The Franchise shall constitute both a right and an obligation
to provide the services of a Cable Communications System as required by the provisions of this
ordinance.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 19/74
B. The term of any new or Renewal Franchise and all rights, privileges, obligations, and restrictions
pertaining thereto shall remain in effect for a period of fifteen years, unless terminated sooner as
hereinafter provided.
C. The material provisions of any franchises granted pursuant to this ordinance shall be
comparable, in order that one operator not be granted an unfair competitive advantage over
another, and to provide all parties equal protection under the law. The Franchising Authority shall
not authorize or permit a System to operate within the Franchise area on terms or conditions
more favorable or less burdensome to any one operator.
(Ord. No. 29-94, Enacted 12/07/1994)
5.18.050 Required Extensions Of Service
A. Grantee is hereby authorized to extend the Cable System as necessary, as desirable, or as
required pursuant to the franchise agreement.
B. No Subscriber shall be refused service arbitrarily.
(Ord. No. 29-94, Enacted 12/07/1994)
5.18.060 Two-Way Capability
A. The Grantee shall design and construct the system in such a manner as to provide return
response capability and so as to permit the introduction of return video and two-way data signals
as production technology allows and as the demand requires.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 20/74
B. Should Grantee become a provider of, and should the City elect to purchase data or other
telecommunication services other than traditional Cable services from the Grantee in the service
area, the City shall pay no more than an amount based on the lowest competitor's price in the
service area for like services. The Grantee may offer to provide such services to the City at the
lowest competitor's price in the service area for like services. The Grantee may offer to provide
such services to the City at the lowest competitor's price less a competitive differential.
1. No provision contained herein shall require the Grantee to provide or prohibit the Grantee
from providing telecommunication services to the City which will classify the Grantee as a
common carrier or public utility, or otherwise subject it to regulatory authority outside of
that for the traditional Cable services currently provided by the Grantee in the service
area. To this end:
a. The Grantee may (i) refuse telecommunication service including but not limited to
data, voice or other non-traditional Cable service to the City, or (ii) control, monitor
and/or maintain any portion of the system including but not limited to the optical
path and the optical/electronic interface required to provide such services.
b. The City shall fully disclose the type(s) of services it will transmit and receive on
the Grantee's system.
2. All applications of the system by the City under this section are intended solely for their
use, and are not for resale or commercial use.
3. Should the Grantee become a provider of such services to the City, the Grantee's liability
for any malfunction or failure of transmission under this section shall be limited to repair of
the malfunctioning facility and restoration of transmission capability. Grantee shall have
no liability for special or consequential damages of lost data or economic loss resulting for
the City/County's inability to transmit signals over said facilities except to the extent the
loss or damages are the consequence of Grantee's willful misconduct.
(Ord. No. 29-94, Enacted 12/07/1994)
5.18.070 Procedure For Remedying Franchise Violations
A. In the event that City believes that Grantee has violated any provision of the Franchise, City may
make a written demand on Grantee that it remedies such violation. From delivery of such notice
the Grantee shall (a) within 14 days, respond to the Franchising Authority, contesting the
assertion of noncompliance, or (b) have 30 days to cure such default, or (c) in the event that, by
the nature of default, such default cannot be cured within the three (3) day period, initiate
reasonably steps to remedy such default and notify the Franchising Authority of the steps being
taken and the projected date that they will be completed. If the Grantee fails to comply with
§5.18.070 or the City believes the Grantee to still be not in compliance, and the alleged violation
is of a significant material provision of the franchise, a meeting with the City manager shall be
held to review the alleged violation. If this meeting does not result in a satisfactory resolution,
and/or Grantee requests a hearing, then a hearing shall be held, and Grantee shall be provided
with an opportunity to be heard upon 30 days written notice to Grantee of the time and the place
of the hearing and the allegation of Franchise violations.
1. Any hearing will be conducted by the City Council.
2. The costs incurred by the parties for attorney's fees, expert witness fees and other
expenses shall be borne solely by the party incurring the costs.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 21/74
3. All witnesses testifying at any hearing held pursuant to the is section shall be sworn
witnesses and shall be subject to direct and cross-examination. However, formal rules of
evidence applicable to the trial of civil and criminal proceedings in the trial courts of the
State of Utah shall not be applicable to the hearing. The provisions of the Administrative
Procedures Act, commencing at §63-46b-1, et. seq. U.C.A. 1953, as amended, or any
such hearing. The hearing may be continued from time to time.
4. The City Council shall upon conclusion of the hearing prepare findings of fact and
conclusions. The decision shall be made filed and mailed to the Grantee not later than 30
calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing.
B. If, after the hearing, the City Council determines that a non-compliance occurred or still exists,
then Grantor may impose a remedy including, without limitation.
1. Making the correction itself, and charging the cost to the Grantee.
2. Commencing an action at law for monetary damages, or seeking other equitable relief;
3. Requiring the filing of a financial performance instrument by the Grantee to insure future
performance; or
4. In the case of a substantial default of a material provision of the Franchise, declaring the
Franchise terminated.
C. If the decision by the City Council is that there are grounds for termination of the Franchise and
that the Franchise shall be terminated, the City Council shall adopt a resolution which terminates
the Franchise and includes it findings and conclusions. A copy of the resolution shall be mailed to
the Grantee.
D. The Grantee shall not be held in default or non-compliance with the provisions of the Franchise,
nor suffer any enforcement or penalty relating thereto, for such non-compliance or alleged
defaults are caused by strikes, acts of God, power outages, or other event reasonably beyond its
ability to control.
(Ord. No. 29-94, Enacted 12/07/1994)
5.18.080 Alternative Remedies
No provision of this ordinance shall be deemed to bar the right of the City to seek or obtain judicial relief
from a violation of any provisions of the Franchise or any rule, regulation, requirement or directive
promulgated thereunder. Neither the existence of other remedies identified in his ordinance nor the
exercise thereof shall be deemed to bar or otherwise limit the right of the City to recover monetary
damages for such violation by the Grantee, or judicial enforcement of the Grantee's obligations by
means of specific performance, injunction relief or mandate, or any other judicial remedy at law or in
equity. No provision of this ordinance shall be deemed to bar any rights the Grantee may have under law
and the right to review of any decision by the City Council by a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 29-94, Enacted 12/07/1994)
5.18.090 Franchise Fee
A. For the use of the streets and for the purposes of providing revenue with which to defray the
costs or regulation arising out of the granting of this Franchise under this ordinance, Grantee
shall pay a Franchise Fee.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 22/74
B. During the term of the Franchise, Grantee shall pay to the City an amount equal to five percent
(5%) per year of the Grantee's annual Gross Revenue received.
C. The Franchise Fee shall be paid quarterly 45 days after the end of each quarter. Each payment
shall be accompanied by a report from a representative of the Grantee showing the basis for the
computation.
D. No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as an accord that the amount paid is, in fact,
the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of payment be construed as a release of any
claim which the City may have for further or additional sums payable under the provisions of this
Section.
E. Any Franchise Fees which remain unpaid after the dates specified in §5.18.090(3) shall be
delinquent and shall thereafter accrue interest at the maximum legal rate until paid.
(Ord. No. 29-94, Enacted 12/07/1994)
5.18.100 Application
A. No initial license franchise shall be issued except upon written application to the City. Such forms
shall contain such information as the City Council may prescribe as to the:
1. Citizenship and character of the applicant.
2. The financial, technical and other qualifications of the applicant to operate the system.
3. Complete information as to its principals and ultimate beneficial owners, including, in the
case of corporations, all stockholders both nominal and beneficial owning one percent
(1%) or more of the issued and outstanding stock, and in the case of incorporated
associations, all members and ultimate beneficial owners however designated.
4. Description in detail of the equipment or facilities proposed to be constructed, installed
and maintained.
5. A statement or schedule setting forth the number of channels and all of the television or
radio stations proposed to be received, transmitted, conducted, relayed or otherwise
conveyed over its system.
6. Such other information as the City may deem appropriate or necessary. Such application
shall be signed by the applicant or a duly authorized representative.
B. The City Council, after the last date fixed for the receipt of the application, shall cause to be
published in a newspaper of general circulation within the City, a notice of a public hearing,
giving the time, date, place of such hearing, and listing the names of the applicants and inviting
public examination of the applicants and qualification of said applicants.
C. A public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the standards of due process fairness to
applicants and the public and in accordance with the FCC rules and regulations and orders and
policies pertinent to such hearing. Each applicant shall be notified of the time and location of
his/her application to be considered.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 23/74
D. At the option of the City and upon application of the Grantee, any franchise granted under this
chapter may be renewable in the same manner as required herein for obtaining an original
franchise except those provisions which are by their terms expressly inapplicable. The City
Council may, at its option, waive compliance with any or all of the requirements of this section.
Any proceedings undertaken by the Franchising Authority that relate to the renewal of the
Grantee's Franchise shall be governed by and comply with the provisions of the Cable Act, as
amended, unless the procedures and substantive protections set forth therein shall be deemed to
be preempted and superseded by the provisions of any subsequent provision of Federal or State
law.
(Ord. No. 29-94, Enacted 12/07/1994)
5.18.110 Application Fee
Each initial application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable filing fee in the amount of $1,000.00,
which shall be payable to Spanish Fork City and remitted to the City Finance Director.
(Ord. No. 29-94, Enacted 12/07/1994)
(Ord. No. 18-09, Amended 11/03/2009)
5.20 Pawnbrokers
5.20.010 Pawnbroker Defined
5.20.020 License Required
5.20.030 Display Of Merchandise
5.20.040 Firearms
5.20.060 Bond Required
5.20.070 Disclosure Provisions
5.20.080 Right To Redeem Pawned Articles
5.20.090 Dealing With Proscribed Persons
5.20.100 Protection Of Minors
5.20.110 Hours
5.20.120 Ownership Of Pawned Property
5.20.130 Unlawful Acts
5.20.140 Separate Rooms
5.20.150 Liability Of Principal
5.20.160 Violation
5.20.010 Pawnbroker Defined
"Pawnbroker" means any person who loans money or deals in the purchase or exchange of personal
property, on condition of selling the same back again to the pledgor or depositor; or who loans or
advances money on personal property by taking a chattel mortgage or security thereon, and takes or
receives such personal property or other indicia of title into his possession; or any person who sells
unredeemed pledges with or without the contemporary sale of new merchandise to facilitate the sale of
merchandise.
5.20.020 License Required
A. It is unlawful for any person to be in the business of pawnbroker in the City, without having
previously obtained a license to operate as a pawnbroker in accordance with the provisions of
this title.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 24/74
B. The business license administrative fee for a pawnbroker shall be as set forth in §5.04.110(B),
and each license shall expire on December 31st of each year. The license, after being issued,
shall be displayed prominently in the place of business. A copy of all ordinances pertaining to the
conduct or transaction of pawnbroker business shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the
place of business in such a way that it can be easily perused by all who do business with the
pawnbroker.
5.20.030 Display Of Merchandise
All merchandise displayed by a pawnbroker to be held for sale by a pawnbroker shall be held and
displayed within an enclosed structure.
5.20.040 Firearms
Any pawnbroker accepting and reselling firearms must have a federal firearms permit. Any pawnbroker
violating this provision shall have his license revoked. Any pawnbroker accepting or reselling firearms is
required to produce the federal firearms permit upon request of any law enforcement officer of the City.
(Ord. No. 04-00, Repealed 5.20.050, 04/18/2000)
5.20.060 Bond Required
Before any license shall be issued to a pawnbroker, under the provisions of this chapter, the applicant
for the license shall execute and deliver to the City a bond in the principal amount of one thousand
dollars executed by a corporate surety authorized to so business in the state, and conditioned upon the
faithful performance of the licensee of all requirements under this chapter.
5.20.070 Disclosure Provisions
A. All pawnbrokers shall keep a complete ledger-type record containing an account of each and
every transaction concerning the buying selling, pawning and redemption of articles, which
record shall be written in the English language in legible printing at the time of the receipt, loan,
purchase, sale or redemption, and shall set forth the following information:
1. The date and time;
2. The name, date of birth, and full description of the pledgor or seller, with his street
address, City and state of residence. The name, date of birth and description of the seller
or pledgor shall be taken from an identification card containing his or her photograph. The
type of identification card used for this purpose shall be noted on the form. If the property
is jointly owned, both owners must be designated as above.
3. An accurate description of the goods, articles or things pawned or purchased, including
the serial number, model number, name of the manufacturer, and dimensional description
(e.g. Zenith color TV, 23-inch, Model Number _____, Serial Number _____; or Colt pistol,
6-inch barrel, Model Number _____, Serial Number _____);
4. The amount of money loaned or advanced thereon or paid therefore;
5. The date and hour of the transaction, and in the case of items pawned, the period of time
within which the pledge must be honored;
6. The residence address of the pawnbroker;
7. The number of the pawn ticket;
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 25/74
8. Each ticket shall have the name of the business and shall be signed by the seller or
pledgor and agent of the business.
B. The pawnbroker shall make out, in connection with each article pawned, purchased or received
pursuant to a transaction of any nature, a serially numbered pawn ticket.
C. Each pawn ticket shall be issued in multiple copies so that one copy can be retained by the
pawnbroker, one copy referred to the person delivering the article, one copy at the close of each
business day mailed by the pawnbroker to the sheriff of the county, and the fourth copy delivered
to the police department of the City at no greater interval than one week. It shall be a
misdemeanor for the pawnbroker to issue any pawn ticket which is not serially numbered in
sequence as shown in the ledger book in subsection A above, or to intentionally falsify any
information on either the ledger or the four-part ticket. The copies delivered to the county sheriff
and to the City police department shall be clear, legible, and shall contain all signatures. It is
unlawful for any pawnbroker, whether acting for himself or acting by and through any agent or
employee, to transact any business with respect to a pawn, redemption, purchase, sale,
consignment, or any other transaction or gift, other than in conformance with the requirements
set forth in this chapter.
5.20.080 Right To Redeem Pawned Articles
It is unlawful, in all cases in which an article pledged has been forfeited, for a sale or other disposition
thereof to be made by the pawnbroker within a period of two months from the date of the pledge;
provided, that if the pledgor makes payment to the pawnbroker equal to the interest for a particular
month, the redemption period shall be extended an addition 30 days.
5.20.090 Dealing With Proscribed Persons
It is unlawful for any pawnbroker to receive any goods, articles or things in pawn, in pledge or to loan or
allow to be redeemed any article by any person who at the time of the transaction is intoxicated or who
is known to be a habitual drunkard, or any person who is known to be a thief, insane or incompetent, or
to any person under the age of eighteen years.
5.20.100 Protection Of Minors
It is unlawful for any pawnbroker to sell or trade any gun, or knife with a blade in excess of four inches
long to any person under the age of eighteen years, unless the person is accompanied by their legal
guardian or parent.
5.20.110 Hours
It is unlawful for any pawnbroker to receive any goods by way of pawn or pledge, or to keep his place of
business open before the hour of 7:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m.; provided, however, that on Saturday of
each week and on days preceding legal holidays, and the last 15 days of December of each year, it is
lawful for the pawnbroker to keep his/her place of business open until 11:00 p.m.
5.20.120 Ownership Of Pawned Property
A. It is unlawful for any pawnbroker to accept goods or articles in pawn from other than the lawful
owner thereof, except with written permission of the owner. Any articles pawned by other than
the owner, taken by a pawnbroker, shall be surrendered to the owner thereof upon presentation
of proof of ownership of the pawned article by the owner, and failure of a pawnbroker to
surrender such materials forthwith upon demand by the true owner, and after exhibition of proof
of ownership, shall be a Class B misdemeanor.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 26/74
B. This provision shall apply to outright purchase and all other applicable transactions of any nature.
5.20.130 Unlawful Acts
A. A pawnbroker shall be required to adhere to the requirements of Utah Code Annotated §76-6-
408 in addition to any requirement of this chapter.
B. Every pawnbroker or person who has or operates a business dealing in or collecting used or
personal property shall require the seller or person delivering the property to certify, in writing,
that he has the legal rights to sell the property. The pawnbroker or person shall also require the
seller or person delivering the property to obtain a legible print, preferably the right thumb, at the
bottom of the certificate next to his signature, or any other positive form of identification.
C. Every pawnbroker or person who has or operates a business dealing in or collecting used or
personal property and every agent, employee or representative of the pawnbroker or person who
buys merchandise or property shall retain that property for a period of 30 days before selling or
otherwise disposing of the property or merchandise.
5.20.140 Separate Rooms
It is unlawful for any pawnbroker to contain his pawnbroking business in the same room or in the same
building with interconnecting rooms with any business dealing in alcoholic beverages.
5.20.150 Liability Of Principal
The holder of a pawnbroker’s license is liable for any and all acts of his employees in violation of this
chapter.
5.20.160 Violation
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
5.24 Secondhand, Junk And Antique Dealers
5.24.010 Secondhand, Junk And Antique Dealers Defined
5.24.020 License Required - Fee
5.24.030 Display Of Merchandise
5.24.040 Disclosure Provisions
5.24.050 Dealing With Proscribed Persons
5.24.060 Ownership Of Property
5.24.070 Unlawful Acts
5.24.080 Liability Of Principal
5.24.090 Exemption
5.24.010 Secondhand, Junk And Antique Dealers Defined
A. Antique Dealer. Any person who engages in the buying, selling, bartering and exchanging of old
furniture, coins, currency or other materials bought or sold as having antique value in hereby
declared to be an "antique dealer."
B. Junk Dealer. Any person engaged in buying and selling, bartering and exchanging old metal,
glass, rags, rubber, paper or other junk is hereby declared to be a "junk dealer."
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 27/74
C. Secondhand Dealer.
1. Any person who keeps a store, office or place of business or who travels through the
community for the purpose of purchasing, bartering, exchanging or selling secondhand
goods, (including, but not limited to, used clothing or garments of any kind, books,
musical instruments, coins, wares or merchandise), or who engages in the business of
dealing in secondhand goods is hereby declared to be a "secondhand dealer."
2. An otherwise licensed business which sells new appliances or musical instruments or
automobiles is exempt from the above when the used article is used as a trade-in for a
new item of the same or similar description.
5.24.020 License Required - Fee
A. It is unlawful for any person to do business as a secondhand dealer, a junk dealer or an antique
dealer in the City, without having previously obtained a license for that purpose in accordance
with the provisions of this Chapter and Chapter 5.04 of this Title.
B. The business license administrative fee for a secondhand, junk or antique dealer shall be as set
forth in §5.04.110(A). Each license shall expire on December 31st of each year. The license,
after being issued, shall be displayed prominently in the place of business.
5.24.030 Display Of Merchandise
All merchandise displayed by a secondhand, junk, or antique dealer to be held for sale by such dealer
shall be held and displayed within an enclosed structure.
5.24.040 Disclosure Provisions
A. All licensees under this chapter shall keep a complete written record containing an account of
each and every transaction concerning any goods taken into the business either by purchase or
by trade, which record shall be written in the English language in legible printing at the time of the
purchase or trade, and shall set forth the following information:
1. The date and time;
2. The name, date of birth, and address of the customer. (If the property is jointly owned,
each owner's information must be given in full.) If the property sold or traded by other
than the legal owner, both names must be included.
3. An accurate description of the goods, articles or things sold or traded, including the serial
number of the article, the name of the manufacturer, if available, and a factual description
of the item (e.g. Zenith color TV, 23-inch, Model Number _____, Serial Number _____);
4. The amount of money paid for the item with each item listed separately with a value
ascribed to each or in the event of an exchange, the value ascribed on the exchange;
5. The day, time of day, month and year that the transaction occurred;
6. The number of the sales ticket;
B. The licensee shall make out, in connection with each article purchased or traded for, a serially
numbered sales ticket.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 28/74
C. Each sales ticket shall be issued in multiple copies so that one copy can be retained by the
licensee, one copy given to the customer and one copy at the close of each business week shall
be mailed or delivered to the police department of the City. It is a Class B misdemeanor for the
licensee to take any property by either sale or trade into his business without issuing a sales
ticket or to use a sales ticket which is not serially numbered in sequence as shown in the ledger
book referred to in subsection A above, or to intentionally falsify any information on either the
ledger or the ticket. It is unlawful for any licensee, whether acting for himself or acting by and
through any agent or employee, to transact any business with respect to which a sales ticket is
required in this chapter other than in conformance with the requirements set forth in this chapter.
5.24.050 Dealing With Proscribed Persons
A. It is unlawful for any licensee hereunder to receive any goods subject to this chapter from any
person who, at the time of the transaction, is intoxicated or who is known to be a habitual
drunkard, or who is known to be a thief, is insane or incompetent, or any person under the age of
18 years.
B. Any licensee hereunder who accepts property which he/she knows to have been stolen is guilty
of a Class B misdemeanor.
5.24.060 Ownership Of Property
It is unlawful for any licensee hereunder to accept materials, by either purchase or trade, from other than
the lawful owner thereof except with the written permission of the owner. Any article accepted from other
than the owner, taken by a licensee hereunder, shall be surrendered to the real owner thereof upon
presentation of proof of ownership of the article by the real owner. Failure of the licensee to surrender
such materials forthwith upon demand by the true owner and after exhibition of proof of ownership shall
be a misdemeanor.
5.24.070 Unlawful Acts
A. A licensee hereunder shall be required to adhere to the requirements of Utah Code Annotated
§76-6-408 in addition to any requirements of this chapter.
B. Every licensee hereunder and every agent, employee or representative of the licensee, who
buys, receives or obtains property pursuant to a license issued under this chapter shall require
the seller or person delivering the property to certify, in writing, that he has the legal right to sell
the property. The licensee or his agent shall also require the seller or person delivering the
property to affix a legible print, preferably the right thumb, at the bottom of the certificate next to
his signature, or to provide another positive form of identification. Such alternative identification
must be the type of identification having a photograph of the customers (i.e. a driver's license
with photograph attached), and if used in lieu of the thumbprint, the licensee shall affix the proper
numbers from the driver's license or other identification and adequately identify the identification.
5.24.080 Liability Of Principal
The holder of a license hereunder is liable for any and all acts of his employees in violation of this
chapter.
5.24.090 Exemption
Purchases of recyclable cans and bottles are exempt from this chapter.
(Ord. No. 04-00, Repealed 5.24.100, 04/18/2000)
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 29/74
5.28 Sexually Oriented Business And Employee Licensing Act
5.28.010 Title For Citation
5.28.020 Purpose
5.28.030 Application
5.28.040 Definitions
5.28.050 Obscenity And Nudity
5.28.060 Location And Zoning Restrictions
5.28.070 Business License Required
5.28.080 Exemptions From License Requirements
5.28.090 Legitimate Artistic Modeling
5.28.100 Business Categories - Number Of Licenses
5.28.110 Employee Licenses
5.28.120 License Application - Disclosures Required
5.28.130 License - Fees
5.28.140 License - Bond
5.28.150 License - Premises Location And Name
5.28.160 License - Issuance Conditions
5.28.170 License - Term
5.28.180 License - Notice Of Change Of Information
5.28.190 License - Transfer Limitations
5.28.195 Moving Of Business Location
5.28.200 License - Display
5.28.210 License - Statement In Advertisements
5.28.220 Regulations And Unlawful Activities
5.28.230 Outcall Services Prohibited
5.28.240 Adult Business - Design Of Premises
5.28.250 Semi-Nude Entertainment Business - Design Of Premises
5.28.260 Semi-Nude Entertainment Business - Locations Restrictions
5.28.270 Semi-Nude Dancing Bar Prohibited
5.28.280 Semi-Nude Dancing Performer Restriction
5.28.290 Semi-Nude Dancing Agencies
5.28.300 Performers - Prohibited Activities
5.28.310 Performers - Costume Requirements
5.28.320 Stage Requirements
5.28.330 Customers - Prohibited Activities
5.28.340 Nudity - Defenses To Prosecution
5.28.350 Existing Business - Compliance Time Limits
5.28.360 Violation - Injunction When
5.28.370 Violation - License Suspension Or Revocation
5.28.380 Effect Of License Revocation
5.28.390 Appeal Procedures
5.28.400 Violation - Penalty
5.28.410 Severability
5.28.010 Title For Citation
The ordinance codified in this article shall be known, and may be referred to, as the “Sexually Oriented
Businesses and Employee Licensing Ordinance.”
(Ord. No. 18-97, Enacted 10/21/1997)
5.28.020 Purpose
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 30/74
The purpose and object of this Chapter is to establish reasonable and uniform regulations governing the
time, place and manner of the operation of sexually oriented businesses and their employees in the City.
This Chapter, by its terms, is designed to prevent crime, protect the City’s retail trade, maintain property
values, and generally protect and preserve the quality of the City’s neighborhoods, commercial districts,
and the quality of urban life. The provisions of this Chapter have neither the purpose nor the effect of
imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative material or speech protected by
the First Amendment. This Chapter shall be construed to protect the governmental interest recognized
by this Chapter in a manner consistent with constitutional provisions provided by the United States and
Utah Constitutions.
(Ord. No. 18-97, Enacted 10/21/1997)
5.28.030 Application
This chapter imposes regulatory standards and license requirements on certain business activities,
which are characterized as “sexually oriented businesses,” and certain employees of those businesses
characterized as “sexually oriented business employees”. Except when the context or specific provisions
require, this chapter does not supersede or nullify any other related ordinances.
(Ord. No. 18-97, Enacted 10/21/1997)
5.28.040 Definitions
For purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings:
"Adult arcade" Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated, slugoperated
or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines,
projectors, or other image producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five or fewer
persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are characterized by their
emphasis upon matter exhibiting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
"Adult bookstore / adult video store" A commercial establishment which, as one of its principal
purposes, offers for sale or rental, for any form of consideration, any one or more of the following: books,
magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes,
compact discs, digital video discs, slides or simulated display, or other visual representations which are
characterized by their emphasis upon the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas. For purposes of this definition, “principal purpose” means:
A. At least 15% of the commercial establishment’s displayed merchandise consists of such items,
B. At least 15% of the wholesale or retail value of the commercial establishment’s displayed
merchandise consists of such items,
C. The commercial establishment derives at least 15% of its revenues from the sale or rental, for
any form of consideration, of such items;
D. The commercial establishment maintains at least 15% of its interior business space for the sale
or rental of such items;
E. The commercial establishments regularly features such items and prohibits access by minors to
all or part of the premises; or
F. The commercial establishment offers “adult”, “xxx”, “x-rated”, “erotic”, “sexual”, “sensual”,
“pornographic”, or any other similar type of material; or advertises itself as offering “adult”, “xxx”,
“x-rated”, “erotic”, “sexual”, “sensual”, “pornographic”, or any other similar type of material on
signage visible from a public right of way.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 31/74
Maintains an adult arcade, which means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein
coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion
picture machines, projectors, or other image producing devices are regularly maintained to show images
to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are
characterized by their emphasis upon matter exhibiting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
"Adult business" An adult arcade, adult motion picture theater, adult bookstore, adult video store, or
sexual device shop.
"Adult motel" A motel, hotel, or similar commercial establishment that (a) offers public accommodations
for any form of consideration, (b) regularly provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, (c) advertises the availability of this sexually-oriented type of material by
means of a sign visible from the public right-of-way, or by means of any off-premises advertising, and (d)
offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time less than ten hours, or allows a tenant or occupant to
sub-rent the sleeping room for a period of less than ten hours.
"Adult theater" A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment that regularly
features persons who appear in a state of semi-nudity.
"Customer" Any person who patronizes any business licensed pursuant to this chapter.
"Nude entertainment business" A commercial establishment that features live performances
characterized by (i) specified sexual activities or (ii) the appearance of persons in a state of nudity.
"Nudity / nude / state of nudity" The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, anus,
or anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering or the showing of the female breast with
less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple or areola.
"Outcall services" Services performed by a sexually oriented business employee, including an escort,
model or dancer, outside of the premises of the sexually oriented business, that include any specified
sexual activity or exposure of specified anatomical areas.
"Semi-nude / state of semi-nudity" A state of dress, other than a state of nudity, in which (a) opaque
clothing primarily covers only the genitals, pubic area, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, nipple and areola of
the female breast, and portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices, (b) the opaque
clothing covering part of the female breast primarily covers only the nipple and areola and portions of the
breast covered by supporting straps or devices, or (c) all or part of the buttocks are exposed.
"Semi-nude entertainment business" A business that features persons who appear semi-nude in the
presence of customers, or a business that holds itself out as such a business. This definition does not
apply to any place where persons appearing in a state of semi-nudity do so as part of:
A. a modeling class operated by a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly
by taxation;
B. a modeling class operated by a private college or university that maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university
supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 32/74
C. a modeling class (i) in which a student must enroll at least three days in advance in order to
participate, and (ii) that is operated in a building that has no sign visible from its exterior or other
advertising that indicates a semi-nude person is available for viewing.
Sexual device: Any three-dimensional object designed or marketed for stimulation of the male or
female human genital organ or anus or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others
and shall include devices such as dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, and physical representations of
the human genital organs. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include any device
primarily intended for protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing
pregnancy.
"Sexual device shop" A commercial establishment that, as its principal purpose, sells or otherwise
provides sexual devices. For purposes of this definition, “principal purpose” means:
A. At least 15% of the commercial establishment’s displayed merchandise consists of such items,
B. At least 15% of the wholesale or retail value of the commercial establishment’s displayed
merchandise consists of such items,
C. The commercial establishment derives at least 15% of its revenues from the sale or rental, for
any form of consideration, of such items;
D. The commercial establishment maintains at 15% of its interior business space for the sale or
rental of such items;
E. The display of such items is visible from any location outside the store.
"Sexual Encounter Center" a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its business purposes,
purports to offer, for any form of consideration, physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling when
one or more of the persons is nude or semi-nude, or which purports to offer, for any form of
consideration, a place where persons regularly appear in a state of semi-nudity in order to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. This
definition does not apply to any place where persons appearing in a state of semi-nudity do so in a
modeling class operated:
A. By a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by public tax dollars;
B. By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs form which
the credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly
by public tax dollars.
"Specified anatomical area"
A. Less than completely and opaquely covered buttocks, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, male or
female genitals, or female breast, or
B. Male genitals in a state of sexual arousal.
"Specified sexual activity" Acts of, or stimulation of, masturbation, sexual intercourse, fellatio,
cunnilingus, or bestiality, or manipulation, caressing or fondling by any person of the human genitals or
pubic area or the uncovered female nipple or areola.
"Sexually oriented business" An adult business, semi-nude entertainment business, adult theater,
semi-nude dancing agency, nude entertainment business, a business that provides out-call services,
escort services, adult motel, semi-nude dancing bar, a business which advertises itself or otherwise hold
itself out to be a sexually oriented business, or similar business.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 33/74
(Ord. No. 06-06, Amended 07/18/ 2006)
(Ord. No. 20-13, Amended 12/17/2013)
5.28.050 Obscenity And Nudity
Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to permit or
allow the showing or display of any matter which is contrary to the provisions of the Spanish Fork City
Code, or other applicable federal or state statute prohibiting obscenity or nudity.
(Ord. No. 18-97, Enacted 10/21/1997)
5.28.060 Location And Zoning Restrictions
It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business to do business at any location within the City not zoned
for such business. Sexually oriented businesses licensed under this chapter shall only be allowed in
areas zoned for their use pursuant to §15.3.16.120(B)(2) and §15.3.24.080 of the Spanish Fork
Municipal Code.
(Ord. No. 07-06, Enacted 07/18/2006)
5.28.070 Business License Required
A. It is unlawful for any person to operate a sexually oriented business without first obtaining a
sexually oriented business license. The license shall specify the type of business for which it is
obtained.
B. Sexually oriented business licenses will be limited to one for each 8,000 residents of the City of
Spanish Fork.
(Ord. No. 06-06, Enacted 06/20/06)
5.28.080 Exemptions From License Requirements
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any sex therapist or similar individual licensed to provide
counseling, licensed medical practitioner, licensed nurse, psychiatrist, psychologist, nor shall it apply to
any educator licensed by the State for activities in the classroom.
(Ord. No. 18-97, Enacted 10/21/1997)
5.28.090 Legitimate Artistic Modeling
A. The City does not intend to unreasonably or improperly prohibit legitimate modeling which may
occur in a state of nudity for purposes protected by the first amendment or similar State
protection. The City does intend to prohibit prostitution and related offenses occurring under the
guise of nude modeling.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 34/74
B. In the event that a contract for nude modeling or appearance is signed more than 48 hours in
advance of the modeling or appearance, the individual to appear nude shall not be required to
obtain a license pursuant to this chapter. During such unlicensed nude appearance, it is unlawful
to:
1. Appear nude or semi-nude in the presence of persons under the age of 18;
2. Allow, offer or agree to any touching of the contracting party or other person by the
individual appearing nude;
3. Allow, offer or agree to commit prostitution, solicitation of prostitution, solicitation of a
minor, or commit activities harmful to a minor;
4. Allow, offer, commit or agree to any specified sexual activity.
5. Allow, offer or agree for the individual appearing nude to be within five (5) feet of any
other person while performing or while nude or semi-nude.
(Ord. No. 18-97, Enacted 10/21/1997)
5.28.100 Business Categories - Number Of Licenses
A. It is unlawful for any business premises to operate or be licensed for more than one category of
sexually oriented business.
B. The categories of licensed sexually oriented businesses are:
1. Adult businesses;
2. Semi-nude entertainment businesses;
3. Adult theater
4. Semi-nude dancing agency.
C. Any sexually oriented business not listed in paragraph (B) is expressly prohibited, including, but
not limited to, businesses that provide outcall services, semi-nude dancing bars, nude
entertainment businesses, escort services, and adult motels.
(Ord. No. 18-97, Enacted 10/21/1997)
5.28.110 Employee Licenses
It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business to employ an individual, or for any individual to be
employed by a sexually oriented business, in the capacity of a sexually oriented business employee,
unless that employee first obtains a sexually oriented business employee license.
(Ord. No. 06-06, Enacted 06/20/06)
5.28.120 License Application - Disclosures Required
Before any applicant may be licensed to operate a sexually oriented business or as a sexually oriented
business employee pursuant to this chapter, the applicant shall submit, on a form to be supplied by the
business license authority, the following:
A. The correct legal name of each applicant, corporation, partnership, limited partnership or entity
doing business under an assumed name;
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 35/74
B. If the applicant is a corporation, partnership or limited partnership, or individual or entity doing
business under an assumed name, the information required below for individual applicants shall
be submitted for each partner and each principal of the applicant, and for each officer, director
and any shareholder (corporate or personal) holding more than ten percent (10%) of the stock of
any applicant. Any holding company, or any entity holding more than ten percent (10%) of an
applicant, shall be considered an applicant for purposes of disclosure under this Chapter;
C. All corporations, partnerships or noncorporate entities included on the application shall also
identify each individual authorized by the corporation, partnership or noncorporate entity to sign
the checks for such corporation, partnership or noncorporate entity;
D. For all applicants or individuals, the application must also state:
1. Any other names or aliases used by the individual;
2. The age, date, and place of birth
3. Height, weight, and color of hair and eyes;
4. Present business address and telephone number;
5. Proposed business address and telephone number;
6. Present residence address and telephone number;
7. State driver’s license or identification number; and
8. Social security number;
E. Acceptable written proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age or, in the case of
employees to be employed in a business where a different age is required, proof of the required
age;
F. Attached to the form as provided above, two (2) color photographs of the applicant clearly
showing the individual’s face, and the individual’s fingerprints on a form provided by the City
Police Department. For persons not residing in the City, the photographs and finger prints may
be on a form from the law enforcement jurisdiction where the person resides. Any fees for the
photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant.
G. A statement describing the business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for three
(3) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application;
H. A statement detailing the license or permit history of the applicant for the five (5) years
immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such applicant
previously operated or sought to operate, in this or any other county, City, state or country has
ever had a license, permit or authorization to do business denied, revoked or suspended, or had
any professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked or suspended. In the event of
any such denial, revocation or suspension, state the date, the name of the issuing or denying
jurisdiction, and describe in full the reasons for the denial, revocation or suspension. A copy of
any order of denial, revocation or suspension shall be attached to the application;
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 36/74
I. List all criminal convictions and the disposition of all arrests of the applicant, individual, or other
entity, subject to disclosure under this chapter, for five (5) years prior to the date of the
application. This disclosure shall include identification of all ordinance violations, except minor
traffic offenses (any traffic offense designated as a felony, Class A or Class B misdemeanor shall
not be construed as a minor traffic offense), stating the date, place, nature of each conviction,
and sentence of each conviction or other disposition; identifying the convicting jurisdiction and
sentencing court and providing court identifying case numbers or docket numbers. Applications
for a sexually oriented business or sexually oriented business employee license shall constitute a
waiver by the applicant of any protection the applicant may otherwise have against disclosure of
any criminal conviction.
J. In the event the applicant is not the owner of record of the real property upon which the business
or proposed business is located, the application must be accompanied by a notarized statement
from the legal or equitable owner of the possessory interest in the property specifically
acknowledging the type of business for which the applicant seeks a license for the property. In
addition, the notarized statement, the applicant shall furnish the name, address and phone
number of the owner of record of the property, as well a copy of the lease or rental agreement
pertaining to the premises in which the service is or will be located;
K. A description of the services to be provided by the business, with sufficient detail to allow
reviewing authorities to determine what business will be transacted on the premises, together
with a schedule of usual fees to be charged by the licensee, and any rules, regulations or
employment guidelines under or by which the business intends to operate. This description shall
also include:
1. The hours that the business or service will be open to the public, and the methods of
promoting the health and safety of the employees and customers and preventing them
from engaging in illegal activity;
2. The methods of supervision preventing the employees from engaging in acts of
prostitution or other related criminal activities;
3. The methods of supervising employees and customers from charging or receiving fees for
services or acts prohibited by this chapter or other statutes or ordinances;
4. The methods of supervising employees and customers in order to promote the health and
safety of employees and customers and prevent the transmission of disease, and prevent
the commission of acts of prostitution or other criminal activity.
(Ord. No. 18-97, Enacted 10/21/1997)
5.28.130 License - Fees
A. Each applicant for a sexually oriented business or sexually oriented business employee license
shall be required to pay regulatory license fees pursuant to the following schedule:
1. Annual sexually oriented business regulatory license fee: $800
2. Annual license for sexually oriented business employee that provides semi-nude
entertainment: $300.
3. Annual license for sexually oriented business employees that do not provide semi-nude
entertainment: $100.
B. Any individual applying for more than one license at the same time shall pay the higher of any
applicable fee, plus an additional $20 for each additional license requested.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 37/74
C. These fees shall be in addition to the other licenses and fees required to do business in the City.
(Ord. No. 06-06, Enacted 06/20/2006)
5.28.140 License - Bond
Each application for sexually oriented business license shall post with the City Finance Director a cash
bond in the amount of $2,000. Any fines assessed against the business, officers or managers for
violations of City Ordinances shall be taken from this bond if not paid in cash within ten days after notice
of the fine, unless an appeal is filed as provided by this chapter. In the event the funds are drawn against
the cash bond to pay such fines the bond shall be replenished to $2,000 within fifteen days of the date of
notice against it. In the event the bond is not replenished within the fifteen days, the license granted by
this chapter shall automatically be suspended until such time as the bond is replenished.
(Ord. No. 18-97, Enacted 10/21/1997)
(Ord. No. 18-09, Amended 11/03/2009)
5.28.150 License - Premises Location And Name
A. It is unlawful to conduct a business under a license issued pursuant to this chapter at any
location to which telephone calls are automatically forwarded and such business shall require a
separate license.
B. It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business to do business in the City under any name other
than the name specified in the application.
(Ord. No. 18-97, Enacted 10/21/1997)
5.28.160 License - Issuance Conditions
The City business license official shall approve the issuance of licenses to the applicant within 60 days
after receipt of the application, unless the official finds one or more of the following:
A. The applicant is under 18 years of age or any higher age if the license sought requires a higher
age;
B. The applicant is overdue in payment to the City of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed
against the applicant or imposed on the applicant in relation to a sexually oriented business;
C. The applicant has falsely answered a material question or request for information as authorized
by this chapter;
D. The applicant has been convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter within two (2) years
immediately proceeding the application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have
no effect on the denial;
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 38/74
E. The premises to be used for the business has been disapproved by the County Health
Department, the City Department of Public Safety, the City Building Official or the City Zoning
Official as not being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances of the City. If any of the
foregoing reviewing agencies cannot complete their review within the 60-day approval or denial
period the agency or department may obtain from the City business license official an extension
of time for their review of no more than 15 days. The total time for the City to approve or deny a
license shall not exceed 75 days from receipt of an application. Businesses located outside the
corporate boundaries of the City, but requiring a license under this chapter, may be denied a
license pursuant to this chapter if the business does not have a valid business license to conduct
business at the business location from the appropriate jurisdiction for that location;
1. Upon receipt of an application all departments required to review the application shall
determine within ten (10) days whether or not the application is complete with all items
necessary for processing. Incomplete applications shall be returned to the applicant with
specification of the items which are incomplete.
2. The time for processing applications specified in this section shall begin to run from the
receipt of a complete application.
3. In the event that a license has not been disapproved within 60 days, or the 75 days
allowed after an extension, the City shall issue the license.
4. Any license issued pursuant to subsection (3) above may be revoked by the City pursuant
to the revocation procedures of §5.28.370 through §5.28.390 if the completed review
determines that the license should have been denied.
F. The license fees required by this chapter or by other ordinances have not been paid;
G. All applicable sales and use taxes have not been paid;
H. An applicant for the proposed business is in violation of, or not in compliance with this chapter;
I. An applicant has been convicted of a crime involving prostitution; exploitation of prostitution;
aggravated promotion of prostitution; aggravated exploitation of prostitution; solicitation of sex
acts; sex acts-for-hire compelling prostitution; aiding prostitution; sale, distribution or display of
material harmful to minors; sexual performance by minors; possession of child pornography;
lewdness; public indecency; or crimes involving sexual abuse or exploitation of a minor, sexual
assault or aggravated sexual assault; rape; rape of a child; object rape; object rape of a child;
sodomy; sodomy on a child; sexual abuse of a child; aggravated sexual abuse of a child; forcible
sodomy; forcible sexual abuse; incest; harboring a runaway child; criminal contempt, conspiracy
or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses or offenses involving similar elements from
any jurisdiction regardless of the exact title of the offense, for which:
1. Less than two (2) years have elapsed from the date of conviction if the conviction is of a
misdemeanor offense, or less than five (5) years if the convictions are of two or more
misdemeanors within five (5) years, or less than five (5) years has elapsed from the date
of the conviction if the offense was a felony;
2. The fact that a conviction is being appealed does not prevent someone from being denied
a business license for that conviction.
(Ord. No. 18-97, Enacted 10/21/1997)
5.28.170 License - Term
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 39/74
Sexually oriented business and employee licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid from the
date of issuance through December 31st of that year. The license fees required under §12-7-13 above
shall not be prorated for any portion of a year, but shall be paid in full for whatever portion of the year the
license is applied for.
(Ord. No. 18-97, Enacted 10/21/1997)
5.28.180 License - Notice Of Change Of Information
Any change in the information required to be submitted under this chapter for either a sexually oriented
business license or sexually oriented business employee license shall be given, in writing, to the
business license authority and the police department within 14 days after such change.
(Ord. No. 18-97, Enacted 10/21/1997)
5.28.190 License - Transfer Limitations
Sexually oriented business licenses granted under this chapter shall not be transferable. It is unlawful for
a license held by an individual to be transferred. It is unlawful for a license held by a corporation,
partnership or other noncorporate entity to transfer any ownership part in excess of ten percent (10%)
thereof, without filing a new application and obtaining prior City approval. If any transfer of the controlling
interest in a business license occurs, the license is immediately null and void and the business shall not
operate until a separate new license has been properly issued by the City as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. No. 18-97, Enacted 10/21/1997)
5.28.195 Moving Of Business Location
It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business to relocate or otherwise move its location or area of
operation. A sexually oriented business wishing to relocate must submit the appropriate application for a
license as required under this chapter. Such application shall be reviewed under the terms and
conditions of this chapter and applicable City ordinances.
(Ord. No. 06-06, Enacted 06/20/2006)
5.28.200 License - Display
It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business employee to:
A. Allow persons under the age of 18 on the licensed premises, except that, in adult businesses that
exclude minors from less than all the business premises, minors shall not be permitted in any
area in which, or from which, it is possible to view any material depicting specified sexual activity
or specified anatomical areas, but may be permitted in the other areas of the premises.
B. Allow, offer, or agree to conduct any outcall services:
C. Allow, offer or agree to allow any alcohol to be stored, used or consumed on or in the licensed
premises;
D. Allow the outside entry to the premises to be locked while any customer is in the premises;
E. Allow, offer or agree to gambling on the licensed premises;
F. Allow, offer or agree to any sexually oriented business employee touching any customer;
G. Allow, offer of agree to illegal possession, use sale or distribution of controlled substances on the
licensed premises;
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 40/74
H. Allow sexually oriented business employees to posses, use, sell or distribute controlled
substances while engaged in the activities of the business;
I. Allow, offer or agree to commit prostitution, solicitation of prostitution, solicitation of a minor or
committing activities harmful to a minor to occur on the licensed premises;
J. Allow, offer or commit any specified sexual activity on the premises of a sexually oriented
business;
K. Appear, or allow a sexually oriented business employee or any other person to appear, in a state
of nudity in the presence of a customer.
(Ord. No. 06-06, Enacted 06/20/2006)
5.28.210 License - Statement In Advertisements
It is unlawful for any advertisement by the sexually oriented business or employee to fail to state that the
business or employee is licensed by the City, and shall include the City license number.
(Ord. No. 18-97, Enacted 10/21/1997)
5.28.220 Regulations And Unlawful Activities
It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business or sexually oriented business employee to:
A. Allow persons under the age of 18 on the licensed premises, except that, in adult businesses that
exclude minors from less than all of the business premises, minors shall not be permitted in any
area in which, or from which, it is possible to view any material depicting specified sexual activity
or specified anatomical areas, but may be permitted in the other areas of the premises.
B. Allow, offer or agree to conduct any outcall services;
C. Allow, offer, or agree to allow any alcohol to be stored, used or consumed on or in the licensed
premises;
D. Allow the outside entry to the premises to be locked while any customer is in the premises;
E. Allow, offer or agree to gambling on the licensed premises;
F. Allow, offer or agree to any sexually oriented business employee touching any customer;
G. Allow, offer or agree to illegal possession, use, sale or distribution of controlled substances on
the licensed premises;
H. Allow sexually oriented business employees to possess, use, sell or distribute controlled
substances while engaged in the activities of the business;
I. Allow, offer or agree to commit prostitution, solicitation of prostitution, solicitation of a minor or
committing activities harmful to a minor to occur on the licensed premises;
J. Allow, offer or commit any specified sexual activity on the premises of a sexually oriented
business;
K. Appear, or allow a sexually oriented business employee or any other person to appear, in a state
of nudity in the presence of a customer.
L. Sexual devices displayed for sale cannot be displayed where they would be visible from any
location outside the store.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 41/74
(Ord. No. 06-06, Enacted 06/20/2006)
(Ord. No. 20-13, Amended 12/17/2013)
5.28.230 Outcall Services Prohibited
It is unlawful for any business or employee to offer or to provide outcall services in the City of Spanish
Fork.
(Ord. No. 18-97, Enacted 10/21/1997)
5.28.240 Adult Business - Design Of Premises
A. In addition to the general requirements of disclosure for sexually oriented businesses, any
applicant for a license as an adult business shall also submit a diagram, drawn to scale, of the
premises of the license. The design and construction, prior to granting a license or opening or
business, shall conform to the following:
1. The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every area of the premises to which any
patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms.
2. Restrooms may not contain any video reproduction equipment or any of the business
merchandise. Signs shall be posted requiring only one person being allowed in the
restroom per stall, and only one person in any stall at a time, and requiring that customers
shall not be allowed access to manager’s station areas.
3. For businesses which exclude minors from the entire premises, all windows, doors and
other apertures to the premises shall be darkened or otherwise constructed to prevent
anyone outside the premises from seeing the inside of the premises. Businesses which
exclude minors from less than all of the premises shall be designed and constructed so
that minors may not see into the area from which they are excluded.
4. The diagram must show marked internal dimensions, all overhead lighting fixtures, and
lighting for illumination capacity.
B. It shall be the duty of the licensee and the licensee’s employees to ensure that the views from
the manager’s station in subsection A of this section remain unobstructed by any doors, walls,
merchandise, display racks or any other materials at all times when any customer is present on
the premises, and to ensure that no customer is permitted access to any area of the premises
which has been designated as an area in which customers will not be permitted. The premises
shall at all times be equipped and operated with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to
illuminate every place to which customers are permitted access at an illumination of not less than
one-foot candle, measured at floor level. It shall be the duty of the licensee and the licensee’s
employees present on the premises to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained
at all times when any customer is present in the premises.
(Ord. No. 18-97, Enacted 10/21/1997)
5.28.250 Semi-Nude Entertainment Business - Design Of Premises
A. It is unlawful for business premises licensed for semi-nude entertainment to:
1. Permit a bed, sofa, mattress or similar item in any room on the premises, except that a
sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public or in any office to which
customers are not admitted, and except that in an adult theater such items may be on the
stage as part of a performance;
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 42/74
2. Allow any door on any room used for business, except for the door to an office to which
customers shall not be admitted, outside doors and restroom doors, to be lockable from
the inside;
3. Provide any room in which the employee or employees and the customer or customers
are alone together without separation by a solid physical barrier at least three feet high
and six inches wide. The customer or customers shall remain on one side of the barrier
and the employee or employees shall remain on the other side of the barrier.
B. Adult theaters shall also require that the performance area shall be separated from the
customers by a minimum of three feet, which separation shall be delineated by a physical barrier
at least three feet high.
(Ord. No. 18-97, Enacted 10/21/1997)
5.28.260 Semi-Nude Entertainment Business - Locations Restrictions
It is unlawful for any business licensed for semi-nude entertainment to be located within 600 of a
different business which is licensed for the sale or consumption of alcohol.
(Ord. No. 18-97, Enacted 10/21/1997)
5.28.270 Semi-Nude Dancing Bar Prohibited
It is unlawful for any business licensed for the sale or consumption of alcohol pursuant to City
ordinances or State law to allow any person on the premises to dance, model, or perform in a state of
semi-nudity.
(Ord. No. 18-97, Enacted 10/21/1997)
5.28.280 Semi-Nude Dancing Performer Restriction
It is unlawful for any person to perform or appear in a state of semi-nudity as a professional dancer,
model, performer or otherwise on the premises of a business licensed for semi-nude dancing, either
gratuitously or for compensation, unless that person is licensed as a sexually oriented business
employee.
(Ord. No. 18-97, Enacted 10/21/1997)
5.28.290 Semi-Nude Dancing Agencies
A. It is unlawful for any individual or entity to furnish, book or otherwise engage the services of a
professional dancer, model or performer to appear in a state of semi-nudity for pecuniary
compensation in, or for, any semi-nude entertainment business, or adult theater licensed
pursuant to this chapter unless such agency is licensed pursuant to this chapter.
B. It is unlawful for any individual or entity to furnish, book or otherwise engage or permit any
person to perform as a professional dancer, model or performer in a state of semi-nudity either
gratuitously or for compensation, in, or for, any business licensed pursuant to this chapter, unless
such person is licensed pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. No. 18-97, Enacted 10/21/1997)
5.28.300 Performers - Prohibited Activities
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 43/74
It is unlawful for any professional dancer, model or performer, while performing in any business licensed
pursuant to this chapter:
A. To touch in any manner any customer;
B. To throw any object or clothing off the stage area;
C. To accept any money, drink or any other object directly from any person; or
D. To allow another person to touch such performer or to place any money or object on the
performer or within the costume or person of the performer; or
E. For the performer to place anything within the costume or adjust or move the costume while
performing so as to render the performer in a state of nudity.
(Ord. No. 18-97, Enacted 10/21/1997)
5.28.310 Performers - Costume Requirements
It is unlawful for performers in semi-nude entertainment business to fail to comply with the following
costume requirements;
A. Performers shall at all times be costumed during performances in a manner not to violate any
City Ordinance concerning disorderly conduct or lewdness, and such performers shall not
perform or conduct themselves in such a manner as to violate the provisions of any City
Ordinance. No performer shall appear in any business, licensed as a semi-nude entertainment
business, during a performance or appearance with less than opaque clothing which meets the
definition of semi-nude, and in the case of a female performer, cover the areola and nipple of
such performer in a shape and color other than the natural shape and color of the nipple and
areola.
B. While on the portion of a business licensed as a semi-nude entertainment business used by
customers, performers shall be dressed in an opaque clothing covering the performer’s cleft of
buttocks and pubic area and, in the case of female, the nipple and areola of the breast.
(Ord. No. 18-97, Enacted 10/21/1997)
5.28.320 Stage Requirements
It is unlawful for any performer in a business licensed as a semi-nude entertainment business to appear
in costume other than on a stage which shall be at least three feet from the portion of the premises on
which customers are allowed, and which shall be separated from the customers by a solid barrier or
railing, the top of which shall be at least two feet from the floor.
(Ord. No. 18-97, Enacted 10/21/1997)
5.28.330 Customers - Prohibited Activities
It is unlawful for any person, or any customer of any business to touch in any manner any performer; to
place any money or object on or within the costume or person of any performer; or to give or offer to give
to any such performer any drinks, money or objects while such performer is performing; except that
money may be placed on the stage which shall not be picked up by the performer except by hand.
(Ord. No. 18-97, Enacted 10/21/1997)
5.28.340 Nudity - Defenses To Prosecution
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 44/74
It is a defense to prosecution or violation under this chapter that a person appearing in a state of nudity
did so in a modeling class operated:
A. By a proprietary school licensed by the State, or a college, junior college or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation;
B. By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which
credits are transferable to a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation.
(Ord. No. 18-97, Enacted 10/21/1997)
5.28.350 Existing Business - Compliance Time Limits
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all persons and businesses described herein,
whether the herein-described activities were established before or after the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter, and regardless of whether such person and businesses are
currently licensed to do business in the City.
1. All semi-nude entertainment business and employees thereof requiring licenses and
semi-nude dancing agency licenses shall have 75 days from the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter, or until their licenses must be renewed, whichever is
first, to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
2. All adult businesses shall have 135 days from the effective date of the ordinance codified
in this chapter, or until their current license must be renewed, whichever is first in time, to
comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 18-97, Enacted 10/21/1997)
5.28.360 Violation - Injunction When
An entity or individual who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, without a
valid license, or who employs or is employed as an employee of a sexually oriented business, or who
operates such a business or functions as such an employee in violation of the provisions of this chapter,
is subject to a suit for injunction in addition to the civil and criminal violations provided herein, and any
other remedy available at law or in equity.
(Ord. No. 18-97, Enacted 10/21/1997)
5.28.370 Violation - License Suspension Or Revocation
A. The City may issue a notice suspending or revoking a sexually oriented business or employee
license granted under this chapter if a licensee, or an employee of the licensee has:
1. Violated or is not in compliance with this chapter;
2. Has refused to allow any inspection of the premises of the sexually oriented business
specifically authorized by this chapter, or by any other statute or ordinance;
3. Has failed to replenish the cost bond as provided in this chapter; such a suspension shall
extend until the bond has been replenished;
4. A licensee or employee gave materially false or misleading information in obtaining the
license;
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 45/74
5. A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business or worked
under the employee license during the period when the business licensee or employee
licensee’s license was suspended;
6. A licensee has committed an offense which would be grounds for denial of a license for
which the time period required has not elapsed;
7. On two or more occasions within a twelve-month period, a person or persons committed
in or on, or solicited for on the licensed premises, an offense which would be grounds for
denial of a license for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons
were employees, whether or not licensed, of the sexually oriented business at the time
the offenses were committed;
8. A licensee is delinquent in payment to the City for ad valorem taxes, or sales taxes
related to the sexually oriented business.
B. Suspension or revocation shall take effect within ten days of the issuance of notice, unless an
appeal is filed with the City as provided by this chapter. The revocation or suspension is stayed
pending the outcome of the appeal with the City.
C. The fact that a criminal conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of a
license
(Ord. No. 18-97, Enacted 10/21/1997)
5.28.380 Effect Of License Revocation
When a license issued pursuant to this chapter is revoked, the revocation shall continue indefinitely, and
the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business or employee license for at least one (1)
year from the date of such revocation.
(Ord. No. 18-97, Enacted 10/21/1997)
5.28.390 Appeal Procedures
A. If the license is denied or approved with qualifications, or if a notice of suspension, revocation or
citation or a civil fine is imposed, the applicant or licensee may file an appeal with the City
Manager, by filing notice with the City Recorder.
B. The appeal must be filed within ten days of the date of service of the notice of any denial,
qualified approval, suspension, revocation or civil fine. Upon receiving the notice of such appeal,
the City Recorder shall schedule a hearing before the City Manager, which hearing shall be held
within 20 days from the date of the appeal, unless such time shall be extended for good cause,
provided, however, that such hearing shall not be held more than 35 days after the notice of
appeal is filed with the City Recorder.
C. The City Manager shall hold a hearing on the record and take such facts and evidence as
necessary to determine whether the denial, qualified approval, suspension, revocation or civil
fine was proper under the law.
D. The burden of proof shall be on the City.
E. After the hearing, the City Manager shall have seven working days, unless such period is
extended for good cause, in which to render findings of fact and conclusions of law and make a
decision as to the disposition of the appeal. The City shall cause notice of such decision to be
filed with the City Recorder and mailed to the applicant or licensee.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 46/74
F. The applicant or licensee may appeal the decision of the City Manager by filing a notice of
appeal and the reasons for such appeal, in writing, within seven days after the filing of notice of
the City Manager’s decision with the City Recorder and the mailing of such notice to the applicant
or licensee. If the City Manager’s decision upholds a suspension or revocation, the license shall
be immediately suspended.
G. If a notice of appeal is timely filed, as set forth in paragraph F, the City Council shall schedule a
public hearing to consider the appeal. The standard by which the Council shall review the
decision of the City Manager is whether substantial evidence exists on the record to support the
City Manager’s decision.
H. An applicant or licensee aggrieved by the Council’s decision shall be permitted to have judicial
review of such decision pursuant to Rule 65(B), Utah Rules of Civil Procedure, or any other
applicable ordinance, statute or rule providing for such review.
(Ord. No. 06-06, Enacted 06/20/2006)
5.28.400 Violation - Penalty
In addition to revocation or suspension of a license, as provided in this chapter, each violation of this
chapter shall, upon citation by the Community Development Director, or designee, require the licensee
to pay a civil penalty in the amount of $500.00. Such fines shall be deducted from the cost bond posted
pursuant to this chapter, unless paid within ten (10) days of notice of the fine or the final determination
after any appeal. In addition to the civil fines provided in this chapter, the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall be a Class B Misdemeanor. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 18-97, Enacted 10/21/1997)
(Ord. No. 18-09, Amended 11/03/2009)
5.28.410 Severability
In the event that any provision of this chapter is declared invalid for any reason, the remaining provisions
shall remain in effect.
(Ord. No. 18-97, Enacted 10/21/1997)
5.32 Telecommunications Rights-Of-Way
5.32.010 Findings Regarding Rights-Of-Way
5.32.020 Finding Regarding Compensation
5.32.030 Finding Regarding Local Concern
5.32.040 Finding Regarding Promotion Of Telecommunications Series
5.32.050 Findings Regarding Franchise Standards
5.32.060 Power To Manage Rights-Of-Way
5.32.070 Scope Of Ordinance
5.32.080 Excluded Activity
5.32.090 Definitions
5.32.100 Non-Exclusive Franchise
5.32.110 Every Provider Must Obtain
5.32.120 Nature Of Grant
5.32.130 Current Providers
5.32.140 Nature Of Franchise
5.32.150 Regulatory Approval Needed
5.32.160 Term
5.32.170 Compensation
5.32.180 Timing
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 47/74
5.32.190 Fee Statement And Certification
5.32.200 Future Costs
5.32.210 Taxes And Assessments
5.32.220 Interest Of Late Payments
5.32.230 No Accord And Satisfaction
5.32.240 Not In Lieu Of Other Taxes Or Fees
5.32.250 Continuing Obligation And Holdover
5.32.260 Costs Of Publication
5.32.270 Franchise Application
5.32.280 Application Criteria
5.32.290 Franchise Determination
5.32.300 General Requirement
5.32.310 Quality
5.32.320 Licenses And Permits
5.32.330 Relocation Of The System
5.32.340 Protect Structures
5.32.350 No Obstruction
5.32.360 Safety Precautions
5.32.370 Repair
5.32.380 System Maintenance
5.32.390 Trimming Of Trees
5.32.400 Notification Of Sale
5.32.410 Events Of Sale
5.32.420 Insurance, Indemnity, And Security
5.32.430 Oversight
5.32.440 Maintain Records
5.32.450 Confidentiality
5.32.460 Provider's Expense
5.32.470 Right Of Inspection
5.32.480 Enforcement And Remedies
5.32.490 Force Majeure
5.32.500 Extended Operation And Continuity Of Services
5.32.510 Removal Or Abandonment Of Franchise Property
5.32.520 Transfer Of Abandoned System To City
5.32.530 Removal Of Above-Ground System
5.32.540 Leaving Underground System
5.32.550 Publicizing Work
5.32.560 Conflicts
5.32.570 Severability
5.32.580 New Developments
5.32.590 Notices
5.32.600 Exercise Of Police Power
5.32.610 Construction
5.32.620 Ordinance Applicability
5.32.630 Other Applicable Ordinances
5.32.640 City Failure To Enforce
5.32.650 Construed According To Utah Law
5.32.010 Findings Regarding Rights-Of-Way
Spanish Fork City finds that the Rights-of-Way within the City:
are critical to the travel and transport of persons and property in the business and social life of the City;
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 48/74
A. Are intended for public uses and must be managed and controlled consistent with that intent;
B. Can be partially occupied by the facilities of utilities and other public service entities delivering
utility and public services rendered for profit, to the enhancement of the health, welfare, and
general economic well-being of the City and its citizens; and
C. Are a unique and physically limited resource requiring proper management to maximize the
efficiency and to minimize the costs to the taxpayers of the foregoing uses and to minimize the
inconvenience to and negative effects upon the public from such facilities' construction,
placement, relocation, and maintenance in the Rights-of-Way.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.020 Finding Regarding Compensation
The City finds that the City should receive fair and reasonable compensation for use of the Rights-of-
Way.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.030 Finding Regarding Local Concern
The City finds that while Telecommunications Systems are in part an extension of interstate commerce,
their operations also involve Rights-of-Way, municipal franchising, and vital business and community
service, which are of local concern.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.040 Finding Regarding Promotion Of Telecommunications Series
The City finds that it is in the best interests of its taxpayers and citizens to promote the rapid
development of Telecommunications Services, on a nondiscrimination basis, responsive to community
and public interest, and to assure availability for municipal, educational and community services.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.050 Findings Regarding Franchise Standards
The City finds that it is in the interests of the public to Franchise and to establish standards for
franchising Providers in a manner that:
A. Fairly and reasonably compensates the City on a competitively neutral and non-discriminatory
basis as provided herein;
B. Encourages competition by establishing terms and conditions under which Providers may use
the Rights-of-Way to serve the public;
C. Fully protects the public interests and the City from any harm that may flow from such
commercial use of Rights-of-Way;
D. Protects the police powers and Rights-of-Way management authority of the City, in a manner
consistent with federal and state law;
E. Otherwise protects the public interests in the development and use of the City infrastructure;
F. Protects the public's investment in improvements in the Rights-of-Way; and
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 49/74
G. Ensures that no barriers to entry of Telecommunications Providers are created and that such
franchising is accomplished in a manner that does not prohibit or have the Effect of prohibiting
Telecommunication Services, within the meaning of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 [P.L.
No. 104-104].
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.060 Power To Manage Rights-Of-Way
The City adopts this Telecommunications Ordinance pursuant to its power to manage the Rights-of-
Way, pursuant to common law, the Utah Constitution and statutory authority, and receive fair and
reasonable, compensation for the use of Rights-of-Way by Providers as expressly set forth by §253 of
the Act.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.070 Scope Of Ordinance
This Ordinance shall provide the basic local scheme for Providers of Telecommunications Services and
Systems that require the use of the Rights-of-Way, including Providers of both the System and Service,
those Providers of the System only, and those Providers who do not build the System but who only
provide Services. This Ordinance shall apply to all future Providers and to all Providers in the City prior
to the effective date of this Ordinance, whether operating with or without a Franchise as set forth in
§5.32.620.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.080 Excluded Activity
A. This Ordinance shall not apply to cable television operators otherwise regulated by Chapter 5.18
of the Spanish Fork City Municipal Code (the "Cable Television Ordinance").
B. This Ordinance shall not apply to Personal Wireless Service Facilities.
C. Providers excused by other law that prohibits the City from requiring a Franchise shall not be
required to obtain a Franchise, but all of the requirements imposed by this Ordinance through the
exercise of the City's police power and not preempted by other law shall be applicable.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.090 Definitions
For purposes of this Ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives shall have the
meanings set forth in this Section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended.
Words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the single number include the plural
number, words in the plural number include the singular. The word "shall" and "will" are mandatory, and
"may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.
"Application" The process by which a Provider submits a request and indicates a desire to be granted a
Franchise to utilize the Rights-of-Way of all, or a part, of the City. An Application includes all written
documentation, verbal statements and representations, in whatever form or forum, made by a Provider
to the City concerning: the construction of a Telecommunications System over, under, on or through the
Rights-of-Way; the Telecommunications Services proposed to be provided in the City by a Provider; and
any other matter pertaining to a proposed System or Service.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 50/74
"City" Spanish Fork City, Utah.
"Completion Date" The date that a Provider begins providing Services to customers in the City.
"Construction Costs" All costs of constructing a System, including make ready costs, other than
engineering fees, attorneys or accountants fees, or other consulting fees.
"Control / Controlling Interest" Actual working control in whatever manner exercised, including, without
limitation, working control through ownership, management, debt instruments or negative control, as the
case may be, of the System or of a Provider. A rebuttable presumption of the existence of Control or a
Controlling Interest shall arise from the beneficial ownership, directly or indirectly, by any Person, or
group of Persons acting in concert, of more than twenty-five percent (25%) of any Provider (which
Person or group of Persons is hereinafter referred to as "Controlling Person"). "Control" or "Controlling
Interest" as used herein may be held simultaneously by more than one Person or group of Persons.
"FCC" The Federal Communications Commission, or any successor thereto.
"Franchise" The rights and obligation extended by the City to a Provider to own, lease, construct,
maintain, use or operate a System in the Rights-of-Way within the boundaries of the City. Any such
authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean or include:
A. Any other permit or authorization required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a
business within the City required by the ordinances and laws of the City;
B. Any other permit, agreement or authorization required in connection with operations on Rights-of-
Way or public property including, without limitation, permits and agreements for placing devices
on or in poles, conduits or other structures, whether owned by the City or a private entity, or for
excavating or performing other work in or along the Rights-of-Way.
"Franchise Agreement" A contract entered into in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance
between the City and a Franchisee that sets forth, subject to this Ordinance, the terms and conditions
under which a Franchise will be exercised.
"Gross Revenue" Includes all revenues of a Provider that may be included as gross revenue within the
meaning of Chapter 26, Title 11 Utah Code annotated, 1953, as amended.
"Infrastructure Provider" A Person providing to another, for the purpose of providing
Telecommunication Services to customers, all or part of the necessary System which uses the Rights-
Of-Way.
"Open Video Service" Any video programming services provided to any Person through the use of
Rights-of-Way, by a Provider that is certified by the FCC to operate an Open Video System pursuant to
§651, et seq., of the Telecommunications Act (to be codified at 47 U.S.C. Title VI, Part V), regardless of
the System used.
"Open Video System" The system of cables, wires, lines, towers, wave guides, optic fiber, microwave,
laser beams, and any associated converters, equipment, or facilities designed and constructed for the
purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying or distributing Open Video Services to or from subscribers or
locations within the City.
"Operator" Any Person who provides Service over a Telecommunications System and directly or
through one or more Persons owns a Controlling Interest in such System, or who otherwise controls or is
responsible for the operation of such a System.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 51/74
"Ordinance / Telecommunications Ordinance" This Telecommunications Ordinance concerning the
granting of Franchises in and by the City for the construction, ownership, operation, use or maintenance
of a Telecommunications System.
"Person" Includes any individual, corporation, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, or
any other legal entity, but not the City.
"Personal Wireless Services Facilities" The same meaning as provided in §704 of the Act (47 U.S.C.
332(c)(7)(c), which includes what is commonly known as cellular and PCS Services that do not install
any System or portion of a System in the Rights-of-Way.
"Provider" An Operator, Infrastructure Provider, Resaler, or System Lessee.
"PSC" The Public Service Commission, or any successor thereto.
"Resaler" Any Person that provides local exchange service over a System for which a separate charge
is made, where that Person does not own or lease the underlying System used for the transmission.
"Rights-of-Way" The surface of and the space above and below any public street, sidewalk, alley, or
other public way of any type whatsoever, now or hereafter existing as such within the City.
"Signal" Any transmission or reception of electronic, electrical, light or laser or radio frequency energy or
optical information in either analog or digital format.
"System Lessee" Any Person that leases a System or a specific portion of a System to provide
Services.
"Telecommunications" The transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of
information of the user's choosing (e.g., data, video, and voice), without change in the form or content of
the information sent and received.
"Telecommunications System / System" All conduits, manholes, poles, antennas, transceivers,
amplifiers and all other electronic devices, equipment, wire and appurtenances owned, leased, or used
by a Provider, located in the Rights-of-Way and utilized in the provision of Services, including fully digital
or analog, voice, data and video imaging and other enhanced Telecommunications Services.
Telecommunications System or Systems also includes an Open Video System.
"Telecommunications Service(s) / Services" Any telecommunications services provided by a Provider
within the City that the Provider is authorized to provide under federal, state and local law, and any
equipment and/or facilities required for and integrated with the Services provided within the City, except
that these terms do not include “cable service” as defined in the Cable Communications Policy Act of
1984, as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 (47
U.S.C. §521, et seq.), and the Telecommunications Act of 1996. Telecommunications System or
Systems also includes an Open Video System.
"Wire" Fiber optic Telecommunications cable, wire, coaxial cable, or other transmission medium that
may be used in lieu thereof for similar purposes.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.100 Non-Exclusive Franchise
The City is empowered and authorized to issue non-exclusive Franchises governing the installation,
construction, and maintenance of Systems in the City's Rights-of-Way, in accordance with the provisions
of this Ordinance. The Franchise is granted through a Franchise Agreement entered into between the
City and Provider.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 52/74
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.110 Every Provider Must Obtain
Except to the extent preempted by federal or state law, as ultimately interpreted by a court of competent
jurisdiction, including any appeals, every Provider must obtain a Franchise prior to constructing a
Telecommunications System or providing Telecommunications Services using the Rights-of-Way, and
every Provider must obtain a Franchise before constructing an Open Video System or providing Open
Video Services via an Open Video System. Any Open Video System or Service shall be subject to the
customer service and consumer protection provisions applicable to the Cable TV companies to the
extent the City is not preempted or permitted as ultimately interpreted by a court of competent
jurisdiction, including any appeals. The fact that particular Telecommunications Systems may be used
for multiple purposes does not obviate the need to obtain a Franchise for other purposes. By way of
illustration and not limitation, a cable operator of a cable system must obtain a cable franchise, and,
should it intend to provide Telecommunications Services over the same System, must also obtain a
Telecommunications Franchise.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.120 Nature Of Grant
A Franchise shall not convey title, equitable or legal, in the Rights-of-Way. A Franchise is only the right
to occupy Rights-of-Way on a non-exclusive basis for the limited purposes and for the limited period
stated in the Franchise; the right may not be subdivided, assigned, or subleased. A Franchise does not
excuse a Provider from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before collocating
its System on the property of others, including the City’s property. This section shall not be construed to
prohibit a Provider from leasing conduit to another Provider, so long as the Lessee has obtained a
Franchise.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.130 Current Providers
Except to the extent exempted by federal or state law, any Provider acting without a Franchise on the
effective date of this Ordinance shall request issuance of a Franchise from the City within 90 days of the
effective date of this Ordinance. If such request is made, the Provider may continue providing service
during the course of negotiations. If a timely request is not made, or if negotiations cease and a
Franchise is not granted, the Provider shall comply with the provisions of §5.32.510.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.140 Nature Of Franchise
The Franchise granted by the City under the provisions of this Ordinance shall be a nonexclusive
Franchise providing the right and consent to install, repair, maintain, remove and replace its System on,
over and under the Rights-of-Way in order to provide Services.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.150 Regulatory Approval Needed
Before offering or providing any Services pursuant to the Franchise, a Provider shall obtain any and all
regulatory approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses for the offering or provision of such Services
from the appropriate federal, state and local authorities, if required, and shall submit to the City upon the
written request of the City evidence of all such approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 53/74
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.160 Term
No Franchise issued pursuant to this Ordinance shall have a term of less than five (5) years or greater
than 15 years. Each Franchise shall be granted in a nondiscriminatory manner.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.170 Compensation
As fair and reasonable compensation for any Franchise granted pursuant to this Ordinance, a Provider
shall have the following obligations:
A. Application Fee. In order to offset the cost to the City to review an Application for a Franchise
and in addition to all other fees, permits or charges, a Provider shall pay to the City, at the time of
Application, $500 as a non-refundable Application fee.
B. Franchise Fees. The Franchise fee, if any, shall be set forth in the Franchise Agreement. The
obligation to pay a Franchise fee shall commence on the Completion Date. The Franchise fee is
offset by any business license administrative fee or business license tax enacted by the City.
C. Excavation Permits. The Provider shall also pay the required fees for an excavation permit as
provided for by the ordinances, resolutions, policies, or standards of the City.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.180 Timing
Unless otherwise agreed to in the Franchise Agreement, all Franchise Fees shall be paid on a monthly
basis within 45 days of the close of each calendar month.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.190 Fee Statement And Certification
Unless a Franchise Agreement provides otherwise, each fee payment shall be accompanied by a
statement showing the manner in which the fee was calculated and shall be certified as to its accuracy.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.200 Future Costs
A Provider shall pay to the City or to third parties, at the direction of the City, an amount equal to the
reasonable costs and reasonable expenses that the City incurs for the services of third parties (including
but not limited to attorneys and other consultants) in connection with any renewal or Provider-initiated
renegotiation, or amendment of this Ordinance or a Franchise, provided, however, that the parties shall
agree upon a reasonable financial cap at the outset of negotiations. In the event the parties are unable
to agree, either party may submit the issue to binding arbitration in accordance with the rules and
procedures of the American Arbitration Association. Any costs associated with any work to be done by
the Power and Public Works Department to provide space on City owned poles shall be borne by the
Provider.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.210 Taxes And Assessments
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 54/74
To the extent taxes or other assessments are imposed by taxing authorities, other than the City on the
use of the City property as a result of a Provider's use or occupation of the Rights-of-Way, the Provider
shall be responsible for payment of its pro rata share of such taxes, payable annually unless otherwise
required by the taxing authority. Such payments shall be in addition to any other fees payable pursuant
to this Ordinance.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.220 Interest Of Late Payments
In the event that any payment is not actually received by the City on or before the applicable date fixed
in the franchise, interest thereon shall accrue from such date until received at the rate charged for
delinquent state taxes.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.230 No Accord And Satisfaction
No acceptance by the Spanish Fork City any fee shall be construed as an accord that the amount paid is
in fact the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of such fee payment be construed as a release of
any claim the City may have for additional sums payable.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.240 Not In Lieu Of Other Taxes Or Fees
The fee payment is not a payment in lieu of any tax, fee or other assessment except as specifically
provided in this Ordinance, or as required by applicable law. By way of example, and not limitation,
excavation permit fees and fees to obtain space on the City owned poles are not waived and remain
applicable.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.250 Continuing Obligation And Holdover
In the event a Provider continues to operate all or any part of the System after the Term of the
Franchise, such operator shall continue to comply with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance and
the Franchise, including, without limitation, all compensation and other payment provisions throughout
the period of such continued operation, provided that any such continued operation shall in no way be
construed as a renewal or other extension of the Franchise, nor as a limitation on the remedies, if any,
available to the City as a result of such continued operation after the term, including, but not limited to,
damages and restitution.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.260 Costs Of Publication
A Provider shall assume any publication costs associated with its Franchise that may be required by law.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.270 Franchise Application
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 55/74
To obtain a Franchise to construct, own, maintain or provide Services through any System within the
City, to obtain a renewal of a Franchise granted pursuant to this Ordinance, or to obtain the City
approval of a transfer of a Franchise, as provided in §5.32.400(B), granted pursuant to this Ordinance,
an Application must be filed with City on the form attached to this Ordinance as Exhibit A, which is
hereby incorporated by reference. The Application form may be changed by the Mayor so long as such
changes request information that is consistent with this Ordinance. Such Application form, as amended,
is incorporated by reference.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.280 Application Criteria
In making a determination as to an Application filed pursuant to this Ordinance, the City may, but shall
not be limited to, request the following from the Provider:
A. A copy of the order from the PSC granting a Certificate of Convenience and Necessity.
B. Certification of the Provider's financial ability to compensate the City for Provider's intrusion,
maintenance and use of the Rights-of-Way during the Franchise term proposed by the Provider;
C. Provider’s agreement to comply with the requirements of §5.32.290 through §5.32.390 of this
Ordinance.
D. Prior to making any attachments to poles, the willingness to enter into a pole attachment
agreement with the City.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.290 Franchise Determination
The City, in its discretion, shall determine the award of any Franchise on the basis of these and other
considerations relevant to the use of the Rights-of-Way, without competitive bidding.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.300 General Requirement
No Provider shall receive a Franchise unless it agrees to comply with each of the terms set forth in this
Section governing construction and technical requirements for its System, in addition to any other
reasonable requirements or procedures specified by the City or the Franchise, including requirements
regarding locating and sharing in the cost of locating portions of the System with other Systems or with
City utilities. A Provider shall obtain an excavation permit, pursuant to the excavation ordinance, before
commencing any work in the Rights-of-Way.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.310 Quality
All work involved in the construction, maintenance, repair, upgrade and removal of the System shall be
performed in a safe, thorough and reliable manner using materials of good and durable quality. If, at any
time, it is determined by the FCC or any other agency granted authority by federal law or the FCC to
make such determination, that any part of the System, including, without limitation, any means used to
distribute Signals over or within the System, is harmful to the public health, safety or welfare, or quality
of service or reliability, then a Provider shall, at its own cost and expense, promptly correct all such
conditions.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 56/74
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.320 Licenses And Permits
A Provider shall have the sole responsibility for diligently obtaining, at its own cost and expense, all
permits, licenses or other forms of approval or authorization necessary
to construct, maintain, upgrade or repair the System, including but not limited to any necessary
approvals from Persons and/or the City to use private property, easements, poles and conduits. A
Provider shall obtain any required permit, license, approval or authorization, including but not limited to
excavation permits, pole attachment agreements, etc., prior to the commencement of the activity for
which the permit, license, approval or authorization is required.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.330 Relocation Of The System
The system may only be relocated if the following criteria are met:
A. New Grades or Lines. If the grades or lines of any Rights-of-Way are changed at any time in a
manner affecting the System, then a Provider shall comply with the requirements of the
excavation requirements.
B. The City Authority to Move System in case of an Emergency. The City may, at any time, in case
of fire, disaster or other emergency, as determined by the City in its reasonable discretion, cut or
move any parts of the System and appurtenances on, over or under the Rights-of-Way of the
City, in which event the City shall not be liable therefor to a Provider. The City shall notify a
Provider in writing prior to, if practicable, but in any event as soon as possible and in no case
later than the next business day following any action taken under this Section. Notice shall be
given as provided in §5.32.590.
C. A Provider Required to Temporarily Move System for Third Party. A Provider shall, upon prior
reasonable written notice by the City or any Person holding a permit to move any structure, and
within the time that is reasonable under the circumstances, temporarily move any part of its
System to permit the moving of said structure. A Provider may impose a reasonable charge on
any Person other than the City for any such movement of its Systems.
D. Rights-of-Way Change - Obligation to Move System. When the City is changing a Rights-of-Way,
and makes a written request, a Provider is required to move or remove its System from the
Rights-of-Way, without cost to the City, to the extent provided in the excavation requirements.
This obligation does not apply to Systems originally located on private property pursuant to a
private easement, which property was later incorporated into the Rights-of-Way, if that private
easement grants a superior vested right. This obligation exists whether or not the Provider has
obtained an excavation permit.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.340 Protect Structures
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 57/74
In connection with the construction, maintenance, repair, upgrade or removal of the System, a Provider
shall, at its own cost and expense, protect any and all existing structures belonging to the City. A
Provider shall obtain the prior written consent of the City to alter any water main, power facility,
sewerage or drainage system, or any other municipal structure on, over or under the Rights-of-Way of
the City required because of the presence of the System. Any such alteration shall be made by the City
or its designee on a reimbursable basis. A Provider agrees that it shall be liable for the costs incurred by
the City to replace or repair and restore to its prior condition in a manner as may be reasonably specified
by the City, any municipal structure or any other Rights-of-Way of the City involved in the construction,
maintenance, repair, upgrade or removal of the System that may become disturbed or damaged as a
result of any work thereon by or on behalf of a Provider pursuant to the Franchise.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.350 No Obstruction
In connection with the construction, maintenance, upgrade, repair or removal of the System, a Provider
shall not unreasonably obstruct the Rights-of-Way of fixed guide way systems, railways, passenger
travel, or other traffic to, from or within the City without the prior consent of the appropriate authorities.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.360 Safety Precautions
A Provider shall, at its own cost and expense, undertake all necessary and appropriate efforts to prevent
accidents at its work sites, including the placing and maintenance of proper guards, fences, barricades,
security personnel and suitable and sufficient lighting, and such other requirements prescribed by OSHA
and Utah OSHA. A Provider shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local requirements
including but not limited to the National Electric Safety Code.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.370 Repair
After written reasonable notice to the Provider, unless, in the sole determination of the City, an eminent
danger exists, any Rights-of-Way within the City which are disturbed or damaged during the
construction, maintenance or reconstruction by a Provider of its System may be repaired by the City at
the Provider's expense, to a condition as good as that prevailing before such work was commenced.
Upon doing so, the City shall submit to such a Provider an itemized statement of the cost for repairing
and restoring the Rights-of-Ways intruded upon. The Provider shall, within 30 days after receipt of the
statement, pay to the City the entire amount thereof.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.380 System Maintenance
A Provider shall:
A. Install and maintain all parts of its System in a non-dangerous condition throughout the entire
period of its Franchise.
B. Install and maintain its System in accordance with standard prudent engineering practices and
shall conform, when applicable, with the National Electrical Safety Code and all applicable other
federal, state and local laws or regulations.
C. At all reasonable times permit examination by any duly authorized representative of the Spanish
Fork City the System and its effect on the Rights-of-Way.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 58/74
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.390 Trimming Of Trees
A Provider shall have the authority to trim trees, in accordance with all applicable utility restrictions,
ordinance and easement restrictions, upon and hanging over Rights-of-Way so as to prevent the
branches of such trees from coming in contact with its System.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.400 Notification Of Sale
A. Notification and Election. When a Provider is the subject of a sale, transfer, lease, assignment,
sublease or disposed of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary
sale, consolidation or otherwise, such that it or its successor entity is obligated to inform or seek
the approval of the PSC, the Provider or its successor entity shall promptly notify Spanish Fork
City of the nature of the transaction. The notification shall include either:
1. The successor entity’s certification that the successor entity unequivocally agrees to all of
the terms of the original Provider’s Franchise Agreement, or
2. The successor entity’s Application in compliance with §5.32.270 and §5.32.280 of this
Ordinance.
B. Transfer of Franchise. Upon receipt of a notification and certification in accordance with
subsection (A)(1), the City designee, as provided in §5.32.480(A), shall send notice affirming the
transfer of the Franchise to the successor entity. If the City has good cause to believe that the
successor entity may not comply with this Ordinance or the Franchise Agreement, it may require
an Application for the transfer. The Application shall comply with §5.32.270 and §5.32.280.
C. If PSC Approval No Longer Required. If the PSC no longer exists, or if its regulations or state
law no longer require approval of transactions described in subsection (A), and the City has good
cause to believe that the successor entity may not comply with this Ordinance or the Franchise
Agreement, it may require an Application. The Application shall comply with §5.32.270 and
§5.32.280.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.410 Events Of Sale
The following events shall be deemed to be a sale, assignment or other transfer of the Franchise
requiring compliance with §5.32.400 the sale, assignment or other transfer of all or a majority of a
Provider's assets to another Person; (i) the sale, assignment or other transfer of capital stock or
partnership, membership or other equity interests in a Provider by one or more of its existing
shareholders, partners, members or other equity owners so as to create a new Controlling Interest in a
Provider; (ii) the issuance of additional capital stock or partnership, membership or other equity interest
by a Provider so as to create a new Controlling Interest in such a Provider; or (iii) the entry by a Provider
into an agreement with respect to the management or operation of such Provider or its System.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.420 Insurance, Indemnity, And Security
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 59/74
Prior to the execution of a Franchise, a Provider will deposit with the City an irrevocable, unconditional
letter of credit or surety bond as required by the terms of the Franchise, and shall obtain and provide
proof of the insurance coverage required by the Franchise. A Provider shall also indemnify the City as
set forth in the Franchise.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.430 Oversight
The City shall have the right to oversee, regulate and inspect periodically the construction, maintenance,
and upgrade of the System, and any part thereof, in accordance with the provisions of the Franchise and
applicable law. A Provider shall establish and maintain managerial and operational records, standards,
procedures and controls to enable a Provider to prove, in reasonable detail, to the satisfaction of the City
at all times throughout the Term, that a Provider is in compliance with the Franchise. A Provider shall
retain such records for not less than the applicable statute of limitations.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.440 Maintain Records
A Provider shall at all times maintain:
A. On file with the City, a full and complete set of plans, records and "as-built" hard copy maps and,
to the extent the maps are placed in an electronic format, they shall be made in electronic format
compatible with the City's existing GIS system, of all existing and proposed installations and the
types of equipment and Systems installed or constructed in the Rights-of-Way, properly identified
and described as to the types of equipment and facility by appropriate symbols and marks which
shall include annotations of all Rights-of-Ways where work will be undertaken. As used herein,
“as-built” maps include “file construction prints”. Maps shall be drawn to scale. “As-built” maps,
including the compatible electronic format, as provided above, shall be submitted within 30 days
of completion of work or within 30 days after completion of modification and repairs. “As-built”
maps are not required of the Provider who is the incumbent local exchange carrier for the
existing System to the extent they do not exist.
B. Throughout the term of the Franchise, a Provider shall maintain complete and accurate books of
account and records of the business, ownership, and operations of a Provider with respect to the
System in a manner that allows the City at all times to determine whether a Provider is in
compliance with the Franchise. Should the City reasonably determine that the records are not
being maintained in such a manner, a Provider shall alter the manner in which the books and/or
records are maintained so that a Provider comes into compliance with this Section. All financial
books and records which are maintained in accordance with the regulations of the FCC and any
governmental entity that regulates utilities in the State of Utah, and generally accepted
accounting principles shall be deemed to be acceptable under this Section.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.450 Confidentiality
If the information required to be submitted is proprietary in nature or must be kept confidential by federal,
state or local law, upon proper request by a Provider, such information shall be classified as a Protected
Record within the meaning of the Utah Government Records Access and Management Act (“GRAMA”),
making it available only to those who must have access to perform their duties on behalf of the City,
provided that a Provider notifies Spanish Fork City, and clearly labels the information which a Provider
deems to be confidential, proprietary information. Such notification and labeling shall be the sole
responsibility of the Provider.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 60/74
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.460 Provider's Expense
All reports and records required under this Ordinance shall be furnished at the sole expense of a
Provider, except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance or a Franchise.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.470 Right Of Inspection
For the purpose of verifying the correct amount of the franchise fee, the books and records of the
Provider pertaining thereto shall be open to inspection or audit by duly authorized representatives of the
City at all reasonable times, upon giving reasonable notice of the intention to inspect or audit the books
and records, provided that the City shall not audit the books and records of the Provider more often than
annually. The Provider agrees to reimburse the City the reasonable costs of an audit if the audit
discloses that the Provider has paid 95% or less of the compensation due the City for the period of such
audit. In the event the accounting rendered to the City by the Provider herein is found to be incorrect,
then payment shall be made on the corrected amount within 30 calendar days of written notice, it being
agreed that the City may accept any amount offered by the Provider, but the acceptance thereof by the
City shall not be deemed a settlement of such item if the amount is in dispute or is later found to be
incorrect.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.480 Enforcement And Remedies
A. Enforcement - City Designee. The City is responsible for enforcing and administering this
Ordinance, and the City or its designee, as appointed by the Mayor or City, is authorized to give
any notice required by law or under any Franchise Agreement.
B. Enforcement Provision. Any Franchise granted pursuant to this Ordinance shall contain
appropriate provisions for enforcement, compensation, and protection of the public, consistent
with the other provisions of this Ordinance, including, but not limited to, defining events of default,
procedures for accessing the Bond/Security Fund, and rights of termination or revocation.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.490 Force Majeure
In the event a Provider's performance of any of the terms, conditions or obligations required by this
Ordinance or a Franchise is prevented by a cause or event not within a Provider's control, such inability
to perform shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof.
For the purpose of this section, causes or events not within the control of a Provider shall include,
without limitation, acts of God, strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances, failure or loss of utilities,
explosions, acts of public enemies, and natural disasters such as floods, earthquakes, landslides, and
fires.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.500 Extended Operation And Continuity Of Services
A. Continuation after Expiration. Upon either expiration or revocation of a Franchise granted
pursuant to this Ordinance, the City shall have discretion to permit a Provider to continue to
operate its System or provide Services for an extended period of time not to exceed six (6)
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 61/74
months from the date of such expiration or revocation. A Provider shall continue to operate its
System under the terms and conditions of this Ordinance and the Franchise granted pursuant to
this Ordinance.
B. Continuation by Incumbent Local Exchange Carrier. If the Provider is the incumbent local
exchange carrier, it shall be permitted to continue to operate its System and provide Services
without regard to revocation or expiration, but shall be obligated to negotiate a renewal in good
faith.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.510 Removal Or Abandonment Of Franchise Property
A. Abandoned System. In the event that (1) the use of any portion of the System is discontinued
for a continuous period of 12 months, and 30 days after no response to written notice from the
City to the last known address of Provider; (2) any System has been installed in the Rights-of-
Way without complying with the requirements of this Ordinance or Franchise; or (3) the
provisions of §5.32.140 are applicable and no Franchise is granted, a Provider, except the
Provider who is an incumbent local exchange carrier, shall be deemed to have abandoned such
System.
B. Removal of Abandoned System. The City, upon such terms as it may impose, may give a
Provider written permission to abandon, without removing, any System, or portion thereof,
directly constructed, operated or maintained under a Franchise. Unless such permission is
granted or unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance, a Provider shall remove within a
reasonable time the abandoned System and shall restore, using prudent construction standards,
any affected Rights-of-Way to their former state at the time such System was installed, so as not
to impair their usefulness. In removing its plant, structures and equipment, a Provider shall refill,
at its own expense, any excavation necessarily made by it and shall leave all Rights-of-Way in as
good condition as that prevailing prior to such removal without materially interfering with any
electrical or telephone cable or other utility wires, poles or attachments. The City shall have the
right to inspect and approve the condition of the Rights-of-Way cables, wires, attachments and
poles prior to and after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of this
Ordinance and any security fund provided in a Franchise shall continue in full force and effect
during the period of removal and until full compliance by a Provider with the terms and conditions
of this Section.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.520 Transfer Of Abandoned System To City
Upon abandonment of any System in place, a Provider, if required by the City, shall submit to the City a
written instrument, satisfactory in form to the City, transferring to the City the ownership of the
abandoned System.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.530 Removal Of Above-Ground System
At the expiration of the term for which a Franchise is granted, or upon its revocation or earlier expiration,
as provided for by this Ordinance, in any such case without renewal, extension or transfer, the City shall
have the right to require a Provider to remove, at its expense, all above-ground portions of a System
from the Rights-of-Way within a reasonable period of time, which shall not be less than 180 days. If the
Provider is the incumbent local exchange carrier, it shall not be required to remove its System, but shall
negotiate a renewal in good faith.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 62/74
(Ord. No. 20-97 Enacted, 11/24/1997)
5.32.540 Leaving Underground System
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this Ordinance, a Provider may abandon any
underground System in place so long as it does not materially interfere with the use of the Rights-of-Way
or with the use thereof by any public utility, cable operator or other Person.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.550 Publicizing Work
Before entering onto any private property, a Provider shall make a good faith attempt to contact the
property owners in advance, and describe the work to be performed.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.560 Conflicts
In the event of a conflict between any provision of this Ordinance and a Franchise entered pursuant to it,
the provisions of this Ordinance in effect at the time the Franchise is entered into shall control.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.570 Severability
If any provision of this Ordinance is held by any federal, state or local court of competent jurisdiction, to
be invalid as conflicting with any federal or state statute, or is ordered by a court to be modified in any
way in order to conform to the requirements of any such law and all appellate remedies with regard to
the validity of the Ordinance provisions in question are exhausted, such provision shall be considered a
separate, distinct, and independent part of this Ordinance, and such holding shall not affect the validity
and enforceability of all other provisions hereof. In the event that such law is subsequently repealed,
rescinded, amended or otherwise changed, so that the provision which had been held invalid or modified
is no longer in conflict with such law the provision in question shall return to full force and effect and shall
again be binding on the City and the Provider, provided that the City shall give the Provider 30 days, or a
longer period of time as may be reasonably required for a Provider to comply with such a rejuvenated
provision, written notice of the change before requiring compliance with such provision.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.580 New Developments
It shall be the policy of the City to liberally amend this Ordinance, upon Application of a Provider, when
necessary to enable the Provider to take advantage of any developments in the field of
Telecommunications which will afford the Provider an opportunity to more effectively, efficiently, or
economically serve itself or the public.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.590 Notices
All notices from a Provider to the City required under this Ordinance or pursuant to a Franchise granted
pursuant to this Ordinance shall be directed to the officer as designated by the Mayor. A Provider shall
provide in any Application for a Franchise the identity, address and phone number to receive notices
from the City. A Provider shall immediately notify Spanish Fork City, of any change in its name, address,
or telephone number.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 63/74
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.600 Exercise Of Police Power
To the full extent permitted by applicable law either now or in the future, the City reserves the right to
adopt or issue such rules, regulations, orders, or other directives that it finds necessary or appropriate in
the lawful exercise of its police powers.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.610 Construction
This Ordinance shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable federal and state statutes.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.620 Ordinance Applicability
This Ordinance shall apply to all Franchises granted or renewed after the effective date of this
Ordinance. This Ordinance shall further apply, to the extent permitted by applicable federal or state law
to all existing Franchises granted prior to the effective date of this Ordinance and to a Provider providing
Services, without a Franchise, prior to the effective date of this Ordinance.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.630 Other Applicable Ordinances
A Provider's rights are subject to the police powers of the City to adopt and enforce ordinances
necessary to the health, safety and welfare of the public. A Provider shall comply with all applicable
general laws and ordinances enacted by the City pursuant to its police powers. In particular, all
Providers shall comply with the City zoning and other land use requirements.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.640 City Failure To Enforce
A Provider shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this Ordinance or
any Franchise granted pursuant to this Ordinance by reason of any failure of the City to enforce prompt
compliance.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.32.650 Construed According To Utah Law
This Ordinance and any Franchise granted pursuant to this Ordinance shall be construed and enforced
in accordance with the substantive laws of the State of Utah.
(Ord. No. 20-97, Enacted 11/24/1997)
5.36 Signs
5.36.010 Purpose
5.36.020 Definitions
5.36.030 General Provisions
5.36.040 Prohibited Signs
5.36.050 Permitted Permanent Signs
5.36.060 Permitted Temporary Signs
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 64/74
5.36.070 Billboards
5.36.080 Nonconforming Signs
5.36.090 Permits And Fees
5.36.100 Remedies And Violations
5.36.010 Purpose
The purpose of this section is to regulate the number, type, location, physical dimensions, and design of
signs in order to protect the public interest and achieve community objectives as follows:
A. To balance public and private objectives by allowing adequate signage for business
identification;
B. To promote the free flow of traffic and protect pedestrians and motorists from injury and property
damage which may be caused by cluttered, distracting, and illegible signage;
C. To prevent property damage and personal injury resulting from signs which are improperly
constructed or poorly maintained;
D. To promote the use of signs which are well designed, of appropriate scale, and integrated with
surrounding buildings and landscape in order to meet the City’s desire for quality development.
5.36.020 Definitions
"Sign": A name, identification, description, display or illustration affixed to a surface visible to the public
and used for visual communication which is intended to attract the attention of the public and is visible
from the public rights-of-way or other properties. The term “sign” shall not include any flag, badge, or
insignia of any governmental unit nor shall it include any item of merchandise normally displayed within
a show window of a business.
"Sign, A-frame" Are portable signs, usually equilateral triangular shaped, such that the short side
provides a base for two sign copies facing opposite directions.
"Sign, Awning" Signs which are placed on or integrated into a fabric or other material canopies which
are mounted on the exterior of a building.
"Sign, Banner" A sign made of fabric or other pliable material.
"Sign, Billboard" A freestanding ground sign which is designed or intended to draw attention to a
business, product, or service that is not sold, offered, manufactured, or existing on the property where
the sign is located.
"Sign, Channel Letters" A three-dimensional graphic sign element representing individual letters, either
internally illuminated or not, that are constructed of either metal or plastic.
"Sign, Civic Event" A government sign posted on public property or on the public right of way giving
notice of an upcoming or current event, including locations of polling places, being sponsored by the
government entity posting the sign.
"Sign, Directional" An on-premise sign that includes information assisting in the flow of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic such as enter, exit, and one-way.
"Sign, Directory" A sign, other than an identification sign, listing the names, uses, or locations of the
various businesses or activities conducted within a building or group of buildings, which is centrally
located and intended to provide on-site directions.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 65/74
"Sign, Electric" Any sign containing electrical wiring used to illuminate or draw attention to the sign.
"Sign, Freestanding" A sign which is erected on its own self-supporting permanent structure, including
a mast or pole, detached from any supporting elements of a building.
"Sign, Government" A sign that is constructed, placed, or maintained by the federal, state, or a local
government, including public school districts, which are traffic control signs or civic event signs.
"Sign, Menu Board and Preview Menu Board" A permanently mounted sign displaying the menu and
prices for a drive thru restaurant.
"Sign, Monument" A freestanding sign whose sign face extends to the ground or to a base.
"Sign, Nonconforming" A sign lawfully erected and maintained prior to the adoption of this ordinance
which does not conform with the requirements of this ordinance.
"Sign, Permanent" A sign intended and designed for permanent display in a fixed location.
"Sign, Projecting" A sign attached to a building or other structure and extending in whole or in part
more than 14 inches beyond the building.
"Sign, Reader Panel" A sign designed to permit immediate change of copy either manually or
electronically.
"Sign, Temporary" A sign not intended or designed for permanent display.
"Sign, Traffic Control" Traffic control devices on public property or in the public right-of-way which are
erected and maintained by the United States of America, State of Utah, Utah County, or Spanish Fork
City which comply with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted by the State of Utah.
"Sign, Wall" A sign mounted flat against and projecting less than 14 inches from, or painted on the wall
of a building with the exposed face of the sign parallel to the face of the wall.
"Sign, Window" Temporary or Permanent opaque, perforated or solid signs affixed to the interior or
exterior of a window or placed immediately next to a window pane so as to attract the attention of
persons outside the building.
5.36.030 General Provisions
A. All signs shall comply with the City’s Clear Vision Area requirements.
B. All signs shall be structurally designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with all
applicable provisions of the current edition of the building code adopted by the Utah Uniform
Building Code Commission.
C. Signs shall not be located in a manner which interferes with pedestrian travel or poses a hazard
to pedestrians.
D. Signs may be illuminated or non-illuminated, unless otherwise restricted herein. The source of
the sign’s illumination shall not be visible from any street, sidewalk, or adjacent property. This
shall not preclude the use of neon sign elements.
E. Freestanding signs shall be incorporated within a landscaped planter area of at least 25 square
feet, unless waived by the Development Review Committee.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 66/74
F. Sign area shall be measured as follows:
1. Sign copy mounted or painted on a background panel or area distinctively painted,
textured, or constructed as a background for the sign copy shall be measured as that
area contained within the sum of the smallest rectangle(s) that will enclose both the sign
copy and the background.
2. Sign copy mounted as individual letters or graphics against a wall, fascia, mansard, or
parapet of a building or other structure that has not been painted, textured or otherwise
altered to provide a distinctive background for the sign copy shall be measured as a sum
of the smallest rectangle(s) that will enclose each word and each graphic in the total sign.
3. Sign height shall be measured as the vertical distance from the top of the highest element
of the sign or sign structure to the base of the sign, or native grade of the site if the base
of the sign extends more than one (1) foot above the native grade.
5.36.040 Prohibited Signs
Signs placed on public property or in the public rights-of-way are prohibited, except for the following:
A. Government signs and traffic control signs;
B. The City is authorized to sell off-site advertising at city ball fields, the rodeo arena, and the golf
course to raise revenue to offset the subsidy to the recreation programs;
C. The Spanish Fork/Salem Area Chamber of Commerce is authorized to sell off-site advertising on
bus benches at UTA authorized bus stops, in order to raise revenue to reduce the subsidy to the
Chamber.
Any sign not specifically permitted by this ordinance is prohibited.
5.36.050 Permitted Permanent Signs
Permanent signs are limited to government signs and on-site commercial advertising signs, may be
illuminated or non-illuminated, and must be located outside of any Clear Vision Areas. Permanent Signs
may not be constructed of fabric material, such as vinyl or similar products, but rather must be
constructed of a rigid material such as steel, aluminum, wood, or Lexan. An exception exists for signs
constructed of fabric material during the first 60 days of business’ initial opening. Reader Boards are
permitted, and permanent signs are subject to meeting any applicable requirements found in the current
edition of the building code adopted by the Utah Uniform Building Code Commission.
A. Wall Signs.
1. A primary wall sign may not occupy more than 15% of the flat wall area of the primary
elevation.
2. Secondary wall signs are allowed provided they do not exceed five (5) percent of that wall
area.
3. The permitted sign area for a wall may be divided into more than one sign provided that
the signs do not cumulatively exceed the allowed sign area for that particular wall.
4. Permanent window signs shall count as wall signs for purposes of calculating maximum
allowable sign area.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 67/74
5. Wall signs may extend up to six (6) feet vertically from the upper most element of a
building facade, so long as the sign is either made of channel letters or is shaped to only
include an icon related to the business that is permanently attached to the front facade of
the building. The copy area of wall signs may not occupy more than 15% of the flat wall
area of the primary elevation.
B. Monument Signs. Monument Signs shall be permitted for churches, schools, individual
businesses, and multi-tenant developments. One monument sign shall be permitted per street
frontage for each development unless a freestanding pole sign is installed on that frontage.
Monument signs shall be limited to the following criteria unless a Project Signage Plan is
approved:
1. Monument signs must have a one (1) foot high pedestal.
2. The illuminated cabinet or message display area may not exceed five (5) feet in height
from the top of the pedestal.
3. The maximum copy area per side of a monument sign is 48 square feet. Monument signs
shall be permitted for individual businesses and multi-tenant developments. One
monument sign shall be permitted per street frontage for each development unless a freestanding
sign is installed on that frontage.
C. Free standing Signs. Freestanding pole signs are permitted for non-residential individual
businesses and multi-tenant developments that occupy sites that are one acre in size or larger.
One freestanding pole sign shall be permitted per street frontage for each development unless a
monument sign is installed on that frontage. Freestanding signs shall be limited to the following
criteria unless a Project Signage Plan is approved:
1. Freestanding pole signs:
a. May be a maximum of 35 feet in height.
b. May not exceed 200 square feet in size unless specifically authorized herein.
D. Directional Signs. Directional signs, when required to assist the flow of traffic, may not exceed
six (6) square feet in copy area or a height of three (3) feet.
E. Directory Signs. Directory signs, when required to identify businesses or buildings in multi-tent
or multi-building developments, are not to exceed six (6) feet in height and 48 square feet of copy
area.
F. Projecting Signs. Projecting signs may extend up to six feet from a building facade, so long as
the bottom of any part of the sign is at least ten (10) feet above the sidewalk grade. Projecting
signs may contain thirty-six square feet of copy area on each side.
G. Menu Boards. One (1) preview menu board and one (1) ordering menu board are allowed for
each drive-thru business. Preview menu boards and ordering menu boards may not exceed six
(6) feet in height or 40 square feet in copy area.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 68/74
H. Project Signage Plans. Application may be made to have a Project Signage Plan approved to
permit taller signs with greater copy area, as well as additional signs as part of a Project Signage
Plan. Qualifying projects must contain at least 5 acres in area and must have at least 50,000
square feet of building space. Developments with Project Signage Plans may have monument
signs and freestanding pole signs which exceed the height and area requirements set forth in this
Chapter. Applicants may also request that a greater number of signs be allowed than what this
Chapter otherwise permits.
Applications for Project Signage Plans are made by submitting detailed descriptions of the
proposed signs and proposed sign locations to the Community Development Department. The
application will be forwarded to the Planning Commission for recommendation, and to the City
Council for approval, denial, or approval with modifications.
In reviewing applications for Project Signage Plan approval, the Planning Commission and City
Council shall consider the impact of the proposed signs on surrounding properties, the
advantages the proposed signage may create in generating commerce in Spanish Fork City, the
aesthetics of the proposed signs, and visibility from travel lanes on State or Federal highways.
Once approved, Project Signage Plans may not be modified without making new application with
the City.
I. Traffic Control Signs.
J. Trespass Signs. An owner of property may post “No Trespassing” or “No Soliciting” signs on
their property in order to protect their property rights in the property. A number of signs adequate
to give notice are allowed, not to exceed one (1) sign every 200 feet. The size of each sign may
not exceed two feet by three feet.
(Ord. No. 17-17, Amended 9/5/2017)
(Ord. No. 05-18, Amended 3/27/2018)
5.36.060 Permitted Temporary Signs
Temporary signs must be located outside of any Clear Vision Areas and conform to the provisions found
in this Chapter. Government entities may install temporary signs on public and private property to give
notice of events and functions. Temporary signs are limited to on-site advertising unless expressly
allowed for in this Chapter.
A. Banner Signs. Banner signs are limited to commercial speech. Banner signs must be affixed to
the building façade so as to be secure and flush to the wall surface. Banner Signs are permitted
to advertise as many as four (4) 30-day periods each year for each property. One (1) roofmounted
banner sign is permitted for each residential subdivision. Roof-mounted banner signs
may not extend above the roofline of the structure they are installed upon. Roof-mounted banner
signs must be located on a home in the subdivision they are advertising. Banner signs may not
be larger than 16 feet by 40 feet.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 69/74
B. Freestanding Temporary Signs. Freestanding temporary signs may be constructed of a variety
of materials and shall be securely installed so as to be immovable without some measure of
disassembly. Freestanding temporary signs may be up to eight (8) feet tall and may have up to
32 square feet of copy area on each side. Additional restrictions are described below:
1. One (1) freestanding temporary sign may be installed to advertise vacant commercial
parcels of land that are five (5) acres or larger unless the parcel has frontage on more
than one (1) public right-of-way. Should the parcel have frontage on more than one (1)
public right-of-way, then an additional freestanding temporary sign may be installed for
each additional frontage.
2. One (1) freestanding temporary sign may be installed to advertise vacant non-residential
buildings unless the parcel has frontage on more than one (1) public right-of-way. Should
the parcel have frontage on more than one (1) public right-of-way, then an additional
freestanding temporary sign may be installed for each additional frontage.
3. Two (2) on-site freestanding temporary signs may be installed to advertise residential
subdivisions.
4. One (1) temporary freestanding sign is allowed on a commercial construction site. The
temporary freestanding sign may identify the name of the project, the names of the
developer, contractor, architect, subcontractor, and financier of the project and the
projected completion date. The sign may only be installed after building permits have
been issued for the project. The sign shall be removed prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy for the project.
5. Five (5) temporary freestanding signs are allowed on each residential lot. Temporary
freestanding signs on residential lots may be up to six (6) feet tall and may have up to six
square (6) feet in copy area on each side. In addition, a total of ten (10) freestanding
signs are allowed from July 15 through August 25 each year and from September 2
through November 18 each year.
6. Freestanding temporary signs may be used to advertise polling locations and are
considered government signs. Temporary freestanding signs identifying a location as a
polling place may be placed ten (10) days prior to an election. Such signs shall not
support a candidate or cause, but merely identify the polling place and provide other
general information about the upcoming election.
C. A-frame Signs. A-frame signs may not exceed 16 square feet of overall size. One (1)
commercial A-frame sign is allowed per business and may only be placed in the front of the
business. A-frame signs may be placed in the public right-of-way so long as they are not in a
travel lane, parking lane, road shoulder, or obstructs pedestrian travel on a sidewalk. A-frame
signs meeting the conditions of this paragraph are considered to be on-site signs. A-frame signs
must be sufficiently secured so that it won’t readily fall over or otherwise create a hazard to
persons or property. A-frame signs may only be displayed during open business hours in
commercial and industrial zoning districts. A-frame signs shall be maintained in a well-kept
condition.
D. Window Signs. Window signs may be used for business identification and advertising of any
service, product, person, business, place, or activity on the premises. Window signs may cover
up to 50% of the area of the window on which the sign is located.
E. Festive Lights. Lights and lighting displayed to celebrate a national or state holiday are
permitted 30 days prior to the holiday until ten (10) days after the holiday. They may be displayed
on a commercial or non-commercial lot or parcel.
5.36.070 Billboards
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 70/74
Billboards are permitted in the following locations and subject to the following restrictions:
A. Billboards are permitted:
1. Along I-15 from 3100 North to 1600 North and mile post number 259 to mile post number
258 (heading south). These billboards must be at least 500 feet from any other billboard
on the same side of the interstate highway and located in an industrial zone.
2. Along State Road 6 from the junction with Highway 89 southeasterly for 0.84 miles. These
billboards must be at least 750 feet from any other billboard on the same side of the
highway and located in an industrial zone.
B. Must be within 100 feet of I-15 or US Highway 6.
C. Must be at least 400 feet from any R-1 or R-3 residential districts.
D. Cannot exceed a height of 50 feet or 25 feet above roadway grade level, whichever is less.
E. May be double-faced or back-to-back if the separation of panels does not exceed five (5) feet.
F. Each side may have a sign area not to exceed 675 square feet.
G. Footing and structure details must be furnished to the City Building Official prior to issuance of a
building permit.
H. Must be monopole. The monopole and all appurtenances to the sign must be painted black.
I. Utah Department of Transportation must issue a permit for the proposed location prior to
commencing construction, or prior to City conducting any inspections pursuant to its permit.
5.36.080 Nonconforming Signs
Nonconforming signs shall be removed or brought into conformance with this ordinance when:
A. More than 50%of the reproduction cost of the sign or sign structure has been damaged or
destroyed or has deteriorated to such an extent that the cost of repairs exceeds 50% of the
reproduction cost of the sign or sign structure.
B. The property undergoes development or redevelopment in accordance with the Design Review
section of Title 15.
5.36.090 Permits And Fees
A. Building and sign permits shall be obtained prior to erecting, placing, constructing or altering any
sign except window signs, freestanding temporary signs on residential lots, freestanding
temporary signs that advertise polling locations, festive lights, and A-frame signs.
B. The permit fees shall be in the amount established by City Council resolution or in the annual
budget.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 71/74
C. An application for a sign permit shall be made on forms provided by the Community
Development Department. The following information will be required on all sign permit
applications:
1. Address of the property.
2. Business name of the applicant.
3. Business owner’s name, address, and telephone number.
4. Sign contractor’s name, address, and telephone number.
5. Valuation of the sign(s).
6. Inventory of all existing signs on the property showing the type, dimensions, and location
of each sign.
7. Fully dimensioned plans and elevations showing the dimensions, design copy, and
location of each proposed sign.
8. Plans indicating the scope and structural detail of the work to be done; including details of
all connections, supports, footings, and materials.
9. Required information for an electrical permit for all electric signs.
10. Color, material, and letter samples when the sign is subject to design review.
5.36.100 Remedies And Violations
A. Signs placed on public property or in public rights-of-ways may be removed without notice.
B. Violations of this Chapter are Class C Misdemeanors.
C. If any provision of this Chapter on signs is held by a court of lawful jurisdiction to be illegal or
unconstitutional, the remaining provisions shall remain in full force and effect. In the event that
the entire Chapter is held to be illegal or unconstitutional, all signs are prohibited, except for
government signs. In such event, existing signs shall be removed within 60 days.
(Ord. No. 06-05, Enacted 06/07/2005)
(Ord. No. 07-06, Amended 07/18/2006)
(Ord. No. 06-13, Amended 05/07/2013)
(Ord. No. 17-14, Amended 11/18/2014)
(Ord. No. 07-16, Chapter 36 repealed and re-enacted 05/17/2016)
5.40 Home Occupations
5.40.010 Authorized
5.40.020 Definitions
5.40.025 License Required
5.40.030 Administrative Fees
5.40.040 Conditions
5.40.050 Penalty
5.40.010 Authorized
Home occupations are allowed in all of the residential zones of the City, either in the residence or an
accessory building, upon strict compliance with the requirements and conditions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 16-10, Amended 08/03/2010)
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 72/74
5.40.020 Definitions
"Home Occupation with Impact" A business that takes place within a residential zone, conducted by a
resident(s) residing in a home that creates a material impact to the residential neighborhood by having
patrons visit the premises.
"Home Occupation without Impact" A business that takes place within a residential zone, conducted
by a resident(s) residing in a home that creates no impact to the residential neighborhood since no
patrons visit the premises.
5.40.025 License Required
Any person desiring to operate a home occupation must obtain a home occupation business license,
paying all applicable business license administrative fees. Each distinct home occupation requires a
separate business license. Compliance with all local, state, and/or federal laws pertaining to the
particular home occupation is required to maintain the license.
5.40.030 Administrative Fees
The business license administrative fee for a home occupation with impact shall be based upon the
administrative cost to the City to issue a home occupation business license. The initial fee shall be
$60.00 and shall be subject to change based on changing costs, as estimated by the City Council in the
annual budget. In addition to the business license administrative fee, businesses requiring inspection(s)
shall pay an inspection fee based on the cost to the City to conduct the inspection(s). A safety and fire
inspection is required for all businesses that have patrons entering the property. The license shall expire
December 31st of each year. Licenses should be renewed by January 1st of each year. If not renewed
by January 15th, a $15.00 late fee, per month, shall also be paid in order to renew the license.
There is no business license administrative fee for a home occupation without patrons. The license shall
expire December 31st of each year. Licenses should be renewed by January 1st of each year. If not
renewed by January 15th, a $15.00 late fee, per month, shall also be paid in order to renew the license.
5.40.040 Conditions
A. The following conditions must be met in order to obtain and keep a home occupation business
license:
1. The home occupation must clearly be incidental to or secondary to the residential use of
the lot. If housed in an accessory building, the building must meet the stricter of the
conditions of this chapter or the conditions and requirements for accessory buildings
found in Spanish Fork Municipal Code §15.3.24.090(A).
2. The business must be conducted only by a resident or residents who reside on the site.
3. The business may occupy no more than 300 square feet if located in an accessory
building, or the lesser of 300 square feet or 15% of the floor space of the residence if
located in the residence. Exceptions include:
a. Swim lessons: if the swimming pool meets residential pool standards and is
constructed primarily for the personal use of the occupants of the residence.
b. Home Child Day Care: as permitted by the Utah Department of Health, Bureau of
Child Development (rules are available online at www.rues.utah.gov).
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 73/74
4. No more than two nonresident patrons are permitted to be at the dwelling at any one time
by reason of the home occupation. Exceptions include:
a. Preschools are permitted to have no more than 11 patrons, including the
provider’s own children four (4) years of age and younger.
b. Home Child Day Care in accordance with the requirements of the Utah
Department of Health, Bureau of Child Development.
5. The business has no more than ten (10) commercial delivery vehicles per week coming to
the dwelling related to the home occupation, or such other number considered excessive
in the sole discretion of the Community Development Director.
6. The business produces no offensive noise, vibrations, smoke, dust or other particulate
matter, odors, heat, humidity, glare, electrical interference, or other objectionable effects
beyond the boundaries of the property.
7. Vehicles or equipment may not be used for the primary purpose of advertising the
business at the site of the home occupation.
8. One name plate or identification sign no larger than 18" by 24" is allowed on site, so long
as it is located within five (5) feet of the building.
9. The business may not have exterior displays nor display goods which are visible from the
outside, nor otherwise store materials, inventory, or equipment outdoors.
10. The business may not include such uses as automotive repair, commercial welding, body
shop, spray painting, industrial uses, commercial stables or kennels, repair of major
appliances such as: washers, refrigerators, ranges, etc., or other similar type uses which
are not compatible with a residential neighborhood, as determined in the sole discretion of
the Community Development Director.
11. No structural alterations to the building may be made to accommodate the business,
which are not customary for a residential structure.
12. The business shall comply with all safety codes, including fire, building, plumbing,
electrical, or others which may be applicable.
13. Swim lesson home occupations shall obtain approval from the Utah County Health
Department for the proposed activity. Documentation from the Health Department is
required prior to the issuance of a swim lesson home occupation business license.
14. Home Child Day Care occupations must obtain an appropriate State of Utah certificate or
license and adhere to the rules and regulations of the Utah Department of Health, Bureau
of Child Development (rules are available online at www.rules.utah.gov).
15. No process can be used which is hazardous to the public health, safety, morals, or
welfare.
16. If the applicant rents or leases the property where the home occupation is intended to be
conducted, the applicant must provide a letter of consent from the property owner.
17. No visitors or traffic in conjunction with the home occupation shall be permitted between
the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
18. Adequate parking must be maintained for the home occupation. The area utilized and/or
designated as required residential parking may not be used in connection with a home
occupation. Excess parking by patrons in front of neighboring residences, as determined
by the Community Development Director, is grounds to revoke the home occupation
business license.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=5_BUSINESS_LICENSES 74/74
B. An applicant may appeal the imposition or denial of any of these conditions to the City Council by
filing a written notice of appeal within ten (10) days of the imposition or denial with the
Community Development Director.
(Ord. No. 16-10, Enacted 08/03/2010)
(Ord. No. 15-12, Amended 10/18/2012)
(Ord. No. 16-15, Amended 11/03/2015)
5.40.050 Penalty
Any person operating a business in a residential zone without obtaining a business license and
complying with the requirements and conditions of this chapter is guilty of a Class C misdemeanor for a
first offense. Subsequent offenses shall be a Class B misdemeanor. Each day of operations without a
business license shall be considered a separate offense.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=6_ANIMALS 1/15
6 ANIMALS
6.04 (Reserved)
6.08 General Animal Regulations
6.12 Rabies Control
6.16 Kennels
6.20 Chickens
6.24 Pot Bellied Pigs
6.04 (Reserved)
General Animal and Livestock Regulations REPEALED by Ord. No. 03-15, Amended 02/03/2015.
6.08 General Animal Regulations
6.08.010 Definitions
6.08.020 Premises Confining Animals And Fowl - Neat And Sanitary Condition Required
6.08.030 Abandonment Or Destruction Of Animals
6.08.040 Disposal Of Animals
6.08.050 Cruelty To Animals
6.08.060 Excessive Noise
6.08.070 Animals Running At Large
6.08.080 Impound
6.08.090 Keeping Certain Animals Unlawful
6.08.100 Detention Of Animals
6.08.110 Intraseizure Of Animals
6.08.120 Animal Bites
6.08.130 Defecation And Urination
6.08.140 Enforcement
6.08.150 Interference With Officer
6.08.160 Animals In Prohibited Areas
6.08.170 Quarantine Of Animals
6.08.180 Licensing
6.08.190 Revocation Of License
6.08.200 Threatening Passers-By
6.08.210 Penalties
6.08.010 Definitions
For the purpose of this title, unless it is plainly evident from the context that a different meaning is
intended, the following definitions shall apply:
“Animal” means any live, vertebrate creature, domestic or wild.
“Animal at Large” means any animal whether or not licensed, not under restraint.
“Animal Control Officer” means any person designated by the State of Utah, a county government, or
a municipal government as a law enforcement officer who is qualified to perform such duties under the
laws of this state.
“Animal Shelter” means the facility operated by the South Utah Valley Animal Services Special Service
District, a Utah local district, to which City belongs, for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals
held under the authority of this chapter or state law.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=6_ANIMALS 2/15
“Animal under Restraint” means an animal on a leash or lead which is held by a person or attached to
a stationary object or confined within a vehicle or confined upon the real property of the owner or
custodian.
“Attack” means any biting or attempted biting or other action by an animal which places a person or
another animal in danger of imminent bodily harm. Actual physical contact shall not be required to
constitute an attack. Attack may include jumping upon, chasing, nipping, or otherwise threatening.
“Bite” means an actual puncture, tear, bruise, or abrasion of the skin inflicted by the teeth of an animal.
“Cat” means any age feline of the domesticated types.
“Commercial Kennel” means any premises wherein any person or entity engages in the business of
boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee, or selling dogs or cats. Commercial
Kennels must be located in Industrial Zones, pursuant to the requirements of Title 15.
“Custodian” means any person having the charge, care, custody or control of an animal which he/she
does not own.
“Dog” means any canine of the domesticated types.
“Domesticated Animal” means any animal accustomed to live in or about the habitation of humans,
including, but not limited to, cats, dogs, fowl, horses, swine, cattle, sheep and goats.
“Euthanize” means humane killing of an animal.
“Guard Dog” means a dog used for the purpose of deterring crime.
“Household Pet” means any animal or fowl ordinarily permitted in a house and kept for company or
pleasure and not for profit, such as: dogs, cats, canaries, fish, hamsters, mice, and other animals
associated with human environments. Household pets shall not include wildlife, livestock, poultry or any
animals which are capable of inflicting harm or discomfort or endangering the health, safety or welfare of
any person or property.
“Kennel” means any premises where more than two dogs or cats are raised, kept, housed, or boarded;
or any premises wherein any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for
hire, training for a fee or selling dogs or cats.
“Leash” or “Lead” means any chain, rope, or device used to restrain an animal.
“Owner” means any person, partnership or corporation owning, keeping or harboring one or more
animals. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered for three consecutive days or
more.
“Pet Shop” means any establishment, not part of a kennel, containing cages or exhibition pens wherein
dogs, cats, birds, or other pets for sale are kept or displayed.
“Quarantine” means the isolation of an animal in a substantial enclosure so that the animal is not
subject to contact with other animals or unauthorized persons.
“Residential Kennel” means any premises located within a residential zone where more than two dogs
or cats, or combination thereof, are raised, kept, housed, or boarded. Residential kennels may be
permitted for a maximum of four animals.
"UCA” means Utah Code Annotated.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=6_ANIMALS 3/15
“Veterinary Clinic” means any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for
surgery, diagnosis, or treatment of diseases and injuries of animals.
“Vicious Animal” is an animal 1) with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked,
to cause injury to, or to otherwise endanger the safety of humans or other domestic animals; 2) which
attacks a human being or other domestic animal without provocation; or 3) which is trained or used to
fight or to attack humans, except that this provision shall not apply to a dog owned or used by a
government entity; 4) Feeding an animal to a snake or lizard shall not make the snake a vicious animal.
“Wild Animal” means all animals commonly accepted as being “wild” and includes, but is not limited to,
the following, no matter how domesticated they may be:
A. Alligators and crocodiles.
B. Bears (ursidae).
C. Cat family (felidae), except the commonly accepted domesticated cats.
D. Coyotes, foxes and wolves.
E. Porcupine (ercthizontiade)
F. Nonhuman primates (hominidae).
G. Raccoon (prosynnidae).
H. Skunks.
I. Venomous snakes or venomous lizards.
J. Weasels (mustelidae).
K. Ferrets.
6.08.020 Premises Confining Animals And Fowl - Neat And Sanitary Condition Required
A. Wherever animals, including fowl and pigeons, may be tethered, corralled, confined and
sheltered or fed, the premises shall be maintained in a neat and sanitary condition so that no
nuisance due to unsightliness, odor or pest breeding or harborage shall be caused by such
animals or premises.
B. All barns or stables intended for or presently used to shelter livestock which are now erected and
maintained or may be erected, constructed, altered or repaired within the city shall conform to the
requirements of the applicable zoning ordinance, the building code and all other applicable laws
of the city.
6.08.030 Abandonment Or Destruction Of Animals
A. It shall be unlawful for any owner or custodian of an animal to abandon such animal within the
City. If an owner or custodian of an animal no longer desires to keep the animal as a pet, the
owner or custodian shall transfer the animal to a new owner or custodian.
B. When it becomes necessary to destroy any domestic animal because of age, sickness, or other
cause which renders the destruction of the animal necessary or desirable, it shall be the
responsibility of the owner or custodian of such animal to humanely dispose of the animal or
cause the animal to be destroyed by a licensed veterinarian or delivered to an animal control
officer or other animal shelter for adoption or destruction..
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=6_ANIMALS 4/15
C. The Spanish Fork City animal control officer shall take custody of an animal for release to the
Animal Shelter when a release form is signed by the owner or custodian and the required fee
paid. The fee shall be set from time to time by a resolution of the City Council, or in the annual
budget.
6.08.040 Disposal Of Animals
It is unlawful for the owner of any animal or fowl that die or are killed within the limits of this city, to fail to
remove or bury the carcass of such animal within ten hours after its death; provided that no horse, cow,
ox, pig, sheep, goat, ostrich, llama, emu, any wildlife or other animal shall be buried within the limits of
the city.
6.08.050 Cruelty To Animals
A. Except as authorized by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously kill,
injure, maim, disfigure, torture, beat, mutilate, burn or scald, overdrive or otherwise cruelly set
upon any animal. Each such act shall constitute a separate violation and shall be guilty of a class
B misdemeanor.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to hobble livestock in such a way as to cause injury or damage
to the animal.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or to confine any animal in or upon any vehicle in a
cruel or inhumane manner, including, but not limited to, carrying or confining such animal without
adequate ventilation or to leave any animal confined in a vehicle unattended in excessively hot or
cold weather.
D. Every operator of a motor vehicle or self-propelled vehicle within the city shall, immediately upon
injuring, striking, maiming or running down any animal, contact an officer to report the incident.
E. Fights. It is unlawful for any person within the limits of the city to, in any manner whatsoever,
encourage or urge any animal to fight or urge them on after they commence to fight.
F. It is unlawful for any person within the limits of the city to intentionally or carelessly administer
or apply any poisonous or toxic substance or any material injurious to tissues or organs to any
animal or livestock, or procures or permits the same to be done, whether the animals is his own
property or that of another. This provision shall not be interpreted so as to prohibit the use of
poisonous substances for the control of vermin in furtherance of public health when applied in
such a manner as to reasonably prohibit access to other animals.
G. It is unlawful for any person within the limits of the city to administer or apply, procure or allow the
administration or application of any trapping mechanism for domestic animals, other than a live
capture trap or to expose such a trapping mechanism to domestic animals or livestock, with the
intent to harm or take the animal whether the animal is his or her own property or that of another.
All set live capture traps shall be checked and emptied daily. All traps must have owner
identification permanently affixed to them.
H. It is unlawful for any person within the limits of the city to neglect or fail to supply any domestic
animal with necessary and adequate exercise, care, rest, food, drink, air, light, space, shelter,
protection from the elements, and/or medical care.
6.08.060 Excessive Noise
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=6_ANIMALS 5/15
It is unlawful for any person to harbor, keep, or own within the limits of the city any animal which barks,
whines, howls, or makes other disturbing noises in an excessive, continuous, or untimely fashion day or
night. Any police officer or animal control officer may apprehend such animal and may cause it to be
impounded in the animal shelter. A second conviction of this section by the same animal within a twelve
month period shall be grounds for removal of the animal from the city, which animal will not be allowed
to return.
6.08.070 Animals Running At Large
It shall be unlawful for any animal to be at large at any time within the corporate limits of the city. The
owner or custodian of any animal which is at large shall be in violation of this section, regardless of the
precautions taken to prevent the escape of the animal and regardless of lack of knowledge of the
offense at the time it occurs.
6.08.080 Impound
A. The animal control officer may apprehend and impound any animal found at large within the city.
Any person apprehending any animal running at large on his/her property may deliver the same
to any city police officer or animal control officer, which animal may then be impounded in the
animal shelter. Any animal placed in the Animal Shelter shall be handled by the policies and
regulations of the Animal Shelter.
B. Any domesticated animal impounded at an animal shelter shall be held according to the policies
of the Animal Shelter.
C. Any animal voluntarily relinquished to the animal control officer or an animal shelter by the owner
or custodian thereof for destruction or other disposition need not be kept for the minimum holding
period, but shall be handled by the policies and regulations of the Animal Shelter.
D. The animal control officer or police officer shall have the sole discretion to determine serious
injury or disease that will require euthanasia prior to five (5) working days.
E. Any wild animal placed in the Animal Shelter may be disposed of immediately.
6.08.090 Keeping Certain Animals Unlawful
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any animal which is prohibited to be kept or
harbored by UCA §§23-13-4, 23-20-3 or 23-20-4.
6.08.100 Detention Of Animals
It is unlawful for any person to detain or hold the animal of another without notifying the animal control
officer or law enforcement agency.
6.08.110 Intraseizure Of Animals
A. Whenever a police officer or an animal control officer shall have probable cause to believe that
an animal has been abandoned, although confined upon private property, that is in violation of
any of the provisions of this Chapter of the Spanish Fork Municipal Code, or is a vicious animal,
the officer shall be authorized to immediately seize the animal and may impound the same at the
Animal Shelter and such officer shall have the right to enter upon whatever premises the animal
may be kept for such purpose.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=6_ANIMALS 6/15
B. If an animal is summarily impounded without the knowledge of the owner or custodian, a notice
that the animal has been impounded shall be given to the owner or custodian of the animal, if the
same is known, by attaching the notice to the door at the residence thereof, or by mailing a
notice to the last known address of the owner or custodian.
C. An animal summarily impounded as provided in this section may be recovered by the owner
complying with the regulations of the animal shelter. If, in a subsequent court proceeding, the
animal is determined not to be abandoned, vicious or a nuisance, the animal shall be released to
the owner or custodian without any charge.
6.08.120 Animal Bites
A. Humans. It shall be unlawful for any domestic animal to bite or attack any person. It is no
defense that the animal is chained or confined if the chaining or confining is on public or private
property where the public has access to be on such property.
B. Domestic Animals. It shall be unlawful for any domestic animal to bite or attack any domestic
animal. It is no defense that the animal is chained or confined if the chaining or confining is on
public or private property where the public has access to be on such property.
C. It is unlawful for any person to keep, own, harbor, or have the control of any fierce or dangerous
animal. It is prima facia evidence that an animal is a fierce or dangerous animal if it bites or
attacks a person or domestic animal. Any police officer or animal control officer may apprehend
such animal and may cause it to be impounded at the Animal Shelter. An animal so impounded
is not allowed to return to the City, nor to be within City limits. If such an animal is not
impounded, the judge shall order the animal removed from City limits upon conviction. The owner
or custodian of any animal is in violation of this section regardless of the precautions taken to
prevent the bite or attack and regardless of the lack of knowledge of the offense at the time it
occurs.
(Ord. No. 06-18, Amended 03/27/2018)
6.08.130 Defecation And Urination
A. It is unlawful to allow an animal to defecate or urinate upon private property not owned by the
person owning or in control of such animal. The owner or custodian of any animal shall be
responsible for the removal of any defecation deposited by such animal on public property,
recreation areas, or private property not owned by the person owning or in control of such
animal.
B. Kennels and Runs. It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of any premises on which a kennel,
run, or other structure or area for housing or keeping of domestic animals is situated, to allow
such kennel, run, or other structure or area of the premises to become unsanitary, unclean, or to
emit undue stench or odor. The owner or occupant of any premises permitting any such condition
to exist that does not abate such condition within 24 hours after notice shall be issued a citation.
If such a notice is given, the condition must remain abated on a permanent basis. Additional
notices shall not be necessary prior to the issuance of a citation.
6.08.140 Enforcement
In the enforcement of any provision of this chapter, any police officer or animal control officer is
authorized to enter the premises of any person to take possession of a fierce, dangerous, or vicious
animal or animals running at large, when in fresh pursuit of such animal at the time the animal goes onto
the private property.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=6_ANIMALS 7/15
6.08.150 Interference With Officer
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, molest, hinder or prevent any police officer or
animal control officer in the discharge of their duties as herein prescribed.
B. Any person who shall hinder, delay, interfere with or obstruct any police officer or animal control
officer while engaged in capturing, securing or taking to the animal shelter any animal or animals
liable to be impounded, or who shall break open or in any manner directly or indirectly aid,
counsel or advise the breaking open of any animal control vehicle or other vehicle used for the
collecting of any such animals shall be deemed guilty of a class B misdemeanor.
6.08.160 Animals In Prohibited Areas
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to take or to permit any domestic animal, whether loose or on
a leash or in arms, in or about any establishment or place of business where food or food
products are sold or displayed, including but not limited to restaurants, grocery stores, meat
markets, food or vegetable stores; and it shall be unlawful for any person to allow any animal to
enter or be in any place of worship during public services; and it shall be unlawful for any person
to allow any animal to enter in or be upon any public park or cemetery where it is posted that no
animal/dogs are allowed.
B. An exception to this section shall be for any animal trained and used as a service animal.
6.08.170 Quarantine Of Animals
Whenever any animal attacks or bites a person, the owner of the animal shall immediately notify the
police department, which shall cause the animal to be impounded or otherwise quarantined for a period
of ten days. At the end of the ten-day quarantine period, the animal may be released from quarantine,
upon examination by a veterinarian or qualified staff of the Animal Shelter that such animal is free from
rabies. The expenses incurred in the inspection of such animal shall be paid by the owner or person in
control of such animal, in addition to any other fines or charges due. Such expenses shall be paid prior
to the release of the animal. If the animal dies within the ten-day quarantine period, its brain shall be
sent to the State Department of Health for examination for rabies.
6.08.180 Licensing
Any person owning a dog within the city limits shall license the dog pursuant to the following provisions:
A. Licensing, Fees, and Registration.
1. Registration--Required--Dogs only. It is unlawful for any person to own, keep or harbor a
dog over the age of three months within the limits of this city without making application to
the city or South Utah Valley Animal Shelter for that purpose and paying an annual
registration fee.
2. All license fees required by this chapter shall be in the amounts established by South
Utah Valley Animal Shelter Special Service District.
3. Such registration receipt and metallic registration tag shall be valid and in force from the
date issued until the expiration date.
4. The provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs whose owners are nonresidents
temporarily within the city for thirty (30) days or less, nor to dogs brought into the city for
the purpose of participating in any show.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=6_ANIMALS 8/15
B. Information Required for Registration. Before receiving a registration receipt and metallic
registration tag, each owner must state at the time of application for such a permit, the name and
address of the owner and sex, breed, age and color of each dog to be registered. The owner
must also present a certificate from a veterinarian stating that the dog has been vaccinated for
the prevention of rabies. Such certificate must give the last date of vaccination and the number of
the vaccination tag used by the veterinarian at the time of vaccination. It is unlawful for the owner
to misrepresent the age of any dog for the purpose of avoiding the payment of the license
required by this chapter.
C. Collar-Tag Attachment. It shall be the duty of the owner or keeper of any dog so registered to
provide a suitable collar for such dog to wear and to attach thereto the metallic registration tag
having a number corresponding with the certificate of registry inscribed thereon. All dogs not so
registered and collared as prescribed by this chapter may be impounded by the animal control
officer or any police officer or other designated official of the city.
D. Removal of Collar and Registration Tag. It is unlawful for any person other than the owner, a
veterinarian, or an animal control officer, to remove the collar from any dog to which collar has
been attached the metallic registration tag herein required, or to remove said metallic registration
tag from the collar to which it has been attached.
E. The owner of any dog of registration age shall make application for permit and obtain a permit
tag for such dog within ten (10) days after acquisition or age attainment.
F. Licensing and Fee Exemptions.
1. The licensing and fee provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs specifically trained
to assist officials of governmental agencies in the performance of their duties and which
are owned by or under contract to such agencies.
2. Nothing in this section (F)(1) shall be construed to exempt any dog from having a current
rabies vaccination.
6.08.190 Revocation Of License
If the owner of any animal is convicted of a violation of this chapter on two or more different occasions
during any twelve (12) month period involving the same animal, the license of the animal involved shall
be revoked. The animal control officer or other police officer shall be authorized to immediately impound
and pick up any animal whose license has been revoked. Any animal impounded following revocation of
its license shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of city ordinances for impounded
animals. Under no conditions shall the animal be allowed to be brought back into the city.
6.08.200 Threatening Passers-By
It shall be unlawful for any animal to threaten passers-by by nipping, chasing, jumping upon, attacking,
or chasing any person, bicycle, or motor vehicle.
6.08.210 Penalties
A person whose animal violates any provision of this Chapter is subject to receiving an administrative
notice of violation and handling the matter administratively, if they so desire. If an animal owner wants to
challenge the violation or otherwise does not want to resolve the matter administratively they shall
receive a citation to court. Animal violations referred to court are infractions misdemeanors. Owners of
animals are responsible for the acts of their animals in violation of this chapter, whether handled
administratively or through the courts.
(Ord. No. 13-16, Amended 08/16/2016)
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=6_ANIMALS 9/15
6.12 Rabies Control
6.12.010 Rabies Control
6.12.020 Vaccination Required
6.12.030 Penalties
6.12.010 Rabies Control
A. A Report of Bites. All persons bitten and the parents or guardians of minor children bitten by a
dog, cat, skunk, fox, bat, coyote, bobcat, or other animal known to constitute a serious threat of
rabies shall notify the animal control officer immediately thereafter. Physicians treating such bites
and other persons having the knowledge of such bites shall also be required to make such
notification.
B. Report of Suspected Rabid Animals. Any person who observes or has knowledge of an animal
which shows symptoms of rabies or which acts in a manner which would lead to a reasonable
suspicion that it may have rabies shall notify the animal control officer and comply with
appropriate laws and regulations regarding suspected cases of rabies as directed by the state or
city-county health departments.
C. Isolation of Biting or Suspected Rabid Animals. Upon the reasonable order of the animal
control or public health officer, a biting or suspected rabid animal shall be isolated, at the owner's
expense if owned, in strict confinement under proper care and under the observation of a
licensed veterinarian in an animal shelter or veterinary hospital in a manner approved by the
animal control officer.
D. Examination of Head. Any biting or suspected rabid animal may be humanely euthanized
immediately, and such animal's undamaged and properly packaged and properly refrigerated
head shall be delivered promptly to an approved medical facility having the capability of
performing tests to demonstrate the presence of rabies.
E. Release. Ten (10) days after the day of infliction of a bite by an animal, such animal may be
released to its owner after a licensed veterinarian has examined that animal and in his/her
opinion found it not to have had rabies in a transmittable stage on the day of infliction of the bite.
Non-immunized animals shall be vaccinated for rabies before release.
F. Animals Possibly Exposed to Rabies. Any animal of a species subject to rabies which has
been bitten by a known rabid animal, or which has been in intimate contact with such an animal,
shall be isolated, at the owner's expense if owned, in strict confinement in a place and manner
approved by the animal control officer and observed by a licensed veterinarian for a period of six
(6) months, or euthanized. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following alternative is permitted in
case of dogs and cats. If the dog or cat has been vaccinated against rabies at least thirty (30)
days prior to the suspected exposure with a type of vaccine produced under U.S.D.A. license
and within the time period approved by the state veterinarian, the dog or cat may be revaccinated
and isolated in strict confinement in a place and manner approved by the animal
control officer and observed by a licensed veterinarian for a period of thirty (30) days.
6.12.020 Vaccination Required
A. Dog and cat owners shall obtain a rabies vaccination for each dog or cat they own, keep, harbor
or have custody of, within ten (10) days after it becomes three months of age, or within ten (10)
days after obtaining any dog or cat over three months of age. It shall be unlawful for any person
or persons to own, keep, harbor or possess or to have in his or her care, charge or custody, any
dog or cat three months of age or over unless such dog or cat has a current and valid rabies
vaccination administered by any duly qualified and licensed veterinarian, with a rabies vaccine
approved by the State Department of Health for use in dogs and cats. Such vaccination shall be
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=6_ANIMALS 10/15
repeated at intervals specified by the State Department of Health in order to maintain adequate
immunity.
B. In addition to the current year’s license, the vaccination tag shall be attached to or otherwise
worn by the dog or cat. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to remove or cause to be
removed the vaccination tag from any dog or cat without the consent of the owner, keeper, or
harborer thereof. The vaccination tag shall not be transferrable from one dog or cat to another.
6.12.030 Penalties
A person whose animal violates any provision of this Chapter is subject to receiving an administrative
notice of violation and handling the matter administratively, if they so desire. If an animal owner wants to
challenge the violation or otherwise does not want to resolve the matter administratively they shall
receive a citation to court. Animal violations referred to court are infractions. Owners of animals are
responsible for the acts of their animals in violation of this chapter, whether handled administratively or
through the courts.
(Ord. No. 13-16, Amended 08/16/2016)
6.16 Kennels
6.16.010 Allowable Number Of Dogs And Cats
6.16.020 Permit Required
6.16.030 Fees
6.16.040 Violations - Permit Revocation
6.16.050 Inspection
6.16.060 Definition - Exception For Puppies/Kittens
6.16.070 Penalties
6.16.010 Allowable Number Of Dogs And Cats
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no more than two (2) dogs or cats, or combination thereof,
which are three (3) months of age or older shall be kept at any residence or commercial establishment at
any time. This provision shall not apply to permitted commercial or residential kennels, grooming parlors,
or veterinary clinics.
6.16.020 Permit Required
A. Permit required. No person shall operate or maintain a residential or commercial kennel without
first obtaining a permit from the division of animal control. Commercial kennels must also
maintain a current business license pursuant to the requirements of Title 5.
B. Application. All applications for permits to operate or maintain a commercial or residential kennel,
shall be submitted in writing upon printed forms provided for such purposes by the city. The
application shall first be referred to the city animal control officer. Upon approval, the city shall
issue the permit upon payment of the fee herein provided.
C. Before a commercial kennel permit can be issued the following conditions concerning the
location of the kennel must be met.
1. The location where the dogs or cats are kept, raised, housed, or boarded must be 200
feet away from any neighboring house, and;
2. Must be 150 feet from any road.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=6_ANIMALS 11/15
D. The following minimum standards shall be complied with to obtain and maintain a residential or
commercial kennel permit.
1. Enclosure must be provided which shall allow adequate protection against weather
extremes. Floors of buildings, runs and walls shall be of an appropriate material as
required by the specific breed of animal and also to permit proper cleaning and
disinfecting.
2. Adequate ventilation shall be maintained and an appropriate temperature provided as
required by the specific breed of animal housed therein.
3. Each animal shall have sufficient space to stand up, lie down and turn around without
touching the sides or tops of cages.
4. Runs shall provide an adequate exercise area and protection from the weather.
5. All animal quarters and runs are to be kept clean, dry and in a sanitary condition.
6. The food shall be free of contamination, palatable and of sufficient nutritive value as to
meet the normal daily requirements for the condition and size of the animal.
7. Fresh water is to be available at all times. Water vessels shall be mounted or secured in a
manner that prevents tipping and be of the removable type.
E. Holders of existing commercial kennel permits which do not meet the distance requirements
required in this chapter shall be exempt from the distance requirements for their existing animals.
As animals die, are sold, given away, or are otherwise removed from the property, they may not
be replaced unless all of the conditions of this chapter are met.
F. After a residential kennel permit has been issued, the person or persons responsible for
operation of the residential kennel shall submit to the animal control officer within thirty (30) days
a proof of spay or neuter of any dog or cat beyond two (2) in number that are kept at the
residential kennel. This proof shall come in the form of verification by a licensed veterinarian.
Failure to submit this proof of spay/neuter within thirty (30) days will result in the immediate
forfeiture of the residential kennel license and associated fees. As dogs and cats residing at the
residential kennel die, are sold, given away, or are otherwise removed from the property, and
other dogs or cats are obtained, no more than two (2) such animals may remain intact at any
time. All others must be spayed or neutered and proof of such shall be submitted to the animal
control officer within thirty (30) days of acquisition of the animal(s) or the residential kennel
license shall be forfeited.
G. All dogs and cats residing at a residential kennel must be kept current with licenses and
vaccinations as required by other sections of this title or the residential kennel license and
associated fees will be forfeited.
H. Persons currently housing more than two (2) dogs or cats, or combination thereof, which are
three (3) months of age or older at the time of passage of the residential kennel regulations shall
have three (3) months to apply for a residential kennel permit or reduce the number of dogs and
cats to be in accordance with other sections of this title.
I. The city shall have the power to revoke residential or commercial kennel permits in the event that
the permit holder is convicted of any violation of the provisions of this title.
6.16.030 Fees
Any person conducting, operating or maintaining a residential or commercial kennel shall pay to the city
for the privilege of conducting, operating or maintaining such kennel an annual permit fee of twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) for each calendar year.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=6_ANIMALS 12/15
6.16.040 Violations - Permit Revocation
Whenever the animal control officer or police officer finds or discovers any violations of any rule or
regulation promulgated as herein provided by the city-county health department, it shall, upon receipt of
such notice, immediately notify the owner or custodian of such kennel, to appear before the city council
at a day and time certain to show cause why the permit should not be revoked for such violation.
6.16.050 Inspection
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer or police officer to periodically inspect all registered
kennels, to see that the provisions of this chapter pertaining to the sanitation and care of such places are
being observed.
6.16.060 Definition - Exception For Puppies/Kittens
A. Kennel as defined in 6.08.010 shall be applicable to this chapter.
B. This chapter shall not apply to the birth of puppies or kittens in a situation which is not an
intentional commercial breeding business so long as the number of dogs or cats is reduced down
to two (2) or less within three (3) months from the birth of the puppies or kittens.
6.16.070 Penalties
A person whose animal violates any provision of this Chapter is subject to receiving an administrative
notice of violation and handling the matter administratively, if they so desire. If an animal owner wants to
challenge the violation or otherwise does not want to resolve the matter administratively they shall
receive a citation to court. Animal violations referred to court are infractions. Owners of animals are
responsible for the acts of their animals in violation of this chapter, whether handled administratively or
through the courts.
(Ord. No. 13-16, Amended 08/16/2016)
6.20 Chickens
6.20.010 Keeping Of Chickens
6.20.020 Coops And Enclosures Required
6.20.030 Food Dispensers
6.20.035 Permit Required
6.20.040 Penalties
6.20.010 Keeping Of Chickens
Subject to the requirements of this chapter and any other applicable provisions of Title 6, Chapter 1, hen
chickens (and no roosters) regardless of age, in the numbers set forth below, may be kept on a lot or
parcel of land in any residential zone. The following applies:
A. The number of hen chickens which may be kept shall be limited based on the size of the lot or
parcel as follows:
1. five thousand (5,000) square feet and larger: up to six (6).
2. less than five thousand (5,000) square feet: none.
B. The principal use on the lot or parcel shall be a single-family dwelling, duplex (minimum square
footage per dwelling unit), or twin home.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=6_ANIMALS 13/15
C. Chickens may be kept on a non-nuisance basis strictly for familial gain from the production and
consumption of eggs only and there shall be no sale or income resulting from the keeping of
chickens.
D. All enclosures, pens and coops shall be located in the rear yard of the main dwelling or in an
interior side yard provided all of the requirements of this chapter are met.
E. Enclosures, pens, and coops shall not be located in a corner side yard unless the side yard shall
be completely fenced using site-obscuring fencing or vegetative screening, so as to prevent sight
of such areas from the street or neighboring properties to the greatest degree possible.
F. Dead birds and unused eggs shall be removed within 24 hours or less and shall be properly
discarded.
(Ord. No. 11-12, Amended 09/04/2012)
6.20.020 Coops And Enclosures Required
To keep chickens, an enclosure, including a coop, is required, in accordance with the regulations
established in this section.
A. The coop shall meet the following construction standards:
1. with solid walls on all sides, exclusive of openings for animals and access to animals;
2. with a solid roof;
3. so as to prevent intrusion, including by burrowing, from all types of rodents, vermin, and
predatory animals; and
4. such that they resemble typical accessory buildings and are not unsightly.
B. The coop shall have a minimum floor area of at least two and one-half square feet per chicken.
C. If chickens are not allowed to roam within an enclosure outside the coop, the coop shall have a
minimum floor area of six square feet per chicken.
D. The coop shall be structurally sound and located in a rear yard at least twenty-five feet from any
neighboring residential structures and at least six feet from the primary residential structure on
the property. The coop shall meet the minimum setback requirements for accessory structures
within the zoning district. The coop and enclosure shall be hidden from the public view through
the use of opaque fencing materials or vegetative screening. Because a corner lot technically
does not include a rear yard, the owner of a corner lot may choose one of the "side" yards to
function as a rear yard for the purposes of keeping chickens and locating the coop.
E. The rear yard of the residence may act as the enclosure if it is fully fenced by a sight obstructing
fence at least six feet in height and anchored on the bottom to prevent chickens from getting out
or potential predators from getting in through or under the fence. If the rear yard is not used as
an enclosure, the enclosure must be attached to the coop, which may act as one side of the
enclosure, and shall be constructed on the other sides and top with mesh wire or other similar
materials and in such a manner that the chickens cannot get out, nor potential predators get in.
Such an enclosure shall contain a minimum of three square feet per bird.
F. The coop and enclosure shall be maintained in a neat and sanitary condition and shall be
cleaned as necessary to prevent any odor detectable at a property line. At a minimum the coop
and enclosed area shall be cleaned weekly, although waste may be composted so long as the
composting area meets the setback requirements that apply to the coop and prevent any odor
detectable at the property line.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=6_ANIMALS 14/15
G. No chicken shall be permitted to roam outside the coop or enclosure.
6.20.030 Food Dispensers
Chicken feed shall be stored in rodent- and predator-proof containers. Water shall be available to the
chickens at all times.
6.20.035 Permit Required
A permit to keep chickens in residential zones pursuant to the terms of this ordinance is required. A
person desiring to have chickens shall obtain a permit for the location where the chickens are to be kept.
Permits may be obtained from the animal control officer. A permit application shall be accompanied by a
drawing showing where, at the desired location, chickens will be kept. The price of the permit shall be
established by resolution of the City Council, or in the annual budget.
Two violations of this chapter within a twelve month period shall cause the chicken owner to lose their
permit. The permit may be re-instated after one year, if there has been compliance with the animal laws
of the City during that time. The animal control officer will notify an owner of a second violation, which
notice will require the owner to remove their chickens from the premises and will notify them the date
they can again have chickens on the premises, if compliance is met.
6.20.040 Penalties
A person whose animal violates any provision of this Chapter is subject to receiving an administrative
notice of violation and handling the matter administratively, if they so desire. If an animal owner wants to
challenge the violation or otherwise does not want to resolve the matter administratively they shall
receive a citation to court. Animal violations referred to court are infractions. Owners of animals are
responsible for the acts of their animals in violation of this chapter, whether handled administratively or
through the courts. A second violation within twelve months will be required to be handled through the
courts.
(Ord. No. 13-16, Amended 08/16/2016)
6.24 Pot Bellied Pigs
6.24.010 Keeping Of Pot Bellied Pigs
6.24.020 Requirements
6.24.030 Permit Required
6.24.040 Penalties
6.24.010 Keeping Of Pot Bellied Pigs
Subject to the requirements of this chapter and any other applicable provisions of Title 6, Chapter 8, one
purebred pig commonly known as a Vietnamese, Chinese, or Asian potbellied pig, but no other kind of
swine, may kept as a pet within the City. A potbellied pig kept on residential property within the City shall
be kept as a pet for personal enjoyment, and not kept or raised for breeding, sale, or human
consumption.
6.24.020 Requirements
To keep a potbellied pig in a residential area within the City, the following requirements shall be met:
A. The pig may be no more than twenty-two (22) inches high at the shoulder;
B. The pig may weigh no more than 150 pounds;
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=6_ANIMALS 15/15
C. Any pig over four months of age shall be spayed or neutered;
D. Any pig over four months of age shall be vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian;
E. Any pig allowed to leave the owner's premises shall be on a leash and accompanied by a
responsible person.
6.24.030 Permit Required
A permit to keep a potbellied pig in residential zones pursuant to the terms of this ordinance is required.
A person desiring to have a potbellied pig shall obtain a permit for the location where the pig is to be
kept. Permits may be obtained from the animal control officer. A tag, indicating the permit has been
issued, is to be attached to a collar, shoulder harness, or other means to be worn by the pig at all times.
The price of the permit shall be established by resolution of the City Council, or in the annual budget.
Two violations of this chapter within a twelve month period shall cause the pot-bellied pig owner to lose
their license. The license may be re-instated after one year, if there has been compliance with the
animal laws of the City during that time. The animal control officer will notify an owner of a second
violation, which notice will require the owner to remove their pot-bellied pigs from the premises and will
notify them the date they can again have pot-bellied pigs on the premises, if compliance is met.
6.24.040 Penalties
A person whose animal violates any provision of this Chapter is subject to receiving an administrative
notice of violation and handling the matter administratively, if they so desire. If an animal owner wants to
challenge the violation or otherwise does not want to resolve the matter administratively they shall
receive a citation to court. Animal violations referred to court are infractions. Owners of animals are
responsible for the acts of their animals in violation of this chapter, whether handled administratively or
through the courts. A second violation within twelve months will be required to be handled through the
courts.
(Ord. No. 03-15, Amended 02/03/2015)
(Ord. No. 13-16, Amended 08/16/2016)
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=7_GENERAL_GOVERNMENT 1/30
7 GENERAL GOVERNMENT
7.04 Cemeteries
7.08 Libraries
7.12 City Airport
7.16 (Reserved)
7.20 Historic Preservation
7.24 Park Regulations
7.28 Boards, Commissions, And Committees
7.32 Administrative Process
7.04 Cemeteries
7.04.010 Interment To Be In Cemeteries
7.04.020 Fees For Services
7.04.030 Records
7.04.040 Forfeiture Of Burial Rights
7.04.050 Burial Of Indigent Persons
7.04.060 Control And Maintenance
7.04.070 Vehicular Traffic
7.04.080 Defacing Or Removing Shrubs Or Markers
7.04.090 Animals - Trespassing
7.04.100 Rules And Regulations
7.04.110 Penalty
7.04.010 Interment To Be In Cemeteries
No dead human bodies shall be interred within the limits of the City except in a cemetery operated by
the City or otherwise established in accordance with law. It shall be unlawful for any person to be buried
in the cemetery unless the casket is placed in a vault made of concrete or another material that has
similar structural property as concrete and which is approved by the cemetery sexton.
(Ord. No. Amended 02/02/2010)
7.04.020 Fees For Services
The City may charge a reasonable fee for the right to be buried in a cemetery lot. Charge for burial rights
shall include the necessary costs for future perpetual care and maintenance for such lot or burial place.
In addition, reasonable charges of the digging of graves, inspections, and other services performed may
be imposed. All fees shall be set by the City council. Fees may be changed no more often than annually
and shall be part of the City budget, which shall be made available to the public. All fees shall be paid to
the City treasurer and shall be prepaid prior to the receiving of any services.
7.04.030 Records
The City recorder shall keep a record of all sales of cemetery lots and burial rights therein showing the
number of the lot and the block and burial place sold, the date of sale, the person to whom sold, and the
amount received for the same. The recorder shall further keep record of all transfers of cemetery lots
and burial places which are properly made and filed in his or her office. The recorder shall further keep
and maintain permanent records of the name, date of death, and location of all persons buried in the
City's cemeteries.
7.04.040 Forfeiture Of Burial Rights
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=7_GENERAL_GOVERNMENT 2/30
The City shall have the right to reclaim, by forfeiture, any cemetery lot which has remained unused. In
claiming any such forfeiture, the City shall comply with the provisions of Utah Code Annotated '8-5-1
et.seq. as it may from time to time be amended.
7.04.050 Burial Of Indigent Persons
Such lots as the City council shall from time to time designate shall be reserved for the burial of indigent
persons.
7.04.060 Control And Maintenance
The superintendent of buildings and grounds, or such other officer as may be assigned to perform the
duties herein set forth, under the direction of the public works director shall have the care and control of
the maintenance and operation of the City's cemeteries. All markers, planting, improvements or other
work of any nature or description must be done under the direction and control of the superintendent of
buildings and grounds or such other designated person. No person owning a right of burial in a lot in the
City's cemeteries shall plant, grade or do any work in such cemeteries except by written authority first
had and obtained from the superintendent of buildings and grounds. The City council shall, by resolution,
designate the type of markers, grade of ground, plantings and other improvements which may be
permitted in the City's cemeteries.
7.04.070 Vehicular Traffic
A. It is unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle upon any cemetery lot, back over any grave,
cut corners or drive such vehicle upon any part of the cemetery which is not an established
roadway, but this provision shall not apply to the City employees in the discharge of their duties.
B. It is unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle within the City's cemeteries at a speed
greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and
potential hazards then existing. Where speed limits are posted, it is unlawful for any person to
drive a motor vehicle in excess of the posted speed limit.
C. Whenever signs have been installed by the City directing traffic to proceed in one direction only
upon any street in the City's cemeteries, it is unlawful for any person to disobey such signs and
drive a motor vehicle in the opposite direction.
7.04.080 Defacing Or Removing Shrubs Or Markers
No person shall injure, deface, take or carry away from any grave or lot any monument, marker, tree,
shrub, flower, ground or any other property or ornament in the City's cemeteries except with the written
permission of the superintendent of buildings and grounds.
7.04.090 Animals - Trespassing
It is unlawful for the owner, agent, caretaker, or other person or persons in charge of any animal to allow
or negligently permit animals to run at large or trespass on cemetery grounds.
7.04.100 Rules And Regulations
The City council may prepare and have printed rules and regulations for the operation of the cemetery,
and such rules and regulations will cover all matters necessary for the operation of the cemetery which
are not contained in this chapter.
7.04.110 Penalty
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of Class C misdemeanor.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=7_GENERAL_GOVERNMENT 3/30
7.08 Libraries
7.08.010 (Reserved)
7.08.020 (Reserved)
7.08.030 Fiscal Matters - Donations
7.08.040 Donations Of Money Or Property
7.08.050 Defacing Books
7.08.010 (Reserved)
(Ord. No. 05-07, Repealed 02/20/2007)
7.08.020 (Reserved)
(Ord. No. 05-07, Repealed 02/20/2007)
7.08.030 Fiscal Matters - Donations
The library board of directors shall make an annual report to the City council on the condition and
operation of the library. The directors shall also provide for the keeping of such records as shall be
required by the Utah State Library Commission in its request for an annual report from the public
libraries, and shall submit such annual report to the commission.
7.08.040 Donations Of Money Or Property
Any person desiring to make donations of money, personal property or real estate for the benefit of such
library shall have the right to vest the title to the money, personal property or real estate so donated, in
the name of Spanish Fork City, to be held and controlled by the City, when accepted, according to the
terms of the deed, gift, devise, or bequest of such property; and as to such property the City shall be
held and considered to be a trustee.
7.08.050 Defacing Books
It is unlawful for any person to mark, tear or in any manner injure, deface, mutilate or destroy any book,
pamphlet or other property of the public library of the City. After receipt of a notice from the librarian of
the City library demanding the return to the library of any property received by any person from said
library, it is unlawful for any person to fail to return any book, pamphlet or other property of the library
within five days after receipt of such notice or within such other period as the librarian or library board of
directors may determine. Violations of this section shall be punishable as infractions as provided in state
law, or the City council may impose monetary penalties for violations of this section or for violations of
such rules and regulations as may be established by the librarian or the library board of directors.
7.12 City Airport
7.12.010 Name - Location - Control
7.12.020 Authority To Make Rules - Unlawful To Violate
7.12.030 Definitions
7.12.040 Airport Board
7.12.050 Aeronautical Activities Standards
7.12.010 Name - Location - Control
The airport facility is located at 300 West 2050 North, Spanish Fork, and is hereby designated as the
Spanish Fork/Springville Municipal Airport.
7.12.020 Authority To Make Rules - Unlawful To Violate
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=7_GENERAL_GOVERNMENT 4/30
A. The airport manager, with the concurrence of the Spanish Fork/ Springville Airport board, is
hereby authorized and directed to promulgate rules and regulations not in conflict with law or
ordinance with reference to the use of the municipal airport and the control and management
thereof.
B. It is an infraction for any person to violate any of the provisions of this title or to fail to observe
and obey any of the requirements and restrictions hereof.
7.12.030 Definitions
As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
"Acrobatic Flying" means any international maneuver not necessary for navigation.
"Aeronautical Activity" means any activity, whether or not conducted on the airport, which involves,
makes possible, or is required for the operation of aircraft, or which contributes to, or is required for the
safety of such operations, and shall include, but not be limited to, all activities commonly conducted on
airports, such as charter operations, pilot training, aircraft rental and sightseeing, aerial photography,
crop dusting, flying clubs, aerial advertising and surveying, air carrier operations, aircraft sales, aircraft
service, aviation petroleum product sales, repair and maintenance of aircraft, sale of aircraft parts, sales
of aircraft accessories, sales and maintenance, radio sales and repair, navigation equipment sales and
repair, and any other activity which, because of its direct relationship with the operation of aircraft, can
properly be regarded as an aeronautical activity.
"Aircraft" means a device as defined by FAA that is used or intended to be used for flight in the air.
"Airplane" means an engine driven fixed wing aircraft heavier than air that is supported in flight by the
dynamic reaction of the air against the wings.
"Airport" means all of the city owned or leased real or personal property comprising Spanish
Fork/Springville Municipal Airport.
"Airport Board" means the duly appointed airport advisory body of the cities of Spanish Fork and
Springville.
"Airport Manager" means the duly appointed manager of the Spanish Fork/Springville Municipal Airport.
"Air Traffic" means aircraft in operation anywhere in the airspace and on that area of the airport
normally used for the movement of aircraft.
"Aircraft Operation" means an aircraft arrival at or departure from the airport.
"Aircraft Parking and Storage Area" means the open areas of the airport set aside for aircraft parking
and storage space for the parking and storage of aircraft, or areas for the servicing of aircraft with fuel,
lubricants or other supplies, or for making minor or emergency repairs to aircraft, or for any and all such
purposes.
"City" means the corporate municipal entities known as Spanish Fork City Corporation and Springville
City Corporation.
"Commercial Aeronautical Activity" means any aeronautical activity, as defined herein, which is
conducted for profit and personal or collective gain.
"Council" means the municipal councils of Spanish Fork City Corporation and Springville City
Corporation, which are and shall remain independent entities whose concurrence is required on all
Council decisions relating to operation of the airport or this act.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=7_GENERAL_GOVERNMENT 5/30
"Fixed Base Operator" means any person meeting the minimum standards for a commercial
aeronautical activity established by this ordinance and engaging in at least the following commercial
aeronautical activities; public aviation fuel sales; aircraft engine, airframe, and accessory sales and
service; flight training; aircraft charter and taxi service; and two (2) other commercial aeronautical
activities.
"Flying Club" means an association or group of more than three (3) persons, organized as a non profit
corporation under the laws of the State of Utah, or, as a duly organized non profit unincorporated
association, jointly owning or leasing aircraft where payment is made to the club for the operating time of
such aircraft.
"Fuel Handling" means the transportation, delivery, fueling and drainage of fuel or fuel waste products.
"Fuel Storage Area" means any portion of the airport designated temporarily or permanently by the
airport manager as areas in which gasoline or any other type of fuel may be stored or loaded.
"Master Plan" means the currently approved, scaled dimensional layout of the entire airport properties,
indicating current and proposed usage for each identifiable segment as approved by the council and
amended from time to time.
"Non commercial Aeronautical Activity" means any aeronautical activity, as defined herein, which is
conducted by a person or organization incorporated under the laws of the State of Utah as a non profit
functioning incorporated association; and which is not conducted for personal or collective profit.
"Off airport User" means a person owning or controlling one or more aircraft stored, hanged, tied down,
maintained or otherwise kept on property adjacent to the airport, and who requires access to the airport
for use of said aircraft.
"Operational Area" means any place on the airport not leased or demised to anyone for exclusive
occupancy.
"Owner" means a person who holds legal title of an aircraft or vehicle, or in the event that the aircraft or
vehicle is the subject of a conditional sale or lease thereof, the person entitled to possession.
"Permission or Permit" means permission granted by the airport manager, board, and/or city councils
pursuant to this ordinance to engage in a specific aeronautical or other activity on the airport.
"Person" means any natural person or legal entity.
"Standards" means the qualifications established herein, as amended from time to time by the city
council's setting forth the minimum requirements to be met as a condition for the right to conduct an
aeronautical activity on the municipal airport.
"Traffic Pattern" means the traffic flow is prescribed for aircraft landing at, taxiing on, or taking off from
the airport.
"Vehicle Parking Area" means any portion of the airport designated and made available, temporarily or
permanently by the airport manager for the parking of vehicles.
7.12.040 Airport Board
A. Board Created-Members. There is hereby created and established the joint City Airport Board
which shall consist of six members who shall be citizens of Spanish Fork and Springville, to
include an elected official from both cities, and two citizens from each City.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=7_GENERAL_GOVERNMENT 6/30
(Ord. No. 05-07, Repealed 02/20/2007)
(Ord. No. 03-08, Enacted 02/05/ 2008)
7.12.050 Aeronautical Activities Standards
A. Airport Use. Permits And Licenses. No person shall be permitted to use any land within the
Spanish Fork/Springville Municipal Airport unless a valid contract or agreement has been
executed with Spanish Fork City and Springville City and said land is used in conformance with
all laws, regulations, and standards herein and elsewhere established for said use. No person
shall be granted an exclusive right to conduct any aeronautical activity upon the airport.
Furthermore, no person shall be permitted to use any land or conduct any aeronautical activity or
the solicitation of business in connection therewith unless such aeronautical activity is conducted
in accordance with the standards herein established and is based upon the issuance of the
proper permits or licenses.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=7_GENERAL_GOVERNMENT 7/30
B. Applications. Applications for leases of ground and/or facilities on the airport, or for permission
to carry on any commercial or non-commercial aeronautical activity on the airport, shall be made
to the airport manager who shall thereafter present the application to the board. The application
shall be signed and submitted by a party owning an interest in the business, or the individual who
will be managing the business, or partner of a partnership or a director or an officer of a
corporation.
1. Minimum Application Information. The board will not accept or take action on a license
request for any commercial or non-commercial activity until after the applicant, in writing,
submits a proposal which sets forth the scope of operation proposed, including the
following:
a. The name and address of the applicant.
b. the proposed land use, facility and/or activity sought including layout of buildings,
appurtenances, and spaces to be occupied.
c. An organizational chart showing employees names, duty, status, and job
qualifications.
d. Proof of sufficient available operating resources to sustain the operation for a
reasonable length of time. Operating resources shall not include prospective
profits from the operation.
e. Names and financial statement of any proposed guarantors.
f. Pro forma operating statement for first year.
g. A statement of tools, equipment, services and inventory, if any, proposed to be
furnished in connection with such activity.
h. The requested or proposed date for commencement of the activity and the term of
conducting the same.
i. The estimated cost of any structure or facility to be furnished, the proposed
specifications for the same, and the means or method of financing such.
j. The specific types and amounts of insurance proposed in accordance with
minimum requirements for the activity.
k. Proposed operational hours.
2. Supporting Documents. If requested by the board, the applicant shall submit the following
supportive documents to the board, together with such other documents and information
as may be requested by the board:
a. A current financial statement.
b. A written listing of the assets owned or being purchased which will be used in the
aeronautical activity.
c. A current credit report.
d. A written authorization for the FAA and all aviation or aeronautic commissions,
administrators or departments of all states in which the applicant has engaged in
aeronautical activities to supply the board with all information in their files relating
to the applicant or his operation. The applicant shall execute such forms, releases
and discharges as may be requested by any of these agencies.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=7_GENERAL_GOVERNMENT 8/30
3. Notices at the discretion of the board. All other persons then conducting aeronautical
activities on the airport who, in the opinion of the board, would be directly affected by the
granting of the application in question may also be notified of the filing of such application
and the time and place of the board meeting to consider the same.
C. Action by Board. The board shall consider the application within a reasonable time and shall
thereafter make a recommendation to the city councils recommending approval of the
application, recommending approval of the application subject to reasonable conditions, or
recommending denial of the application for one (1) or more of the following reasons.
1. Not Qualified. The applicant for any reason does not meet the qualifications, standards
and requirements established by this chapter.
2. Safety Hazard. The applicant's proposed operations or construction will create a safety
hazard on the airport
3. Performance Bond. The applicant is unwilling or unable to post a performance bond equal
to six (6) months rental or a deposit of cash equivalent, or advance payment of six (6)
months rental.
D. Action By Councils. Upon receipt of the recommendation of the board, each of the Councils
shall act upon the application within a reasonable time and shall approve the application,
approve the application subject to reasonable conditions, or deny the application. Upon approval
by both councils or conditional approval by both councils, the cities shall enter into a lease
agreement with the applicant.
E. Standard Requirements For All Aeronautical Activity. In order for any license request to be
recommended for approval by the board or approved by the councils, the following findings must
be made:
1. That such applicant has a history of management and personnel ability in conducting the
same or similar or comparable type of service or activity in a good and workmanlike
manner.
2. That such applicant has the financial responsibility and ability to provide facilities and
services proposed.
3. That the applicant has, or can secure, necessary certificates from the FAA or other
authority where the same are required for the activity proposed.
4. That the applicant has, or can furnish, suitable indemnity insurance or bond to protect and
hold the cities harmless from any liability in connection with the conduct of the activity
proposed.
5. That the applicant will provide the cities with a payment bond equal to not less than six (6)
month's rental or other revenue to the airport.
6. That the applicant can meet the minimum standards herein stated for the activity
requested.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=7_GENERAL_GOVERNMENT 9/30
F. Standards for Specific Activities.
1. All persons engaging in commercial aeronautical activities shall meet the following
general requirements:
a. Provision of adequate insurance, as determined by the Airport board, including
public products, liability, indemnifying and holding the cities of Spanish Fork and
Springville harmless and naming the cities of Spanish Fork and Springville as
additional insureds.
b. Provision of adequate building floor space, as determined by the Airport board,
meeting applicable laws and ordinances in which to carry on the commercial
aeronautical activity.
c. All commercial aeronautical activities operations shall be open for business for a
minimum of eight (8) hours each day, five (5) days a week, except for legal
holidays.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=7_GENERAL_GOVERNMENT 10/30
2. Every person conducting the following specific commercial aeronautical activities shall
meet the additional requirements as hereinafter set out:
a. Fixed Base Operator. A fixed Base operator must engage in at least six (6)
commercial activities; including public aviation fuel sales; aircraft engine, airframe
and accessory sales and maintenance; flight training; aircraft charter and taxi
service; and other commercial aeronautical activities subject to the minimum
standards set forth below pursuant to each specific activity. In addition, an FBO
must meet the following standards:
(1) Storage space sufficient to hangar two (2) aircraft.
(2) Separate male and female restrooms.
(3) Public use telephone.
(4) Separate waiting room or pilot lounge.
(5) Hard-surfaced and parking area for at least eight (8) aircraft.
(6) Minimum operating hours Monday through Saturday for eight (8) hours per
day six (6) days a week, except for legal holidays.
(7) During normal operating hours, a line serviceman, FAA certificated
commercial pilot and flight instructor and FAA certified mechanic shall be
on duty and available.
b. Public Aviation Fuel Sales and Services. Only Fixed Base Operations shall be
licensed to conduct aviation fuel and oil sales or service to the public on the
Airport and shall be required to provide:
(1) Aviation fuel located in an approved storage facility.
(2) An adequate inventory of at least two (2) brands of generally accepted
grades of aviation engine oil and lubricants.
(3) Conveniently located heated lounge or waiting rooms for passengers and
airplane crews of itinerant aircraft together with sanitary restrooms and
public telephones.
(4) Adequate and sanitary handling and disposal away from the airport, of all
trash, waste and other materials, including but not limited to used oil,
solvents and other waste. The piling or storage of crafts, boxes, barrel and
other containers will not be permitted within the lease premises.
(5) All refueling operations, procedures and equipment must be in compliance
with applicable federal, state and local fire codes and ordinances
pertaining to fire safety as presently, or as hereinafter may be adopted.
These include, but are not limited to: the Uniform Fire Code Standards,
National Fire Protection Association Standards.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=7_GENERAL_GOVERNMENT 11/30
c. Private Aviation Fuel Services. Duly licensed commercial aeronautical entities
may conduct private fueling services for aircraft owned and operated by such
entities subject to the following:
(1) Provision of approved fuel and oil storage facilities in a location designated
by the airport manager.
(2) Provision of mobile fuel-dispensing equipment meeting all NFPA criteria to
service aircraft.
(3) No refueling of any privately owned aircraft, other than by fixed base
operators, is permitted on the ramp of the fixed base operators, in hangars
or in T-hangers.
(4) All refueling operations, procedures and equipment must be in compliance
with applicable federal, state and local fire codes, ordinances and rules
pertaining to fire safety as presently, or as hereinafter may be, adopted.
These include, but are not limited to, the Uniform Building Code, Uniform
Fire Code, Uniform Fire Code Standards, and National Fire Protection
Association Standards.
d. Aircraft engine airframe and accessory sales and maintenance. All persons
operating aircraft engine, airframe and accessory maintenance facilities to the
public for hire shall provide:
(1) In case of airframe and/or engine repairs, sufficient hangar space to house
any aircraft upon which such service is being performed at time of service.
(2) Suitable inside and outside storage space for aircraft awaiting repair or
maintenance of delivery after repair and maintenance have been
completed.
(3) Adequate shop space to house the equipment and adequate equipment
and machine tools, jacks, lifts and testing equipment to perform top
overhauls as required for FAA certification and repair of parts not needing
replacements on all single-engine land and light multi-engine land general
aviation aircraft.
(4) At least on FAR certificated airframe and power plant mechanic available
during eight (8) hours a day, five (5) days per week.
(5) Proper equipment for repairing and inflating aircraft tires, servicing oleo
struts, changing engine oil, facilities for washing and cleaning aircraft,
recharging or energizing discharged aircraft batteries and starters.
(6) Adequate towing equipment and parking and tiedown areas to safely and
efficiently move aircraft and store them in all reasonable expected weather
conditions.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=7_GENERAL_GOVERNMENT 12/30
e. Flight training. All persons conducting flight training activities shall provide:
(1) At least one (1) full-time (eight (8) hours per day six (6) days per week)
properly certificated flight instructor for single-engine land airplanes.
(2) At least one (1) dual-equipped single-engine land aircraft properly
equipped and maintained for flight instruction and such additional types of
aircraft as may be required to give flight instruction of the kind advertised.
(3) Adequate office and classroom space for at least five (5) students with
proper restroom and seating facilities.
(4) Continuing ability to meet certification requirements of the FAA for the flight
training proposed.
(5) Adequate facilities for storing, parking, servicing and repairing all its aircraft
or satisfactory arrangements with other operators licensed or otherwise
permitted by the board on the airport for such services.
f. Aircraft charter and taxi service. Persons conducting an aircraft charter and/or taxi
service shall provide:
(1) Passenger lounge, restroom and telephone facilities.
(2) Suitable, properly certificated aircraft with properly certificated and qualified
operating crew, one of which shall be located at the airport and ready for
departure during at least eight (8) hours of daylight operation five (5) days
per week except for legal holidays.
g. Aircraft rental and/or sales. Persons conducting an aircraft rental and sales activity
shall provide:
(1) Suitable office space for consummating sales and/or rentals and the
keeping of proper records in connection therewith.
(2) Hangar storage for at least one (1) aircraft to be used for sales or rental.
(3) For rental, at least one (1) airworthy aircraft suitably maintained and
certificated.
(4) Adequate facilities for servicing and repairing the aircraft or satisfactory
arrangements with other operators licensed by the board on the airport for
such service and repair.
(5) The minimum stock of readily expendable spare parts, or adequate
arrangements for securing spare parts required for the type of aircraft and
models sold.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=7_GENERAL_GOVERNMENT 13/30
h. Crop dusting and spraying. Persons conducting crop spraying shall provide:
(1) Suitable arrangements for the safe storage and/or containment of noxious
chemical materials; no poisonous or inflammable materials shall be kept or
stored in close proximity to other facility installations at the airport.
(2) Properly certificated aircraft suitably equipped for the agricultural operation
undertaken.
(3) Suitable arrangements for servicing, repairing, storing and parking its
aircraft with adequate safeguards against spillage on runways and
taxiways or pollution or disbursal of chemicals by wind to other operational
areas on the airport.
i. Aircraft commuter and air carrier service. Persons conducting aircraft commuter
and air carrier service shall provide:
(1) An adequately manned and operated terminal facility including ticket and
operations counter area, lounge and restroom facilities.
(2) A published schedule of operating times and rates.
(3) Reservations service with continuity of communication with public which
will help to prevent overbooking, provide ease of ticket purchases and
cancellations and provide interline reservations.
(4) Baggage handling service including interline exchange.
(5) Satisfactory evidence of reliability and responsibility including FAA
operating permit.
(6) Operator shall furnish airport reports of operations on a monthly basis.
j. Other Commercial Aeronautical Activities. Commercial Aeronautical Activities
other than those listed above, such as paint shops, upholstery shops, propeller
shops, avionics shops may also be operated on the Spanish Fork/Springville
Municipal Airport, General standards specified in '7.12.060 (F) shall apply;
however, specific standards will be as directed by the airport board and shall be in
compliance with applicable local, state, and federal rules and regulations.
k. Combination activities. Any persons conducting a combination of the specific
activities listed herein shall not be required to duplicate the requirements of the
individual activities where the requirements of the combination is sufficient to meet
the requirement of the separate activity to be conducted.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=7_GENERAL_GOVERNMENT 14/30
3. Every person conducting the following specific non-commercial aeronautical activities
shall meet the requirements hereinafter set out.
a. Flying Clubs. Persons seeking to operate flying clubs shall be required to:
(1) Be organized as a non-profit corporation under the laws of the State of
Utah, or, as a duly organized non-profit unincorporated association for the
purpose of fostering flying for pleasure; development of skills in
aeronautics, including pilotage or navigation; development of an
awareness and appreciation of aviation requirements and techniques by
the general public in the field of aviation and aeronautics.
(2) Flying clubs, or any individual member thereof, shall not provide instruction
in club owned aircraft for other than its members and shall not engage in
charter service or any other commercial aeronautical activity at the
Spanish Fork/ Springville Municipal Airport.
(3) Register all aircraft owned, leased, or used by the flying club with the
airport manager.
(4) Assure that each aircraft operated, owned or leased by a flying club is in
full compliance with air worthiness requirements of the appropriate federal
agency.
b. Hangar. All hangars constructed on the Spanish Fork/ Springville Airport shall be
used for the sole purpose of aircraft storage and storage of aircraft related
materials including materials used for spraying from aircraft. Storage of nonaircraft
related materials shall be prohibited.
(1) Construction. All hangars shall be constructed in a location, and in such a
manner as prescribed by the Airport board. The board shall establish
construction standards to regulate size, type of construction, materials
used, and exterior appearance of all hangars. Individuals desiring to
construct a hangar must submit to the board through the airport manager a
site plan showing the following information:
(A) Desired location of hangar.
(B) Elevations of structure showing the general appearance and types
of external materials to be used.
(C) Size and number of aircraft to be stored.
(D) Owner of hangar--name, address and phone number.
(2) Lease. Upon approval of the site plan by the board, a hangar lease
agreement must be executed and a building permit obtained prior to
commencing construction. All construction shall comply with the Uniform
Building Codes as adopted by Spanish Fork City.
(3) Maintenance of hangars. All hangar owners must maintain their structure
to the level of standards as prescribed by the Airport board. Necessary
repairs and maintenance must be completed on the structures as directed
by the board. The board can recommend termination of the hangar lease
agreement to the city councils, as prescribed in said lease agreements, if
the hangar owner does not maintain and use the structure in accordance
with the mandates of the boards.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=7_GENERAL_GOVERNMENT 15/30
7.16 (Reserved)
(Ord. No. 07-18, Repealed 03/27/2018)
7.20 Historic Preservation
7.20.010 Definitions
7.20.020 Historic Preservation Commission
7.20.030 Commission Duties
7.20.040 Historic Sites List
7.20.050 Effect Of Designation Of The Historic Sites List
7.20.060 Standards For Rehabilitation And Design Guidelines
7.20.010 Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter, certain words and terms shall be interpreted as follows:
“Alteration” means any act or process that changes one or more of the exterior architectural features of
a structure, including, but not limited to, the erection, construction, reconstruction, or removal of any
structure.
“Building Code” means the nationally recognized building code adopted by Spanish Fork City.
“Certificate of Appropriateness” means a certificate issued by the Historic Preservation authorizing an
alteration, construction, removal, or demolition of a landmark or of a structure within a historic district.
“Certificate of Economic Hardship” means a certificate issued by the Historic Preservation authorizing
an alteration, construction, removal, or demolition, even though a Certificate of Appropriateness has
previously been denied.
“Commission” means the Spanish Fork City Historic Preservation Commission as designated by this
chapter.
“Construction” means the act of adding an addition to an existing structure on a lot or property.
“Council” means the Spanish Fork City Council.
“Demolition” means any act or process that destroys in part or in whole a historic site, landmark, or
structure.
“Design Guideline” means a standard of appropriate activity that will preserve the historic and
architectural character of a structure or site.
“Designation” means the legal listing of a site, structure, building, natural feature, or district, as a
historic site or landmark pursuant to this chapter.
“Emergency Situations” means any unforeseen circumstances or combination of circumstances with
calls for immediate action by the commission, in order to obtain building and demolition permits to
remedy a damaging, dangerous, unhealthy, or otherwise adverse situation to a nominated or designated
historic landmark.
“Hazardous or Dangerous Building” means a building which has been determined by the Chief
Building Official to be structurally unsound or unsafe to the general public in accordance with the
provisions of the Building Code.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=7_GENERAL_GOVERNMENT 16/30
“Historic Site” means any district, building, structure, object, or site, formally designated to the Spanish
Fork List of Historic Sites pursuant to procedures prescribed herein.
“Intensive Level Survey” means detailed historic research and documentation of the structures
significance, including information on previous owners (chain of title), the builder, and/or architect;
significant events that may have taken place on the property; a detailed description of the building and
site, including the form and style of the building, distinctive architectural features, exterior materials, and
a description of any additions or changes that may have altered the original character of the structure.
“Nomination” is that act of proposing a site, structure, building, or natural feature, to be formally
designated as a historic site.
7.20.020 Historic Preservation Commission
A Historic Preservation Commission is hereby established with the following provisions:
A. The Commission shall consist of five members, one of whom shall be a member of the City
council, with a demonstrated interest, competence, or knowledge in historic preservation. The
members shall be appointed by the City Council for terms of five years. The initial appointments
shall be for one, two, three, four, and five-year terms. Thereafter, appointments shall be for the
full five-year term. No member shall serve more than two consecutive terms.
B. To the extent available in the community, two Commission members shall be professionals, as
defined by National Park Service regulations, from the disciplines of history, archaeology,
planning, architecture, or architectural history.
C. The Commission shall meet as needed, at least twice each year. The members shall select a
chairperson who shall conduct the meetings, and who shall have the authority to call meetings.
The members shall also select a secretary, who shall keep the minutes of the meetings.
7.20.030 Commission Duties
The Historic Preservation Commission shall have the following duties:
A. Survey and Inventory Community Historic Resources. The Historic Preservation Commission
shall conduct or cause to be conducted a survey of the historic, architectural, and archaeological
resources within the community. The survey shall be compatible with the Utah Inventory of
Historic and Archaeological Sites. Survey and inventory documents shall be maintained and shall
be open to the public. The survey shall be updated at least every ten years.
B. Review Proposed Nominations to the National Register of Historic Places. The Historic
Preservation Commission shall review and comment to the State Historic Preservation Officer on
all proposed National Register nominations for properties within Spanish Fork City. When the
Historic Preservation Commission considers a National Register nomination which is normally
evaluated by professionals in a specific discipline and that discipline is not represented on the
Commission, the Commission shall seek expertise in that area before rendering its decision.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=7_GENERAL_GOVERNMENT 17/30
C. Provide advice and information.
1. The Commission shall act in an advisory role to the City Council regarding the
identification and protection of local historic and archaeological resources.
2. The Commission shall work toward the continuing education of citizens regarding historic
preservation and community history.
3. The Commission shall assist in the maintenance and rehabilitation of City-owned historic
buildings and sites, when called upon to do so.
4. The Commission shall apply for and administer grants and other financial aid for historic
preservation projects in the City.
D. State Historic Preservation Laws. The Commission shall become familiar with state laws
regarding historic preservation and notify the State Historic Preservation Office of any known
proposed action which will destroy or affect a site, building, or object owned by the State of Utah
and included on or eligible for the State or National Registers.
7.20.040 Historic Sites List
There is hereby created a Historic Sites List, which shall contain the identification of properties
designated by the City Council as historic properties. The list shall contain the address of the property,
photographs, if available, and a brief history of the property detailing the reasons why it has been
designated as an historic property. The Commission may recommend to the City Council that historic
properties be added to the Historic Sites List as a means of providing recognition to and encouraging the
preservation of historic properties in the community.
A. Criteria for designating properties to the Historic Sites List. Any district, building, structure, object,
or site may be designated to the Historic Sites List if it meets all of the criteria outlined below:
1. It is located within the official boundaries of the City.
2. It is at least 50 years old.
3. It retains its historic integrity, in that there are no major alterations or additions that have
obscured or destroyed the significant historic features. Major alterations that would
destroy the historic integrity include, but are not limited to, changes in pitch of the main
roof, enlargement or enclosure of windows on the principal facades, addition of upper
stories or the removal of original upper stories, covering the exterior walls with nonhistoric
materials, moving the resource from its original location to one that is dissimilar to
the original, additions which significantly detract from or obscure the original form and
appearance of the house when viewed from the public way.
If the property does not meet the integrity requirements outlined in 3. (a), it may still
qualify for designation if it meets one of the following requirements for exceptional
significance:
a. It is directly associated with events of historic significance in the community.
b. It is closely associated with the lives of persons who were of historic importance to
the community.
c. It exhibits significant methods of construction or materials that were used within
the historic period.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=7_GENERAL_GOVERNMENT 18/30
4. It has been documented according to the Utah State Historic Preservation Office
standards for intensive level surveys (June 1993 version or subsequent revisions) and
copies of that documentation have been placed in the local and state historic preservation
files.
B. Designation Procedures. Any person, group, or government agency may nominate a property for
listing on the Historic Sites List. The nomination and listing procedures are as follows:
1. Completed Intensive Level Survey documentation for each nominated property must be
submitted to the Commission.
2. The Commission will review and consider properly submitted nominations at its next
scheduled meeting. The Commission will notify the nominating party and the property
owner, in writing, one week prior to the meeting that the nomination will be considered
and will place that item on the agenda posted for the meeting. The Commission may not
recommend placement on the Historic Preservation list over the objection of the owner.
C. Results of Designation to the Historic Sites List.
1. Owners of officially designated historic sites may obtain a historic site certificate from the
Commission. The certificate contains the historic name of the property, the date of
designation, and signatures of the mayor and the Commission chairperson.
2. If a historic site is to be demolished or extensively altered, efforts will be made to
document its physical appearance before that action takes place.
a. The City will delay issuing a demolition permit for thirty (30) days and will notify a
member of the Commission, which will take responsibility for the documentation.
b. Documentation will include, at minimum, exterior photographs (both black and
white and color slides) of all elevations of the historic building. When possible,
both exterior and interior measurements of the building will be made in order to
provide an accurate floor plan drawing of the building.
c. The demolition permit will be issued after thirty (30) days of the initial application
whether or not the Commission has documented the building. The permit may be
issued earlier if the Commission completes its documentation before the thirty-day
deadline.
d. The documentation will be kept in the Commission's historic site files, which are
open to the public.
D. Removal of Properties from the Historic Sites List. Properties which, in the opinion of the
Commission, no longer meet the criteria for eligibility may be removed from the Historic Sites List
after review and consideration by the Commission.
7.20.050 Effect Of Designation Of The Historic Sites List
A. Properties designated to the Historic Sites List may receive special consideration in the granting
of conditional use permits in order to encourage their preservation.
B. In the event of rehabilitation of the property, local building officials may consider waiving certain
code requirements in accordance with Chapter 34 of the Uniform Building Code (1994 Edition),
which deals with historic buildings, and the Uniform Code for Building Conservation, a special
code for existing buildings.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=7_GENERAL_GOVERNMENT 19/30
C. Owners of Historic Sites may seek assistance from the Commission in applying for grants or tax
credits for rehabilitating their properties.
D. Proposed exterior work on buildings located on Historic Sites is subject to the review and
approval of the Commission. The purpose of this review is to ensure the preservation of historic
properties to the greatest degree possible. This review applies only to exterior work which
requires a building permit, sign permit, or demolition permit. Applications for building, demolition,
or sign permits shall be forwarded by the Building Inspection Department to the Historic
Preservation Commission prior to their issuance. A certificate of appropriateness shall be issued
by the Commission prior to the issuance of a permit for a property on the Historic Site List.
E. Claims of Economic Hardship. The Commission may approve a Certificate of Appropriateness for
Rehabilitation or Demolition of a landmark property if the owner has presented substantial
evidence demonstrating that unreasonable economic hardship will result from denial of the
certificate of appropriateness.
1. Economic Hardship Criteria. In order to sustain a claim of unreasonable economic
hardship, the Commission may require the owner to provide information as to whether the
property is capable of producing a reasonable return for the owner.
2. Demonstration of economic hardship by the owner shall not be based on conditions
resulting from willful or negligent acts by the owner, purchasing the property for
substantially more than market value at the time of purchase, failure to perform normal
maintenance and repairs, failure to diligently solicit and retain tenants, or failure to provide
normal tenant improvements.
F. An applicant who has been denied any permit by the Building Official, based on the
Commission's refusal to issue a Certificate of Historic Appropriateness, may appeal that decision
to the City Council. The appeal must be made, in writing, within ten (10) days after the
Commission's decision.
G. Enforcement. The provisions of this section are subject to the enforcement provisions
established in the Building Code adopted by the City, or the Uniform Code for Building
Conservation.
7.20.060 Standards For Rehabilitation And Design Guidelines
The following standards and guidelines shall be used by the Commission in determining the historic
appropriateness of any application pertaining to Historic Site List properties. In approving an application
for a Certificate of Appropriateness, the Commission must find that the project substantially complies
with all of the following standards and guidelines that pertain to the application and that the decision is in
the best interest of the City.
A. The standards for rehabilitation are as follows:
1. A property shall be used for its historic purpose or be placed in a new use that requires
minimal change to the defining characteristics of the building and its site and
environment.
2. The historic character of a property shall be retained and preserved. The removal of
historic materials or alteration of features and spaces that characterize a property shall be
avoided.
3. Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time, place, and use.
Changes that create a false sense of historical development, such as adding conjectural
features or architectural elements from other buildings, shall not be undertaken.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=7_GENERAL_GOVERNMENT 20/30
4. Most properties change over time; those changes that have acquired historic significance
in their own right shall be retained and preserved.
5. Distinctive features, finishes, and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship
that characterize a property shall be preserved.
6. Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than replaced. Where the severity of
deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the
old in design, color, texture, and other visual qualities and, where possible, materials.
Replacement of missing features shall be substantiated by documentary, physical, or
pictorial evidence.
7. Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause damage to historic
materials shall not be used. The surface cleaning of structures, if appropriate, shall be
undertaken using the gentlest means possible.
8. Significant archeological resources affected by a project shall be protected and
preserved. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures shall be undertaken.
9. New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction shall not destroy historic
materials that characterize the property. The new work shall be differentiated from the old
and shall be compatible with the massing, size, scale, and architectural features to protect
the historic integrity of the property and its environment.
10. New additions shall be undertaken in such a manner that if removed in the future, the
essential form and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be
unimpaired.
B. General Design Guidelines are as follows:
1. Avoid demolition of Historic Site List buildings. They are a finite resource and cannot be
replaced.
2. Vacant buildings should be weather- and vandal-proofed in order to minimize further
deterioration and the threat to public safety.
3. Rehabilitation work, especially on the exterior and the principal facade, should preserve
existing historic features or replace them if absolutely necessary with features and
materials known to have existed on the building. Avoid dressing up buildings by adding
features based on speculation.
4. Avoid moving buildings whenever possible, especially to create artificial groupings of
historic buildings. If buildings must be moved, the new site should be similar to the
original site and the original setback and orientation of the building on the lot should be
replicated.
5. New additions should be subordinate to the original building, i.e. lower in height, attached
to the rear or set back along the side, and subordinate in scale and architectural detailing.
6. Materials should be similar to original materials.
7. Window and door openings should be similar in size and orientation (vertical or
horizontal) to the original openings and should take up about the same percentage.
7.24 Park Regulations
7.24.010 Parks And Recreation Facilities In General
7.24.020 Closure Of Facilities
7.24.030 Park And Recreation Facility Regulations
7.24.040 Hours
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=7_GENERAL_GOVERNMENT 21/30
7.24.050 Motorized Vehicles
7.24.060 Noise-Minimum Fine
7.24.070 Litter
7.24.080 Animals
7.24.090 Alcohol And Tobacco
7.24.100 Fishing
7.24.110 General Boating Regulations
7.24.120 Exceptions
7.24.130 Violation
7.24.010 Parks And Recreation Facilities In General
Spanish Fork City will construct, own, and maintain various parks and other recreational facilities for use
by its residents and others. In addition to the requirements set forth in this Chapter, the City Manager, or
his/her designee, is authorized to create policies for the use of these facilities, including policies which
are specific to certain facilities. Specific policies for certain facilities will take precedence over the more
general requirements set forth in this Chapter.
7.24.020 Closure Of Facilities
Spanish Oaks Reservoir Park shall be closed for public use from December 1st to the following March
1st each year. In addition, thereto, the City Manager, in conjunction with the Parks and Recreation
Director, has the discretion to temporarily close any park or recreational facility to public use at any other
time in order to perform repair or maintenance work on the facility or for safety reasons to protect the
public, or employees, from potential harm, illness, or injury.
7.24.030 Park And Recreation Facility Regulations
The provisions of this chapter are applicable to the parks and recreation facilities identified herein,
unless otherwise indicated, including pavilions, all parking lots, and street parking adjacent to the parks
and facilities described herein:
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=7_GENERAL_GOVERNMENT 22/30
Abbie Court Park, 1438 South 2050 East Detention Basin, 379 North 1280 East
Canyon View Park, 3300 East Powerhouse Road Detention Basin, 375 North 1880 East
Cemetery, 420 South 400 East Detention Basin, 2162 East 100 South
Centennial Park, 572 South 600 East Detention Basin, 360 North 1280 East
City Park, 49 South Main Street Detention Basin, 1100 East 600 South
Little Cleveland Park, 428 East 700 North Old Mill Detention Basin, 1541 S. Mill Road
Little Chicago Park, 727 North 400 East Patriot Park Detention Basin, 1100 East 1100
South
Memorial Square, 200 North Main Street All trails.
North Park, 1185 North 400 East
Park, 1932 East 280 South
Park Side Estates Park, 1221 East 1480 South
Pioneer Cemetery, 1884 South 1530 East
Skate Park, 491 South 600 East
Sports Park, 295 West Volunteer Drive
Spanish Oaks Reservoir Park, 2931 South
Spanish Oaks Drive
Swenson Park, 171 West 300 South
Urban Forest, 1375 West 520 South
Water Park, 199 North 300 West
Whispering Willows Park, 1149 North Ridge Court
Wildflower Park, 293 South 630 West
(Ord. No. 18-17, Amended 9/5/2017)
7.24.040 Hours
Spanish Oaks Reservoir Park is closed from dusk to dawn. Trails are open at all hours. All other parks
and recreation facilities shall be open for public use each day beginning at 5:00 a.m. All activities must
be concluded by 11:00 p.m. Persons found upon the premises of parks and recreation facilities outside
of these hours are subject to trespass charges. City sponsored events are exempt from the beginning
and ending hours.
7.24.050 Motorized Vehicles
Motorized vehicles are limited to designated parking areas and driveways, with the exception of police,
fire, or ambulance vehicles, City maintenance vehicles, and authorized vehicles for city sponsored
events, such as Fiesta Days, in order to facilitate the event.
7.24.060 Noise-Minimum Fine
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=7_GENERAL_GOVERNMENT 23/30
A person convicted of violating the loud speaker requirements (found in Spanish Fork City Municipal
Code '9.12.010) within the parks identified in '030, plus the Spanish Oaks Campground, Canyon View
RV Park, and Gun Club shall pay a minimum fine of $150.00, with the maximum fine not to exceed that
allowed by law.
7.24.070 Litter
A person convicted of littering within the parks identified in '030, plus the Spanish Oaks Campground,
Canyon View RV Park, Gun Club, Golf Course, and Fairgrounds shall pay a minimum fine of $300.00,
with the maximum fine not to exceed that allowed by law.
7.24.080 Animals
A. Domestic animals, including dogs, are prohibited in parks and recreation facilities where it is
posted that no animals and/or dogs are allowed, with the exceptions noted hereafter. An
exception exists for animals trained for and used by disabled persons, such as dogs for the blind
or hearing impaired. An exception exists for police animals being used or trained in the facilities.
The owner, or other responsible party, who has control of such animal within a park or recreation
facility and meets one of the identified exceptions, shall be obligated to clean up after such
animal, including any excrement.
B. It shall be illegal for any person to drop off at parks or recreation facility any animal, including
ducks, geese, other waterfowl, or fish.
7.24.090 Alcohol And Tobacco
No alcoholic beverage of any kind is permitted within parks and recreation facilities, whether the
container has been opened or not. Any such alcohol found on persons or within vehicles or other forms
of personal property at the park is subject to confiscation and destruction. No tobacco product of any
kind, including e-cigarettes or any variation thereof, is permitted to be used within parks and recreation
facilities.
(Ord. No. 05-14, Amended 04/15/2014)
7.24.100 Fishing
No ice fishing is allowed on any ponds or other bodies of water located in any parks. Fishing is otherwise
allowed in parks during their open hours, in accordance with the Utah Division of Wildlife Resources
regulations.
7.24.110 General Boating Regulations
No boats or other watercraft are allowed on Spanish Oaks Reservoir which have any type of motor
unless they are part of a City sponsored event. No boats or other watercraft are allowed on any of the
golf course ponds except for maintenance watercraft.
7.24.120 Exceptions
Spanish Fork City sponsored events are exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
7.24.130 Violation
A person who violates any section of this Chapter, except for §7.24.090, Alcohol and Tobacco, is subject
to receiving an administrative notice of violation and handling the matter administratively, if they so
desire. If an alleged violator wants to challenge the violation or otherwise does not want to resolve the
matter administratively they shall receive a citation to court.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=7_GENERAL_GOVERNMENT 24/30
Violations referred to court are infractions.
(Ord. No.11-04, Enacted 09/07/2004)
(Ord. No. 04-10, Reenacted 02/16/2010)
(Ord. No. 012-16, Amended 08/16/2016)
7.28 Boards, Commissions, And Committees
7.28.010 Boards, Commissions, And Committees Authorized
7.28.020 Planning Commission
7.28.030 Development Review Committee
7.28.040 Personnel Appeal Board
7.28.050 Personnel Committee
7.28.060 Library Board
7.28.070 Airport Board
7.28.080 Arts Council Committee
7.28.090 Historic Preservation Committee
7.28.100 Urban Forestry Board
7.28.110 Volunteer Firefighter Retirement Board
7.28.120 Finance Committee
7.28.130 Utility Board (Reserved)
7.28.140 Risk Management Committee
7.28.150 Waste Water Treatment Plant Advisory Committee
7.28.160 Fiesta Days Committee
7.28.170 Rodeo Committee
7.28.180 Parks And Recreation Committee
7.28.190 Seniors Board
7.28.200 Miss Spanish Fork Pageant Committee
7.28.210 Economic Development Committee (Reserved)
7.28.215 Fairgrounds Recreation Complex Advisory Board
7.28.220 Ad Hoc Committees
7.28.010 Boards, Commissions, And Committees Authorized
The City Council hereby authorizes the creation of boards, commissions, and committees to assist the
Council in carrying out the work of the City in an efficient and cost-effective manner. Unless otherwise
indicated, all boards, commissions, or committees are not vested with the authority to make decisions
regarding the public's business, but are advisory bodies whose purpose is to research issues, provide
information, and make recommendations to the City Council. They are also to implement policies and
decisions of the Council.
Members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of a majority of the Council. Vacancies on
any board, commission, or committee shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as
original appointments. As long as they remain eligible for the position, board, commission, or committee
members may continue to serve until their successor has been appointed and qualified. Unless
otherwise set forth herein, or unless membership is based upon a position, all terms shall commence on
January 1st and end on December 31st. Unless otherwise indicated herein, members of boards,
commissions, or committees may serve successive terms. Unless otherwise set forth by ordinance, each
board, commission, or committee shall meet after the annual appointments have been made and
designate a chairperson to conduct the meetings during the coming year. Additional officers, such as a
vice chair or secretary may be designated, as needed. A majority of the members of a board,
commission, or committee is necessary to constitute a quorum in order to conduct business.
No member of a board, commission, or committee shall receive any compensation for so serving, but
may be reimbursed for their authorized and reasonable expenses.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=7_GENERAL_GOVERNMENT 25/30
7.28.020 Planning Commission
A. A planning commission is created to address land use issues as set forth in Title 15, Part 3
Chapter 8 of the Spanish Fork Municipal Code. The planning commission, in those limited
instances identified in Title 15 where it is the land use authority, is vested with the authority to
make decisions regarding the public's business.
B. The term of the planning commission members shall commence on the first day of July and
terminate on the thirtieth day of June three years later. No more than two full successive terms
may be served.
7.28.030 Development Review Committee
A. A development review committee is created to address the technical aspects of land use issues
as set forth in Title 15, Part 3, Chapter 8 of the Spanish Fork Municipal Code. The development
review committee is authorized to make decisions regarding the public's business in those limited
instances identified in Title 15 where it is the land use authority.
7.28.040 Personnel Appeal Board
A. A personnel appeal board is created as set forth in Spanish Fork Municipal Code '4.04.045 to
handle appeals of personnel matters authorized by statute or ordinance.
7.28.050 Personnel Committee
A. A personnel committee is created, consisting of the Mayor, two council members, the City
Manager, the assistant City Manager, and two classified employees elected by other employees.
The personnel committee is to make recommendations to the Council concerning compensation
and benefits of all employees. The Committee may also make recommendations concerning the
City's personnel policy and other personnel matters.
B. The employee members shall serve for four-year terms. One member shall be up for election
every two years. The council members shall be appointed for one-year terms.
(Ord. No. 07-12, Amended 05/15/2012)
7.28.060 Library Board
A. A library board is created, consisting of eight (8) citizens, one of whom shall be a council
member. The library board shall make recommendations concerning use of the library, the
amount of fines and fees, and the operation and care of the library. The board may make rules
and regulations concerning day to day use of the library and materials to be made available,
which do not need specific council approval, but are consistent with the policies made by the
council.
B. The term of each board member shall be for three years, which terms are staggered, such that
three appointments are available each year. Board members shall not serve more than two full
terms in succession.
7.28.070 Airport Board
A. A joint City Airport Board is created which shall consist of seven members who shall be citizens
of Spanish Fork and Springville, to include an elected official from both cities, the airport
manager, and two citizens from each City.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=7_GENERAL_GOVERNMENT 26/30
B. The citizen members of the board shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years.
C. The city councils of Spanish Fork and Springville may remove their respective members at any
time without cause.
D. The joint City Airport Board, by majority vote, shall elect from its members a chairperson who
shall preside over the meetings of the Board and a vice chairperson who shall sit for the
chairperson during his/her absence.
The election of the officers of the Board shall be held at the first regular meeting at which a
quorum is present following January 1st of each even numbered year.
The Board shall adopt rules for the conduct of its meetings. No action shall be taken by the
Board except by the affirmative vote of at least the majority vote of the quorum.
Four members of the joint City Airport Board shall constitute a quorum.
E. The joint City airport board shall meet not less than four (4) times a year at times and places to
be designated by said board.
F. The joint City airport board shall have authority to recommend to the mayors and City Councils of
Spanish Fork and Springville the needs and requirements of the airport and its facilities. It shall
study city, state and federal budget money, appraise development that is desirable for the airport,
and shall study and appraise an overall plan for the joint municipal airport, together with such
other duties and responsibilities as may be delegated to said board from time to time.
7.28.080 Arts Council Committee
A. An arts council committee is created, consisting of a minimum of three and a maximum of fifteen
members, one of whom shall be an elected official. The arts council committee shall foster an
appreciation of the arts within the City, make recommendations to the City Council concerning
cultural events to be sponsored by the City, and encourage privately sponsored cultural events to
take place within the City.
B. The terms of each committee member shall be three years, which terms shall be staggered, such
that one third of the appointments are available each year. No more than two successive terms
may be served.
7.28.090 Historic Preservation Committee
A. An Historic Preservation Committee is created with the duties set forth in Spanish Fork Municipal
Code '7.20.030.
B. The Committee shall consist of five members, one of whom shall be an elected official. Members
should have a demonstrated interest, competence, or knowledge in historic preservation. The
members shall be appointed for terms of five years. The initial appointments shall be for one,
two, three, four, and five-year terms. Thereafter, appointments shall be for the full five-year term.
No member shall serve more than two consecutive terms.
C. To the extent available in the community, two Committee members shall be professionals, as
defined by National Park Service regulations, from the disciplines of history, archaeology,
planning, architecture, or architectural history.
7.28.100 Urban Forestry Board
A. There is created an Urban Forestry Board consisting of seven members who are residents of the
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=7_GENERAL_GOVERNMENT 27/30
City. If no professionals are available within the City, one non-resident professional may serve on
the Board. The Board shall make recommendations to the City Council concerning the use and
planting of trees on public property, together with the recommendation for their care and
maintenance, and recommendations concerning urban forestry for the benefit of the residents of
the City. Recommendations for the benefit of residents may be made available in newsletters,
pamphlets, or similar media.
B. The term of each Board member shall be for three years. Terms shall be staggered such that two
members will be appointed every year and three members will be appointed every three years.
(Ord. No. 02-16, Enacted 02-16-2016)
7.28.110 Volunteer Firefighter Retirement Board
A. There is created a Volunteer Firefighter Retirement Board consisting of the Mayor, public safety
director, City finance director, a citizen at large, the fire association president, fire association
past president, and a fire association life member.
B. The Board shall advise the Council concerning the funding of the retirement fund and shall
advise the Council as to which firefighters are eligible for, or are nearing eligibility for, retirement
benefits.
C. The fire association president and past president shall serve on the retirement board for the term
of their appointment as association officers. The life member shall be recommended by the fire
association and shall be appointed by the Mayor, with approval by the City Council for a fouryear
term. The citizen at large shall be appointed by the Mayor, with approval by the City Council
for a four-year term.
7.28.120 Finance Committee
A. A finance committee is created consisting of two council members, the City Manager, the City
Finance Director, and three citizens. The committee shall make recommendations to the City
Council concerning the budget, bonding issues, and the financial affairs of the City.
B. The citizen members shall be appointed for three-year terms, with one member appointed every
year. Council members are appointed annually by the Mayor. Other members serve during their
affiliation with the City in the position identified.
7.28.130 Utility Board (Reserved)
(Ord. No. 02-08, Repealed 01/22/2008)
7.28.140 Risk Management Committee
A. A risk management committee is created, consisting of two council members, the City Manager,
the Assistant City Manager, City Attorney, Public Works Director, Public Safety Director, Parks
and Recreation Director, and Finance Director. The risk management committee shall review
claims against the City, cooperate with the City insurer to reduce and minimize claims, and make
recommendations to the Council concerning policies to reduce liability to the City, and, in
appropriate cases, recommend settlement possibilities to the Council.
B. The council members may be appointed by the Mayor on an annual basis.
7.28.150 Waste Water Treatment Plant Advisory Committee
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=7_GENERAL_GOVERNMENT 28/30
A. A waste water treatment plant advisory committee is created, consisting of an elected official, the
City Manager, the Public Works Director, and the POTW Supervisor. The committee shall make
recommendations to the Council concerning the maintenance of the waste water plant, the
capacities of the plant, and measures needed to extend the life and/or capacity of the waste
water treatment plant.
B. The elected official is appointed by the Mayor on an annual basis.
7.28.160 Fiesta Days Committee
A. A Fiesta Days Committee is created consisting of six (6) members, including an elected official, a
representative from the public safety department, the City special events coordinator, and three
citizens. One of the citizen appointees will be appointed as chair of the committee. The other two
citizen members shall be the past chair and the chair elect. The committee shall make
recommendations to the Council concerning the annual City celebration known as Fiesta Days.
The committee may create any number of subcommittees to assist it with the Fiesta Days
celebration, which subcommittees shall act as ad hoc committees.
B. The terms of the citizens members shall be for three years, the first shall be as the chair elect,
the next as chair, and the last as past chair.
7.28.170 Rodeo Committee
A rodeo committee is created consisting of an elected official, the City Manager, a City employee, two at
large representatives, and two members designated by the Diamond Fork Riding Club. The at large
members shall serve alternating four terms. At the inception, one of the at large members shall be
designated to serve two years, and the other four years. Thereafter, they shall each serve four year
terms. The committee shall contract for all the necessary items for the production and operation of the
Fiesta Days rodeo. The committee will enforce the contract with the Riding Club.
(Ord. No. 03-14, Amended 02/18/2014)
7.28.180 Parks And Recreation Committee
A. A parks and recreation committee is created consisting of an elected official, the Parks and
Recreation Director, and eight citizens. The parks and recreation committee shall make
recommendations to the City Council concerning recreation facilities, programs, and participation
fees.
B. The terms of each citizen member shall be for three years, which terms shall be staggered such
that three appointments are available for two years and two appointments are available for the
third year.
7.28.190 Seniors Board
A. A seniors board is created consisting of an elected official, the Senior Director, and nine citizens.
The board shall make recommendations to the council concerning Senior facilities, programs and
charges.
B. The terms of the citizen members shall be for three years and shall be staggered such that three
appointments are due each year.
7.28.200 Miss Spanish Fork Pageant Committee
A. There is created a Miss Spanish Fork Pageant committee consisting of five members, one of
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=7_GENERAL_GOVERNMENT 29/30
whom shall be an elected official. The committee shall make recommendations to the City
Council concerning the Miss Spanish Fork pageant and related awards. The committee shall
organize the pageant, including arranging for facilities and programs.
B. The terms of each member shall be two years and shall be staggered such that two openings are
available one year and three the next.
7.28.210 Economic Development Committee (Reserved)
(Ord. No. 01-09, Repealed 01/20/2009)
7.28.215 Fairgrounds Recreation Complex Advisory Board
A. A fairgrounds Recreation Complex Advisory Board is created consisting of six members, three to
be appointed by Utah County and three to be appointed by Spanish Fork City. One of the
members from each entity shall be an elected official. The Board shall study and provide
recommendations to the Council for the Fairgrounds Recreation Complex master plan, programs,
uses, operating plans, annual budgets, and for the fairgrounds facilities which provide for
fairground, livestock, equestrian, and other recreational opportunities, and such other items as
the Council may request, with respect to the Fairgrounds Complex.
B. The elected City official may serve during his/her term in elected office, unless changed earlier
by action of the Mayor with the consent of the Council. The other two City appointees, shall serve
three-year terms. One of the initial appointees shall serve a three-year term, and the other shall
serve a two-year term.
7.28.220 Ad Hoc Committees
A. Ad hoc committees may be created from time to time to assist and advise the Council concerning
a specific purpose or project. The number on the committee may vary from project to project as
determined by the Mayor and City Council.
B. Ad hoc committee members shall serve until the purpose for which the committee was created is
fulfilled, at which point the committee shall be disbanded.
(Ord. No. 02-13, Amended 02/05/2013)
7.32 Administrative Process
7.32.010 Creation Of Administrative Process
7.32.020 Initiation
7.32.030 Fee Schedule Process
7.32.040 Failure To Comply
7.32.010 Creation Of Administrative Process
There is hereby created an administrative process whereby those minor regulatory matters identified
throughout the Spanish Fork Municipal Code as eligible may be resolved administratively rather than
through the courts. Only those matters which are uncontested and which are identified in the chapter
and/or section of the Code involved are eligible for administrative resolution. Unless spelled out
differently in a specific section, all administrative matters shall follow the procedure set forth in this
chapter.
7.32.020 Initiation
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=7_GENERAL_GOVERNMENT 30/30
All police officers, animal control officers, code enforcement officers, the public works director, public
works division managers, public works inspectors, public works engineers, parks and recreation director,
parks and recreation division managers, recreation supervisors (including site supervisors), parks lead
workers, on-site caretakers, or the cemetery sexton, when dealing with an eligible matter may issue a
notice of violation and stipulation. The notice and stipulation must be signed by the person charged. The
stipulation consents to the administrative process and acknowledges that the person has violated the
applicable regulation and waives all rights to contest the charge, including a right to a trial, with its
attendant rights.
7.32.030 Fee Schedule Process
A. Fees are based on a fee schedule established by the City Council, either in the annual budget or
by resolution. The fee schedule will be issued to the violator with the notice of violation and
stipulation.
B. Scheduling. A person receiving an administrative notice must pay the applicable fee within thirty
days. A request for an extension may be made to the City Recorder. Each party is entitled to one
thirty-day extension, if requested.
7.32.040 Failure To Comply
A person who fails to make a scheduled payment, or perform any other task required by this chapter, is
subject to being issued a court citation and/or summons for the violation. A person who violates the
same provision for a third time within 24 consecutive months is ineligible to have the matter handled
administratively.
(Ord. No. 04-15, Created 02/03/2015)
(Ord. No. 12-16, Amended 08/16/2016)
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=8_NUISANCES 1/12
8 NUISANCES
8.04 Solid Wastes (Reserved)
8.08 Duties And Responsibilities Of Solid Waste Generators And/Or The Public (Reserved)
8.12 Duties And Responsibilities Of Service Providers (Reserved)
8.16 Requirements To Commence (Reserved)
8.20 Abatement Of Weeds, Garbage, And Refuse
8.24 Nuisances
8.28 Fire Code
8.32 Flood Control
8.36 Hazardous Materials
8.04 Solid Wastes (Reserved)
8.04.010 Purposes
8.04.020 Responsibility For System And Its Regulation
8.04.030 Definitions
8.04.040 Categories Of Collection Service
8.04.050 Classification Of Services; Fees
8.04.060 Solid Waste Service Providers
8.04.070 Regulations Authorized
8.04.080 Unauthorized Collection Of Solid Waste
8.04.090 Penalties
8.04.100 Termination Of The Right To Do Business As A Solid Waste Contractor
8.04.110 Title To Solid Waste
8.04.120 Exception For Transporting Collectors
8.04.130 Holidays
8.04.010 Purposes
(Ord No. 12-15, Repealed 06/16/2015)
8.04.020 Responsibility For System And Its Regulation
(Ord No. 12-15, Repealed 06/16/2015)
8.04.030 Definitions
(Ord. No. 06-00, Amended 06/06/2000)
(Ord No. 02-09, Amended 05/08/2009)
(Ord No. 12-15, Repealed 06/16/2015)
8.04.040 Categories Of Collection Service
(Ord. No. 06-00, Enacted 06/06/2000)
(Ord No. 12-15, Repealed 06/16/2015)
8.04.050 Classification Of Services; Fees
(Ord. No. 06-00, Amended 06/06/2000)
(Ord No. 12-15, Repealed 06/16/2015)
8.04.060 Solid Waste Service Providers
(Ord. No. 09-95, Amended 06/07/1995)
(Ord No. 12-15, Repealed 06/16/2015)
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=8_NUISANCES 2/12
8.04.070 Regulations Authorized
(Ord No. 12-15, Repealed 06/16/2015)
8.04.080 Unauthorized Collection Of Solid Waste
(Ord No. 12-15, Repealed 06/16/2015)
8.04.090 Penalties
(Ord No. 12-15, Repealed 06/16/2015)
8.04.100 Termination Of The Right To Do Business As A Solid Waste Contractor
(Ord No. 12-15, Repealed 06/16/2015)
8.04.110 Title To Solid Waste
(Ord. No. 09-95, Repealed & Reenacted 06/07/1995)
(Ord No. 12-15, Repealed 06/16/2015)
8.04.120 Exception For Transporting Collectors
(Ord No. 12-15, Repealed 06/16/2015)
8.04.130 Holidays
(Ord. No. 09-95, Amended 06/07/1995)
(Ord No. 12-15, Repealed 06/16/2015)
8.08 Duties And Responsibilities Of Solid Waste Generators And/Or The Public (Reserved)
8.08.010 Type And Ownership Of Receptacles
8.08.020 Use Of Receptacles And Containers; Area Around Receptacles And Containers
8.08.030 Condition Of Receptacles And Containers; Abuse Of Receptacles And Containers Prohibited
8.08.040 Placement Or Location Of Receptacles And Containers; Spillage
8.08.050 Matter Not To Be Placed In Receptacles Or Containers, Or Set Out For Collection
8.08.080 Accumulation Prohibited
8.08.090 Dumping Prohibited
8.08.100 Hazardous Waste Prohibited
8.08.110 Responsibility For Compliance; Unlawful Deposits
8.08.120 Inspections; Notice; Correction
8.08.010 Type And Ownership Of Receptacles
(Ord No. 12-15, Repealed 06/16/2015)
8.08.020 Use Of Receptacles And Containers; Area Around Receptacles And Containers
(Ord No. 12-15, Repealed 06/16/2015)
8.08.030 Condition Of Receptacles And Containers; Abuse Of Receptacles And Containers
Prohibited
(Ord No. 12-15, Repealed 06/16/2015)
8.08.040 Placement Or Location Of Receptacles And Containers; Spillage
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=8_NUISANCES 3/12
(Ord No. 12-15, Repealed 06/16/2015)
8.08.050 Matter Not To Be Placed In Receptacles Or Containers, Or Set Out For Collection
(Ord No. 12-15, Repealed 06/16/2015)
8.08.080 Accumulation Prohibited
(Ord No. 12-15, Repealed 06/16/2015)
8.08.090 Dumping Prohibited
(Ord No. 12-15, Repealed 06/16/2015)
8.08.100 Hazardous Waste Prohibited
(Ord No. 12-15, Repealed 06/16/2015)
8.08.110 Responsibility For Compliance; Unlawful Deposits
(Ord No. 12-15, Repealed 06/16/2015)
8.08.120 Inspections; Notice; Correction
(Ord 02-09, Amended 05/08/2009)
(Ord No. 12-15, Repealed 06/16/2015)
8.12 Duties And Responsibilities Of Service Providers (Reserved)
8.12.010 Allowable Solid Waste Contractor Operating Hours
8.12.020 Solid Waste Collection Schedule
8.12.030 Furnishing Of And Design Of Containers
8.12.040 Additional Container Pick-Ups
8.12.050 Frequency Of Collection
8.12.060 Solid Waste Vehicle Requirements
8.12.070 Requirements While Transporting
8.12.080 Parking Of Solid Waste Vehicles
8.12.090 Disposal Of Solid Waste
8.12.010 Allowable Solid Waste Contractor Operating Hours
(Ord No. 12-15, Repealed 06/16/2015)
8.12.020 Solid Waste Collection Schedule
(Ord No. 12-15, Repealed 06/16/2015)
8.12.030 Furnishing Of And Design Of Containers
(Ord No. 12-15, Repealed 06/16/2015)
8.12.040 Additional Container Pick-Ups
(Ord No. 12-15, Repealed 06/16/2015)
8.12.050 Frequency Of Collection
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=8_NUISANCES 4/12
(Ord No. 12-15, Repealed 06/16/2015)
8.12.060 Solid Waste Vehicle Requirements
(Ord. No. 09 95, Amended 06/07/1995)
(Ord No. 12-15, Repealed 06/16/2015)
8.12.070 Requirements While Transporting
(Ord No. 12-15, Repealed 06/16/2015)
8.12.080 Parking Of Solid Waste Vehicles
(Ord No. 12-15, Repealed 06/16/2015)
8.12.090 Disposal Of Solid Waste
(Ord. No. 06-00, Amended 06/06/2000)
(Ord No. 02-09, Amended 05/08/2009)
(Ord No. 12-15, Repealed 06/16/2015)
8.16 Requirements To Commence (Reserved)
8.16.010 Solid Waste Vehicle Inspection Requirement
8.16.020 Permit Requirement
8.16.010 Solid Waste Vehicle Inspection Requirement
(Ord No. 12-15, Repealed 06/16/2015)
8.16.020 Permit Requirement
(Ord No. 12-15, Repealed 06/16/2015)
8.20 Abatement Of Weeds, Garbage, And Refuse
8.20.010 Purpose, Inspection, And Notice
8.20.020 Abatement By City
8.20.030 Inspector
8.20.040 Governmental Immunity
8.20.010 Purpose, Inspection, And Notice
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish a means whereby Spanish Fork City may remove or abate or
cause the removal or abatement of injurious and noxious weeds and of garbage, refuse or unsightly and
deleterious objects or structures pursuant to the powers granted to it by Utah Code Annotated Title 10,
Chapter 11. It is declared that any lot or parcel of property which contains weeds, objects, or structures
constitute a nuisance when such weeds, objects, or structures create a fire hazard, a source of
contamination or pollution of water, air or property, a danger to health, a breeding place or habitation for
insects or rodents or other forms of life deleterious to human habitation or are unsightly or deleterious to
their surroundings. The weeds, objects, or structures shall be abated by the owner or occupant of the
property.
Weed abatement compliance shall be accomplished by discing, plowing, or mowing weeds within six (6)
inches of the ground. Weeds are to be maintained less than six (6) inches in height throughout the
growing season. The property between the sidewalk and curb (parking strip) shall be maintained by the
owner or occupant.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=8_NUISANCES 5/12
The City may inspect properties within the city and identify those needing weed, garbage, refuse,
unsightly and deleterious object abatement and then serve notice in writing upon the owner and/or
occupant of such land in person or by mailing notice, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner and/or
occupant at the last known post office address as indicated by the records of the Utah County Recorder.
The notice shall require the owner and/or occupant, as the case may be, to abate the weeds, garbage,
refuse, unsightly and deleterious objects by a specific time, which shall not be less than ten (10) days
from the date of service of such notice. One notice shall be deemed sufficient on any lot or parcel of
property for the entire year.
8.20.020 Abatement By City
If any owner and/or occupant of land described in the notice issued pursuant to Section 8.20.010 shall
fail or neglect to eradicate or destroy and remove weeds, garbage, refuse, or unsightly and deleterious
objects, in accordance with such notice, the City may cause such weeds, garbage, refuse, or unsightly
and deleterious objects to be removed or destroyed. The City shall comply with the provisions of Utah
Code Annotated Title 10, Chapter 11 in recovering abatement costs. Both the owner and occupant shall
be responsible and liable for the costs incurred by the City in cleaning up the property.
8.20.030 Inspector
The City may appoint a weed abatement inspector for the purpose of administering the provisions of this
chapter and the powers delegated to the City by state statutes subject to such control and review as the
city council may from time to time direct. The City weed abatement inspector shall be appointed by and
act under the direction of the public safety director. The City weed abatement inspector shall be granted
the discretion to determine whether weeds are unsightly, create a fire hazard, source of contamination, a
danger to health, a breeding place or habitation for insects or rodents or other forms of life deleterious to
human habitation. Any public safety officer or code enforcement officer may also enforce the provisions
of this Chapter or of state law.
8.20.040 Governmental Immunity
Spanish Fork City, the department of public safety, the weed abatement inspector, or any city employee
working under the direction of either the city weed abatement inspector or the public safety department,
shall be immune from any liability by reason of the city's removal of any nuisances identified herein, after
following the procedures set forth in Utah Code Annotated Title 10 Chapter 11.
(Ord 10-05 Amended 8.20 10/04/05)
8.24 Nuisances
8.24.010 Nuisance
8.24.020 Definition Of Nuisance
8.24.030 Duty Of Maintenance Of Private Property
8.24.040 Storage Of Personal Property
8.24.050 Notice And Violation
8.24.010 Nuisance
The city hereby incorporates as though fully set forth herein, the provisions of Utah Code Annotated '76-
10-801 et seq. to define, control, eliminate, and set the punishment for any nuisance offense occurring
within the city.
8.24.020 Definition Of Nuisance
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=8_NUISANCES 6/12
Notwithstanding any provisions of state law, a nuisance is also defined to mean any condition or use of
premises or of building exteriors which are deleterious or injurious, obnoxious, or unsightly and which
includes, but is not limited to keeping nor depositing on, or scattering over the premises:
A. Lumber, junk, trash, or debris;
B. Abandoned, discarded, or unused objects or equipment such as furniture, stoves, refrigerators,
freezers, cans, containers, or other items;
C. More than two vehicles, boats, trailers, or other similar property required by the State of Utah to
be registered, and which registration has expired by more than three months, unless such
vehicles are stored within a building located on the property.
(Ord. No. 09-15, Amended 03/17/2015)
8.24.030 Duty Of Maintenance Of Private Property
No person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge of any premises shall maintain or keep any
nuisance thereon, nor shall any such person keep or maintain such premises in a manner causing
substantial diminution in the value of the other property in the neighborhood in which such premises are
located
(Ord. No. 05-15, Amended 02/03/2015)
8.24.040 Storage Of Personal Property
Unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped machinery, junk machinery, implements, equipment or
personal property of any kind which is no longer safely usable for the purpose for which it was
manufactured or intended for a period of thirty (30) days or more (except in licensed junk yards) within
this municipality, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and dangerous to the public safety.
A violation of this section is a class C misdemeanor.
8.24.050 Notice And Violation
A person who violates any section of this Chapter is subject to receiving an administrative notice of
violation and handling the matter administratively, if they so desire. If an alleged violator wants to
challenge the violation or otherwise does not want to resolve the matter administratively they shall
receive a citation to court. Violations referred to court are infractions.
Prior to bringing any criminal action for violating any of the sections under this Chapter, the City shall
first cause a notice to be sent to the person owning, occupying, or having charge of the premises
directing the clean-up to be completed and allowing thirty (30) days for the same to be accomplished. An
Administrative Notice of Violation causes the thirty (30) days to start to run.
(Ord. No. 05-15, Amended 02/03/2015)
(Ord No. 12-15, Renamed 06/16/2015)
(Ord. No. 13-16, Amended 08/16/2016)
(Ord. No. 12-16, Amended 08/16/2016)
8.28 Fire Code
8.28.010 Uniform Fire Code Adopted
8.28.020 Penalty - False Alarms
8.28.030 Violations
8.28.040 Outdoor Burning
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=8_NUISANCES 7/12
8.28.060 Non-Fire Responses
8.28.010 Uniform Fire Code Adopted
The city adopts by reference thereto the Uniform Fire Code published by the International Conference of
Building Officials and the Western Fire Chiefs Association, as it may from time to time be amended. No
fewer than three (3) copies of said Uniform Fire Code shall be filed in the office of the city building
inspector for the public's inspection and use. The provisions of said code are adopted as fully as if set
out at length in this chapter, and said provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of
the city.
8.28.020 Penalty - False Alarms
Any person, who without cause, gives an alarm of fire by outcry or ringing of bells or otherwise is guilty
of a class B misdemeanor.
8.28.030 Violations
Except where otherwise specifically provided, any person violating any provision of the Uniform Fire
Code as adopted herein is guilty of an infraction.
8.28.040 Outdoor Burning
A. Spanish Fork City hereby expressly prohibits outdoor burning with the exceptions identified
hereafter and in Utah Code Annotated §11-7-1(2)(a).
B. Open burning shall be permitted in the following instances:
1. In devices for the primary purpose of preparing food, such as outdoor grills and fireplaces;
2. Campfires and fires used solely for recreational purposes where such fires under the
control of a responsible person and the fuel is clean, dry wood or charcoal;
3. In indoor fireplaces and residential solid fuel burning devices except as provided in rules
promulgated by the Division of Environmental Quality and published in the Utah
Administrative Code;
4. Burning of prunings from trees, bushes, and plants, including dead or diseased trees,
bushes, and plants, including stubble, when such burning is incident to horticultural or
agricultural operations and the burning is located on property which is not zoned
residential;
5. Burning of weed growth along ditch banks for clearing ditches for irrigation purposes;
6. Controlled heating of orchards or other crops during the frost season to lessen the
chances of their being frozen, so long as the emissions are consistent with the
requirements identified in Utah Administrative Code, R307-202-3(3).
C. Open burning shall be permitted in the following instances:
1. During open burn periods, with a properly issued permit, and in accordance with the
permit requirements set forth in Utah Administrative Code, R307-202-7. In the event that
the Spanish Fork City Fire Department receives a complaint of violation of any of the
above instances, and an investigation by the Fire Department determines that there is a
violation, the Fire Department may extinguish any such blaze or fire.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=8_NUISANCES 8/12
D. Penalty. A person who violates any provision of this Section is subject to receiving an
administrative notice of violation and handling the matter administratively, if they so desire, and if
there is no restitution owing. If an alleged violator wants to challenge the violation or otherwise
does not want to resolve the matter administratively they shall receive a citation to court.
Violations referred to court are Infractions.
(Ord. No. 12 94, Amended 04/06/1994)
(Ord. No. 17-99, Amended 12/07/1999)
(Ord. No. 07-13, Amended 05/07/2013)
(Ord. No. 05-15, Amended 02/03/2015)
(Ord. No. 13-16, Amended 08/16/2016)
8.28.060 Non-Fire Responses
A. The rescue truck and extrication equipment will always respond with an ambulance call to any
accident scene involving automobiles, motor vehicles, and/or trains.
B. Fire apparatus, in addition to the rescue truck and extrication equipment, will respond to
accidents when requested by Dispatch or the officer in charge at the scene.
C. The party receiving the services of the ambulance, rescue truck and extrication equipment, or fire
apparatus will be billed for each apparatus (ambulance, rescue truck, fire) which responds.
(Ord. No. 21-10, Enacted 11/02/2010)
8.32 Flood Control
8.32.010 Statement Of Purpose
8.32.020 Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses
8.32.030 Definitions
8.32.040 Lands To Which This Chapter Applies
8.32.050 Compliance
8.32.060 Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
8.32.070 Interpretation
8.32.080 Establishment Of Development Permit
8.32.090 Designation Of The City Engineer
8.32.010 Statement Of Purpose
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize
public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
A. To protect human life and health;
B. To minimize expenditures of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges;
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by minimizing future flood blight areas;
G. To ensure that those who occupy the flood prone areas assume responsibility for their actions.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=8_NUISANCES 9/12
8.32.020 Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for:
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or
erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or
velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers,
which help accommodate or channel floodwater;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage;
and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwater
or which may increase flood hazards in other areas.
8.32.030 Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to
give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable
applications.
"Base Flood" means the flood having a one percent chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given
year.
"Development" means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not
limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations located within the area of special flood hazard.
"Flood" or "Flooding" means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
B. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
"Mobile Home" means a structure that is transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent
chassis, and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. It does not include recreational vehicles or travel trailers.
"Structure" means a walled and roofed building or mobile home that is principally above ground.
"Substantial Improvement"
A. "Substantial improvement" means any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the
cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure either:
1. Before the improvement or repair is started; or
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=8_NUISANCES 10/12
2. If the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred.
For the purpose of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when
the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
structure.
B. The term does not, however, include either:
1. Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health,
sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living
conditions; or
2. Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state
inventory of historic places.
8.32.040 Lands To Which This Chapter Applies
This chapter shall apply to all areas within the jurisdiction of the City of Spanish Fork.
8.32.050 Compliance
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full
compliance with the terms to this chapter and other applicable regulations.
8.32.060 Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed
restrictions; provided, however, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed
restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
8.32.070 Interpretation
A. In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
1. Considered as minimum requirements;
2. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
3. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, or the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damage that results from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
8.32.080 Establishment Of Development Permit
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within the
community. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the city engineer
and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions and elevations of the areas in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of
materials and drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing.
8.32.090 Designation Of The City Engineer
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=8_NUISANCES 11/12
The city engineer or his/her designee is hereby appointed as the Spanish Fork City flood plain manager
to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
(Ord No.20-07, Amended 12/04/2007)
8.36 Hazardous Materials
8.36.010 Hazardous Materials; Unlawful Acts
8.36.020 Hazardous Materials Cleanup; Recovery Of The Costs
8.36.010 Hazardous Materials; Unlawful Acts
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to release, discharge, deposit, or cause to be
released, discharged, or deposited any hazardous substance, material or waste upon or into any
property or facility within the City or into any of the airways, watercourses, pipelines, or other
means of conduit which may flow into the City.
B. "Hazardous Substance, Materials, or Waste" means any material that, because of its quantity,
concentration, or physical or chemical characteristics, poses a significant present or potential
hazard to human or animal health and safety or to the environment if released into the work
place or environment.
C. "Hazardous Substance, Materials, or Waste" shall also include any substance declared
hazardous by the Public Safety Director in an effort to protect the health and safety of the
residents of the city.
(Ord. No. 10-93, Enacted 12/15/1993)
8.36.020 Hazardous Materials Cleanup; Recovery Of The Costs
A. The city is authorized, but not required, to clean up or to abate the effects of any hazardous
material, substance, or waste unlawfully released, discharged, or deposited upon or into any
property, or facilities within the city, or into any of the airways, watercourses, pipelines or other
means of conduit which flow into the city. The following described persons or entities shall be
jointly and severally liable to the city for the payment of all costs incurred by the city as a result of
such cleanup or abatement activity;
1. The person, persons, entity or entities whose negligent or willful act or omission
proximately caused such release, discharge, or deposit;
2. The persons, persons, entity or entities who own or had custody or control of the
hazardous material, substance or waste at the time of such release, discharge, or
deposit, without regard to fault or proximate cause; and
3. The person, persons, entity or entities, who own or had custody or control of the container
which held such hazardous material, substance or waste at the time or immediately prior
to such release, discharge, or deposit, without regard to fault or proximate cause.
B. In the event that any person undertakes, either voluntarily or upon order of a city official, to clean
up or to abate the effects of any hazardous material, substance, or waste unlawfully released,
discharged, or deposited upon or into property or facilities within the city, or into the airways,
watercourses, pipelines, or other means of conduit which flow into the city, the city may take
such action as is necessary to supervise or to verify the adequacy of the cleanup or abatement.
Persons described in subsection (A) of this section shall be liable to the city for all costs incurred
as a result of such supervision or verification.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=8_NUISANCES 12/12
C. For purposes of this section, costs incurred by the city shall include, but shall not necessarily be
limited to, the following: actual labor costs of city personnel, including benefits and administrative
overhead; costs of the equipment operation; costs of any contract labor and materials.
D. The remedies provided for by this section shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by
law.
E. The authority to recover costs under this section shall not include actual fire suppression services
which are normally or usually provided by the fire department of the city.
(Ord. No. 10-93, Enacted 12/15/1993)
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=9_PUBLIC_PEACE_MORALS_AND_WELFARE 1/19
9 PUBLIC PEACE MORALS AND WELFARE
9.04 State Criminal Code
9.08 Abusive Language (Reserved)
9.12 Disturbance Of The Peace
9.16 Interference With Or Injury To Property
9.20 Curfew
9.24 Unlawful Activities Near Schools
9.28 Carrying And Discharge Of Weapons
9.32 Noise
9.36 Fugitive Dust And Emissions
9.40 Fireworks Restrictions
9.44 False Alarms
9.48 Beer Regulations
9.04 State Criminal Code
9.04.010 Adoption Of State Criminal Code
9.04.020 Failure To Appear - Misdemeanor
9.04.030 Alcohol Regulations
9.04.040 Leaving Children In Vehicles
9.04.010 Adoption Of State Criminal Code
A. Titles 76 and 58 of Utah Code Annotated, as it may from time to time be amended is adopted by
reference and is made a part of the ordinances of Spanish Fork City as fully as if set out in the
body of the municipal code and shall take effect and be controlling within the limits of the city;
provided, however, that this chapter is not intended to and does not purport to grant unto the city
any power or jurisdiction not specifically or by implication granted by law.
B. Any crimes specified within Titles 76 and 58 which are designated felonies are specifically
excluded from inclusion in this chapter.
C. Whenever a conflict in language or penalty between this chapter and an ordinance previously
passed shall arise, the provisions of this chapter shall govern.
9.04.020 Failure To Appear - Misdemeanor
Any person who willfully fails to appear before a court pursuant to a citation issued with Spanish Fork
City under the provisions of Utah Code Annotated '77-7-18 is guilty of a class B misdemeanor,
regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he or she was originally cited.
9.04.030 Alcohol Regulations
A. The criminal provisions of title 32B of Utah Code Annotated, as it may be amended from time to
time, are hereby adopted by reference and are made a part of the ordinances of Spanish Fork
City as fully as if set out in the body of the Municipal Code and shall take effect and be controlling
within the limits of the City.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=9_PUBLIC_PEACE_MORALS_AND_WELFARE 2/19
B. For purposes of unlawful consumption of alcoholic beverages as set forth in U.C.A. '32B-4-421,
the following definitions shall apply:
1. A public building shall have that meaning set forth in U.C.A. '32B-1-102(82);
2. Park shall mean publicly owned property dedicated to relaxation and/or recreational
activities, including any parking lots or parking areas associated with such park. Park
shall include areas designated as a park by the City, public fairgrounds, ball fields or other
recreational fields, publicly owned gun clubs or related facilities, publicly owned "green
spaces," and public trails, including jogging paths, bicycle, and horse trails. Parks shall
also include any buildings, pavilions, or other structures located in such areas. Parks shall
not include golf courses or designated over-night camping areas;
3. Stadium means a structure with tiers of seats for spectators.
(Ord. No. 05-97, Enacted 03/18/1997)
(Ord. No. 18-13, Amended 10/01/2013)
9.04.040 Leaving Children In Vehicles
A. It shall be unlawful for any person within the limits of this City, having in his or her care, control,
or under his or her guidance, any minor child under six (6) years of age, to at any time leave
such a child unattended in any automobile, bus, or other vehicle or trailer, located upon a public
street, a publicly-owned or privately-owned parking lot open to the general public or to business
invitees, or at any other public place, if the child's health or welfare could be adversely effected.
B. A child is "unattended" within the meaning of this section if the oldest person in the vehicle is a
person under the age of twelve (12) years.
C. Violation of this section is a class B misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 09-06, Enacted 09/01/06)
9.08 Abusive Language (Reserved)
9.08.010 Abusive Language
9.08.010 Abusive Language
(Ord. No. 04-93, Amended 04/07/1993)
(Ord. No. 18-14, Repealed 12/02/2014)
9.12 Disturbance Of The Peace
9.12.010 Loudspeakers
9.12.020 Driving Animals On Streets (Reserved)
9.12.030 Driving On Sidewalks
9.12.050 Sale Or Use Of Fireworks
9.12.060 Loitering Defined
9.12.070 Loitering Prohibited
9.12.010 Loudspeakers
A. It is unlawful within the limits of this city for any person to maintain, operate, connect or suffer or
permit to be maintained, operated or connected any calliope or radio apparatus, sound device or
any talking machine or loudspeaker attached thereto in such a manner that the loudspeaker or
amplifier causes the sound from such radio apparatus or sound device or talking machine to be
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=9_PUBLIC_PEACE_MORALS_AND_WELFARE 3/19
projected directly therefrom outside of any building, vehicle or out of doors, provided that the
chief of police may grant a permit to so broadcast any events or happenings of cultural, political,
intellectual or religious interest. Every person desiring a permit to so broadcast shall make
application, file a statement showing the place where he or she proposes to broadcast, the times
and probable duration, and the nature, topics or title of said broadcast. Said permit shall not be
arbitrarily denied and when an application for a permit is denied, the chief of police shall set forth
in writing and with particularity the grounds for so denying the application for a permit.
B. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the operation of a radio apparatus, sound
device, amplifier or talking machine used in a reasonable manner by any person within any
building, vehicle or structure even though the sound therefrom may be heard on the outside of
such building, vehicle or structure, provided that the said apparatus, sound device, amplifier or
talking machine shall not project the sound therefrom directly outside of any building, vehicle or
out of doors, and provided further that no such radio apparatus, sound device, amplifier or talking
machine is in any way fastened to or connected with any outside wall or window in any building,
vehicle or structure so that sound therefrom is projected outside of such walls or window.
C. It is unlawful within the limits of Spanish Fork City for any person to maintain, operate, connect or
suffer or permit to be maintained, operated, or connected any speakers, sound device, or radio
apparatus that projects a sound that can be heard for a distance of two hundred (200) feet or
greater from the source of the sound, amplification, speakers, sound device or radio apparatus,
with the exception that any such device being projected within the boundaries of one’s own real
property, it shall only be unlawful to project the sound two hundred (200) feet or greater beyond
the edges of the property boundaries.
D. A person who violates any provision of this Section is subject to receiving an administrative
notice of violation and handling the matter administratively, if they so desire. If an alleged violator
wants to challenge the violation or otherwise does not want to resolve the matter administratively
they shall receive a citation to court. Violations referred to court are infractions.
(Ord. No. 05-15, Amended 02/03/2015)
9.12.020 Driving Animals On Streets (Reserved)
(Ord. No. 18-14, Repealed 12/02/2014)
9.12.030 Driving On Sidewalks
It is a violation for any person to drive or propel any motor vehicle upon the sidewalk, ride, drive, or lead
any horse or other animal upon the sidewalk, or to stop any motor vehicle, team, or other vehicle on a
sidewalk so as to impede public travel within the limits of the City except for the purpose of entering or
leaving a city lot. A person who violates this Section is subject to receiving an administrative notice of
violation and handling the matter administratively, if they so desire. If an alleged violator wants to
challenge the violation or otherwise does not want to resolve the matter administratively they shall
receive a citation to court. Violations referred to court are infractions.
(Ord. No. 05-15, Amended 02/03/2015)
9.12.050 Sale Or Use Of Fireworks
The sale or use of fireworks shall be governed in strict accordance with the provisions of Utah Code
Annotated §11-3-1 et seq. A person who violates this Section is subject to receiving an administrative
notice of violation and handling the matter administratively, if they so desire. If an alleged violator wants
to challenge the violation or otherwise does not want to resolve the matter administratively they shall
receive a citation to court. Violations referred to court are infractions.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=9_PUBLIC_PEACE_MORALS_AND_WELFARE 4/19
(Ord. No. 12-16, Amended 08/16/16)
9.12.060 Loitering Defined
Loitering shall mean the congregation of one (1) or more person(s) upon public streets, highways, or
sidewalks of business districts, or residential areas, who are not carrying on any legitimate business
within the city and who are impeding access to any business or impacting by noise, litter, or vandalism,
any residential or business district. It shall also include the congregation of one or more persons in or
upon a parked vehicle in or upon a public street or highway in residential or business districts.
(Ord. No. 04 91, Enacted 03/20/1991)
9.12.070 Loitering Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, as defined in the preceding section, within the city. A violation
of this section shall be a class C misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 04 91, Enacted 03/20/1991)
9.16 Interference With Or Injury To Property
9.16.010 Cleaning Sidewalks
9.16.020 Flooding Of Streets And Sidewalks
9.16.030 Culverts And Boxes Over Water Ditches
9.16.010 Cleaning Sidewalks
It is a violation for any occupant or owner of any property abutting on any street within the City to neglect
or fail to clean and keep clean of all weeds, dirt, or rubbish, the sidewalks in front of or adjacent to his or
her premises. A person who violates this Section is subject to receiving an administrative notice of
violation and handling the matter administratively, if they so desire. If an alleged violator wants to
challenge the violation or otherwise does not want to resolve the matter administratively they shall
receive a citation to court. Violations referred to court are infractions.
(Ord. No. 02-05, Amended 02/15/2005)
(Ord. No. 05-15, Amended 02/03/2015)
9.16.020 Flooding Of Streets And Sidewalks
It is a violation for any person to willfully, carelessly, or negligently obstruct, injure, or flood any street or
sidewalk by the flow or seepage of water, or who willfully, carelessly, or negligently permits water under
his or her control to escape in any manner so as to obstruct, injure, or flood any street or sidewalk within
the City. A person who violates this Section is subject to receiving an administrative notice of violation
and handling the matter administratively, if they so desire. If an alleged violator wants to challenge the
violation or otherwise does not want to resolve the matter administratively they shall receive a citation to
court. Violations referred to court are infractions.
(Ord. No. 05-15, Amended 02/03/2015)
(Ord. No. 13-16, Amended 08/16/2016)
9.16.030 Culverts And Boxes Over Water Ditches
(Ord. No. 18-14, Repealed 12/02/2014)
9.20 Curfew
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=9_PUBLIC_PEACE_MORALS_AND_WELFARE 5/19
9.20.010 Definitions
9.20.020 Hours Established
9.20.030 Parental Liability
9.20.040 Enforcement
9.20.050 Exceptions
9.20.060 Severability
9.20.010 Definitions
A. "Care and Custody" means the legal authority of a parent or guardian to supervise or otherwise
be responsible for a minor, or the express authority given from such parent or legal guardian of a
minor to a responsible adult to supervise or otherwise be responsible for the activities and care of
the minor.
B. "Emergency errand" means any errand or travel undertaken to directly and immediately seek to
prevent or reduce the consequences of an illness or injury, criminal or potential criminal activity,
or fire or other serious accident and shall include the seeking of aid and assistance from medical
or emergency response personnel or for the purchase of medications.
C. "Public Places" means any place open to the public whether privately owned, excluding but not
limited to, a parking lots, the interior and exteriors of commercial establishments such as
restaurants, stores, or places of entertainment.
(Ord. No. 11-96, Enacted 11/20/1996)
9.20.020 Hours Established
A. It is unlawful for any minor under the age of sixteen years to remain or loiter upon any sidewalk,
street, alley, or public place in the City between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. the
following morning unless accompanied by an adult having the care and custody of said minor.
B. It is unlawful for any minor sixteen or seventeen years of age to loiter or remain upon any
sidewalk, street, alley, or public place in the City between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.
the following morning except for Saturday and Sunday mornings when the hours shall be
between 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., unless accompanied by an adult having the care and custody
of said minor.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of a Class C Misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 11-96, Enacted, 11/20/1996)
9.20.030 Parental Liability
It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian, or other person having the care and custody of any minor to
knowingly allow or permit the minor to violate the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 11-96, Enacted 11/20/1996)
9.20.040 Enforcement
A. Any juvenile who is in violation of the provisions of this chapter is subject to arrest and/or citation.
B. Upon arrest, the minor may be returned to the custody of the parent, guardian, or other person in
charge of the care and custody of the minor, or may be taken to a youth receiving or other similar
facility for holding.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=9_PUBLIC_PEACE_MORALS_AND_WELFARE 6/19
C. It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian, or other person charged with the care and custody
of the minor, who is violation of this chapter, to refuse to appear and take custody of said minor
after being ordered to do so by a peace officer.
D. Any person who violates the provisions of this section is guilty of a Class C Misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 11-96, Enacted 11/20/1996)
9.20.050 Exceptions
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any circumstance in which the minor is:
A. Accompanied by an adult, guardian, or other responsible adult having the care and custody of
such minor;
B. Engaged in a legitimate trade, employment, or occupation which requires the minor's presence in
or on the sidewalks, streets, alleys, or public places while working at or traveling to or from such
employment;
C. Engaged on an emergency errand directed by the minor's parent, guardian, or other responsible
person having the care and custody;
D. In a motor vehicle engaged in normal interstate travel in, traveling through, or ending in Spanish
Fork City;
E. Attending or engaged in travel between the minor's home or place of residence and the place
where any religious, municipal, social, entertainment, sporting, political, library, or school function
is occurring;
F. Within the boundaries of the minor's place of residence.
(Ord. No. 11-96, Enacted 11/20/1996)
9.20.060 Severability
If any section or subsection of this chapter is held by a court of jurisdiction to be invalid, the remaining
portions shall remain in full force and effect.
(Ord. No. 11-96, Enacted 11/20/1996)
9.24 Unlawful Activities Near Schools
9.24.010 Designated - Prohibited
9.24.010 Designated - Prohibited
A. It is unlawful for any person to annoy, disturb or otherwise prevent or attempt to prevent the
orderly conduction of the activities, administration or classes of any elementary, intermediate or
high school in the city.
B. It is unlawful for any person to annoy, disturb, assault or molest any student or employee of any
elementary, intermediate or high school within the city while in or at such school or school
building or parking lot or on any grounds thereof.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=9_PUBLIC_PEACE_MORALS_AND_WELFARE 7/19
C. It is unlawful for any person to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in, about or on any elementary,
intermediate or high school grounds or buildings, either on foot or in or on any vehicle without
having some lawful business therein or thereabouts or in connection with such elementary,
intermediate or high school or the employees thereon within the city, during such hours when
school is in session.
D. It is unlawful for any person to conduct himself or herself in an obscene, lewd, wanton or
mischievous manner in speech or behavior in, about or at any school, whether elementary,
intermediate or high school building or grounds thereof, in the city.
E. It is unlawful for any person to park or move a vehicle in the immediate vicinity of or on the
grounds of any elementary, intermediate or high school in the city for the purpose of annoying or
molesting the students or employees thereof, or to induce, entice or invite students or employees
into or on the vehicle for any unlawful purpose.
F. Any person violating any provision of this section is guilty of a class C misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 09-94, Amended 11/03/1993)
9.28 Carrying And Discharge Of Weapons
9.28.010 Definitions - Unlawful Acts
9.28.020 Minors
9.28.010 Definitions - Unlawful Acts
A. It is unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm, including airguns, bows and arrows, and
other devices which project a missile, within the limits of the City, provided that this section shall
not apply to peace officers in the pursuit of official duties, persons acting in self-defense, or to
persons who are members of or guests at a shooting gallery or rifle club and who discharge their
firearms within the safe confines of said club or gallery, provided that adequate safety measures
have been observed in the construction of said club or gallery so as to protect the health and
safety of the public, nor shall this section apply to persons hunting with shotguns during regularly
scheduled hunting seasons provided that any person hunting must strictly comply with state laws
and regulations concerning carrying loaded firearms and concerning distance requirements from
roads, vehicles, and buildings.
B. A violation of this section is a Class B Misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 17-98, Amended 12/15/1998)
9.28.020 Minors
A. It is unlawful for any parent or guardian or person having the charge of or control of any minor to
allow or permit such minor to use within the city limits any firearm or air gun or rifle, provided this
section shall not apply to the use of such weapons at a licensed club or shooting gallery when
minors are superintended by one or more responsible adults.
B. A person who violates any provision of this subsection is guilty of an infraction.
9.32 Noise
9.32.010 Scope And Purpose
9.32.020 Definitions
9.32.030 Classifications
9.32.040 Noise Measurement Procedures
9.32.050 Noise Limits
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=9_PUBLIC_PEACE_MORALS_AND_WELFARE 8/19
9.32.060 Exceptions
9.32.065 Compression Engine Brakes
9.32.070 Violation
9.32.010 Scope And Purpose
The Council finds that the creation and/or continuation of loud, continuous, or obnoxious noises can be a
danger to the general health, safety, welfare, and well-being of the residents of the City. The goal of this
chapter is to regulate, and if necessary, abate noises which constitute a danger to the general health,
safety, welfare, and well-being of the residents of the City.
9.32.020 Definitions
For the purposes of this ordinance, certain words and phrases used herein are defined as follows:
"Continuous Sound" means any sound that exists, essentially without interruption, for a period of two
(2) minutes or more.
"Decibel" means logarithmic and dimensionless unit of measure often used in describing the amplitude
of sound. Decibel is abbreviated dB.
”Dynamic breaking device” (commonly referred to as a “jake brake”) means a device used primarily on
trucks for the conversion of the engine from an internal combustion engine to an air compressor for the
purpose of braking without the use of wheel brakes.
"Emergency Work" means work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a
public calamity or work required to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger.
"Motor Vehicles" shall include, but not be limited to automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, snowmobiles,
recreational vehicles, minibikes, go carts, aircraft and motorboats.
"Noise" means an undesired or harmful sound.
"Noise Source" means any instrument or device or anything which produces, reproduces or amplifies
sound. The term shall include multiple sources of sound.
"Person" means a person, firm, association, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other legal entity,
public or private in nature.
"Residential/Agricultural", "Commercial" or "Industrial" zones shall conform to the zone designations
set forth in the city zoning codes.
9.32.030 Classifications
The creation of noise within the City generally may be classified under one of three headings:
A. Sounds of commerce and industry: In this category are those noises necessarily made by
commercial vehicles in process of transporting persons or goods, necessary noises of
construction or demolition and other sounds necessarily connected with the carrying on of
modern business life. Enforcement agencies of the City are hereby specifically authorized to
work with the producers of this type of noise to either eliminate, modify and/or muffle such
sounds in a way that will allow progress to continue while minimizing the disturbing effects of the
noise. Such noises, when they reach such a stage that they become harmful or disturbing, are
declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated. Refusal to modify excessive noise is a
violation of this chapter.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=9_PUBLIC_PEACE_MORALS_AND_WELFARE 9/19
B. Public disturbance noises: In this category are those noises which because of their intensity, the
decibel level, the constancy of the noise or proximity to residences, businesses and generally
inhabited areas, create a disturbance to human life and efficiency. Included in this category and
typical thereof, though not exclusive of others not so listed, would be the following:
1. inadequately or defectively muffled vehicles, engines and motors;
2. loud machinery and pneumatic apparatus;
3. amplified music or other amplified sounds;
4. miscellaneous noises, including those of machinery, gunfire, etc., when their emission
creates a public disturbance, either because of the intensity, or disturbing nature and/or
the time of the emission. Noises of these categories are a violation of this chapter and are
further determined to be a nuisance which may be abated by the proper authorities in the
City.
C. Intentionally caused noises: In this category are those noises which are caused for the sake of
making noise without regard to the comfort, sleep, or general health and welfare of other
persons. Production of such noise is unlawful and constitutes a misdemeanor. Typical of these
type of noises are the following:
1. improperly muffled vehicle engines, when the same are rapidly accelerated or
decelerated, and especially during such hours that they are likely to interfere with the
sleep or peaceful calm of residential neighborhoods;
2. sounds that are mechanically, pneumatically or electronically produced or amplified, when
the same are not enclosed within a building or enclosure which absorbs the sound, so as
not to disturb the surrounding area;
3. sounds or music created or amplified within a public building or enclosure with such
volume and intensity that the sound produced is actually or potentially dangerous to
hearers within the enclosure.
9.32.040 Noise Measurement Procedures
A. It is the intent of the city council to incorporate into the noise ordinance those standards of
measurement hereinafter set forth, which will take into account the latest scientific advances in
noise measurement and control while at the same time, preserving the common sense and
common law determination of what constitutes a disturbance or public nuisance. Therefore,
sound level measurements, while universally desirable, shall not be required to demonstrate
violation of this chapter if other evidence or testimony establishes the creation of a disturbance or
public nuisance.
B. It is the intention that each separate provision of this chapter shall be deemed independent of all
other provisions therein, and if any provision of this chapter be declared to be invalid, all other
provisions thereof shall remain valid and enforceable.
C. In no event shall the peak intensity of sound exceed a sound level in excess of the limits
established in section 050, measured in decibels.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=9_PUBLIC_PEACE_MORALS_AND_WELFARE 10/19
D. The decibel meter or other instrument used to measure the intensity of a noise may be placed at
any point on the property line (if the noise source radiates into private property) and shall be at
least five (5) feet from any wall and not less than three (3) feet above the ground. If it is not
possible to measure five (5) feet from a wall, five (5) dB variance will be allowed. When
measurements are made inside buildings or enclosures, readings may be obtained from any
area to which persons may have access. The following limits refer to the largest reading
obtained, using the above procedure.
9.32.050 Noise Limits
A. Noise levels shall be based on continuous noise for two minute intervals or intermittent noise
which exceeds the level five or more times within a ten minute period. Noise levels shall not
exceed the following limits:
DAY NIGHT
Zone 6 am - 9 pm 9 pm - 6 am
Residential/Agricultural 65 dB (A) 55 dB (A)
Commercial 70 dB (A) 65 dB (A)
(including Public Facility Zone and Professional Office Zone)
Industrial 80 dB (A) 65 dB (A)
B. When a noise source can be identified and its noise measured in more than one land use
category, the limits of the most restrictive use shall apply at the boundaries between different
land use categories.
C. It shall be unlawful to sustain, in any place of public entertainment, including, but not limited to
restaurants, private clubs, cafes, discotheques, or dance halls; any sound levels equal to or in
excess of:
1. One hundred five (105) dBA at any time, (if the sound level exceeds one hundred five
(105) dBA at any time, a mandatory ten (10) minutes sound break at a level below eighty
five (85) dBA will be taken). The restriction contained in this subparagraph is in addition to
any other applicable limits stated in this chapter.
D. Amplified noise, including music, which can be heard with the human ear at a distance of 200
feet or more from the source of the sound.
E. Construction noise that is normally associated with building of a building or other infrastructure is
limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
F. Enforcement officials are the Community Development Director, building inspectors, and police
officers.
9.32.060 Exceptions
A. Sounds created by emergency activities or emergency vehicles; or sounds giving warning of
emergencies shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
B. Gunfire sounds emanating from the Spanish Fork Gun Club or police firing ranges shall be
exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=9_PUBLIC_PEACE_MORALS_AND_WELFARE 11/19
C. Sounds created by parades, carnivals, special public social events, or special construction
projects may be exempted from the noise provisions of this chapter. An exemption is granted by
a permit from the City Manager, or designee, which must be in writing and shall describe:
1. the special nature of the exempted event;
2. the dBA limitation (maximum allowed);
3. the time period for which the exemption is in force. The permit shall be for one event only.
The City Manager, or designee, may impose reasonable conditions on the issuance of a
permit as necessary to protect the public peace and welfare. The permit may be
withdrawn if the provisions thereof are violated.
9.32.065 Compression Engine Brakes
A. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle equipped with a dynamic breaking device to
use or otherwise apply such a device when traveling upon any street within the city limits.
B. This section does not apply to emergency vehicles.
C. This section does not apply in cases of bona fide emergencies when using an engine brake is
reasonably necessary for public or personal safety.
9.32.070 Violation
A. Violation of the noise provisions of this chapter, or of the conditions of an exemption permit shall
be an infraction.
B. A civil action to abate or enjoin a nuisance, or for damages for causing or maintaining a nuisance
(including the cost, if any, of cleaning the subject property), may be brought by Spanish Fork City
or by any private person directly affected.
(Ord. No. 19-94, Enacted 07/06/1994)
(Ord. No. 02-12, Enacted 02/07/2012)
(Ord. No. 08-13, Enacted 06/04/2013)
(Ord. No. 13-16, Amended 08/16/2016)
9.36 Fugitive Dust And Emissions
9.36.010 Fugitive Dust And Emissions
9.36.020 Violation
9.36.010 Fugitive Dust And Emissions
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the emission of fugitive particulate matter from any
process, including any material handling or storage activity that is in violation of the fugitive
emissions and fugitive dust standards as set by Utah Air Quality Board.
B. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit a building or its appurtenances or open areas to be
used, constructed, repaired, altered or demolished without taking reasonable precautions to
prevent particulate matter from becoming airborne. Dust and other types of particulates shall be
kept to a minimum by such measures as wetting down, covering, landscaping, paving, treating,
or by other reasonable terms.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=9_PUBLIC_PEACE_MORALS_AND_WELFARE 12/19
C. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the repair, construction, or reconstruction of a
roadway or an alley without taking reasonable precautions to prevent particulate matter from
becoming airborne. Dust and other particulate shall be kept to a minimum by employing
temporary paving, wetting down, detouring, or by other reasonable means. Soil or other material
shall be promptly removed which has been transported onto paved streets by trucking or earth
moving equipment, erosion by water, or by other means.
D. The owner or operator of a commercial establishment or industrial plant shall maintain control of
the establishment premises or plant premises and establishment or plant owned, leased or
controlled access roads by paving, oil treatment, or other suitable measures.
E. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit crushing, screening, drying, handling, conveying of
materials, stockpiling, or other operations likely to give rise to airborne dust without taking the
following precautions to prevent particulate matter from becoming airborne:
1. All unpaved roads and other unpaved operational areas which are used by mobile
equipment shall be water sprayed and/or chemically treated to reduce fugitive dust.
Control is required at all times (24 hours per day, everyday) for the duration of the
project/operation. The application rate of water shall be a minimum of 0.5 gallons per
square yard. Application shall be made at least once every two (2) hours during all times
the installation is in use unless daily rainfall exceeds 0.10 of an inch or unless the road is
in a muddy/damp/moist condition or unless it is covered with snow or unless the ambient
temperature is below freezing. Records of water treatment shall be kept for all periods
when the process plant is in operation. The records shall include the following items:
a. Date;
b. Quantity of treatment;
c. Time of day treatments were made.
Records of treatment shall be made available upon request and shall include a period of
two years ending with the date of the request.
2. The truck haul road shall be paved and shall be periodically swept or water sprayed clean
as dry conditions warrant. Records of cleaning of paved roads shall be made available
upon request and shall include a period of two (2) years prior to the date of request.
3. Water sprays or chemical dust suppression spray shall be installed at the following points
to control fugitive emissions:
a. All crushers;
b. All screens;
c. All conveyor transfer points.
The sprays shall operate whenever dry conditions warrant.
4. The storage piles shall be watered or chemically treated to minimize generation of fugitive
dust as dry conditions warrant.
F. No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit sandblasting or related abrasion operations unless
sufficient containment measures are taken to prevent the sand and/or abrasive material from
traveling beyond the property line where the operation is being conducted.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=9_PUBLIC_PEACE_MORALS_AND_WELFARE 13/19
G. No owner, operator, or lessee of any real property located or situated within the city shall, after
the topsoil has been disturbed or the natural cover removed, allow the same to remain
unoccupied, unused, vacant, or undeveloped, without taking all reasonable precautions to
prevent fugitive dust from becoming airborne. Dust and other particulate shall be controlled by
compacting, chemical sealers, resin sealers, asphalt sealers, or plating or vegetation or other
reasonable means.
(Ord. No. 20-94, Enacted 07/06/1994)
9.36.020 Violation
A. A person who violates any section of this Chapter is subject to receiving an administrative notice
of violation and handling the matter administratively, if they so desire. If an alleged violator wants
to challenge the violation or otherwise does not want to resolve the matter administratively they
shall receive a citation to court. Violations referred to court are infractions.
B. A civil action to abate or enjoin a nuisance, or for damages for causing or maintaining a nuisance
(including the cost, if any, of cleaning the subject property), may be brought by Spanish Fork City
or by any private person directly affected.
C. Those persons authorized to issue citations under section 12-04-060 are also authorized to issue
citations under this chapter.
(Ord. No. 20-94, Enacted 07/06/1994)
(Ord. No 10-99, Amended 07/13/1999)
(Ord. No. 12-16, Amended 08/16/2016)
9.40 Fireworks Restrictions
9.40.010 Fireworks Prohibited - Areas
9.40.020 State Law Requirements
9.40.030 City Sponsored Events
9.40.035 Private Events
9.40.040 Penalty - Parental Responsibility
9.40.010 Fireworks Prohibited - Areas
Fireworks are prohibited in the following areas:
A. The use of fireworks is prohibited in all of the Industrial 3 (I-3) zones;
B. The use of fireworks is prohibited in all areas south of the Spanish Fork River from the west end
of the Spanish Oaks Golf Course, eastwardly to the city limits;
C. The use of fireworks is prohibited within 200 feet of any open field, unimproved lot with dry
vegetation, or a lot with a vacant building and dry vegetative growth on the lot.
9.40.020 State Law Requirements
A. Fireworks are allowed in other areas only in strict accordance with the requirements of state law.
B. A licensed fireworks display operator may display fireworks by complying with state law and
providing to the City proof of insurance and paying a fee to cover the cost of City Inspections and
having a fire truck and personnel at the site.
9.40.030 City Sponsored Events
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=9_PUBLIC_PEACE_MORALS_AND_WELFARE 14/19
An exception to the restrictions imposed in this chapter is granted for any city sponsored public display
of fireworks where trained personnel set off the fireworks and the fire department is present to
immediately extinguish any fire.
9.40.035 Private Events
A. The City may issue a Special Events Permit for the discharge of fireworks for public and private
events. The Special Events Permit is obtained from the park and recreation department. The
following conditions must be met for the discharge of fireworks.
1. The operator is licensed by the State of Utah for the type of fireworks to be discharged;
2. Liability insurance with an insurer licensed in the State of Utah is provided, in the minimal
amount of $2,000,000.00 for spectator coverage, with the City, its officers, employees,
and agents named as additional insureds;
3. A safe perimeter is established, in the sole discretion of the Public Safety Director or
designee, where no spectators or buildings are allowed;
4. Fire apparatus and personnel are on site, the type of apparatus and number of personnel
to be determined in the sole discretion of the Public Safety Director or designee; and
5. The location, dates, and times are approved by the Public Safety Director or designee.
B. The cost of the permit will be established by the Council as part of its annual budget. The permit
fee shall include the cost of the fire apparatus and personnel required to be on site for safety
reasons.
(Ord. No. 11-18, Enacted 05/01/2018)
9.40.040 Penalty - Parental Responsibility
A. A violation of this ordinance is a Class C misdemeanor.
B. It is a Class C misdemeanor for a parent or guardian to allow a child in their control or custody to
use fireworks in violation of this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 06-03, Enacted 07/01/2003)
(Ord. No. 10-16, Enacted 07/12/2016)
9.44 False Alarms
9.44.010 Definitions
9.44.020 Registration Required To Operate Alarm Business
9.44.030 Unlawful To Operate An Alarm System Without An Alarm Permit
9.44.040 Alarm Permits
9.44.050 User Instructions
9.44.060 False Alarms
9.44.070 Right To Hearing And Appeal
9.44.080 Deliberate False Alarms
9.44.090 Local Alarm System-Cutoff Required
9.44.100 Public Safety Call Records
9.44.110 Administration And Enforcement
9.44.120 Operational Defects To Be Remedied
9.44.130 Automatic Dialing And Prerecorded Message Alarm Systems Unlawful
9.44.140 City Liability Limitations
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=9_PUBLIC_PEACE_MORALS_AND_WELFARE 15/19
9.44.150 Violation Penalty
9.44.010 Definitions
For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning set forth herein:
A. "Alarm business" means any person engaged in the business of installing, planning the
installation, servicing, maintaining, monitoring, repairing, replacing, moving or removing alarm
systems in the City.
B. "Alarm coordinator" means the individual designated by the Director of Public Safety Director to
issue permits and enforce the provisions of this Article.
C. "Alarm permit" or "permit" means a permit issued by the City that authorizes a person to
operate an alarm system in the City.
D. "Alarm system" means any mechanism, equipment, or device which is designed to detect an
unauthorized entry into any building or onto any property, or to direct attention to a fire, robbery,
burglary, or other emergency in progress, and to signal the above occurrences either by a local
or audible alarm or by a silent or remote alarm. The following devices shall not constitute alarm
systems within the meaning of this subsection:
1. Devices which do not register alarms that are audible, visible, or perceptible outside the
protected premises;
2. Devices which are not installed, operated or used for the purpose of reporting an
emergency to the Department of Public Safety;
3. Alarm devices affixed to motor vehicles; and
4. Alarm devices installed on a temporary basis by the Department of Public Safety.
E. "Alarm user" or "user" means the person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company,
or organization of any kind in control of any building, structure or facility or portion thereof
wherein an alarm system is maintained.
F. "Central station" means an office to which alarm systems are connected, where operators
supervise the circuits, and where guards and/or service personnel are maintained continuously to
investigate signals.
G. "Emergency" means the existence of a fire or the commission or attempted commission of a
criminal action, or medical conditions requiring immediate response and/or action.
H. "Emergency personnel" means peace officers, firefighters, paramedics and emergency medical
technicians.
I. "False alarm" means the activation of an alarm system which results in a response by the
Department of Public Safety where an emergency does not exist and for which no evidence or
indication of criminal activity, fire, or other hazard is discovered. False alarms shall include
negligently or accidentally activated signals; signals which are the result of faulty, malfunctioning,
or improperly installed or maintained equipment; signals which are purposely activated to
summons emergency personnel in non-emergency situations; and alarms for which the actual
cause is not determined. False alarms also include an alarm signal caused by conditions of
nature which are normal for that area. "False alarm" does not include an alarm signal caused by
extraordinarily violent conditions of nature which cannot be reasonably anticipated by the alarm
user.
J. "Local alarm" means any noise-making alarm device and any alarm which emits a visual signal
such as a strobe light.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=9_PUBLIC_PEACE_MORALS_AND_WELFARE 16/19
K. "Person" means and includes natural persons, without regard to number or gender, and any
partnership, corporation, and any other type of legal entity.
9.44.020 Registration Required To Operate Alarm Business
A. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the practice of an alarm business, alarm company or
alarm agent in the City as defined in Utah Code Ann. '58-55-301(1953, as amended), without a
valid license therefor issued in accordance with the provisions of Utah Code Ann. '58-55-301 et
seq.
B. No alarm business or alarm agent shall install any alarm system in the City unless the owner or
lessee of the premises on which the alarm system is to be installed has a valid alarm permit
issued by the City.
9.44.030 Unlawful To Operate An Alarm System Without An Alarm Permit
It shall be unlawful for any person to use, maintain, operate or be in control of any alarm system which
has been installed in any building, structure, facility or portion thereof in the City without a valid permit
therefor issued by the City.
9.44.040 Alarm Permits
A. An alarm permit shall be issued to an alarm user at no charge upon the filing of a completed
alarm information card with the Department of Public Safety. A separate alarm permit is required
for each alarm site.
B. The alarm information card shall set forth the full name, address and telephone number of the
following individuals and entities:
1. the alarm user;
2. the person or licensed alarm system business installing, maintaining or servicing the
system;
3. the central station to which the alarm system is connected;
4. three individuals who may be contacted by emergency personnel responding to an alarm,
who have authority to act for the alarm user in granting emergency personnel access to
any portion of the premises concerned, and who are knowledgeable in the basic
operation of the alarm system.
C. In the event that emergency personnel or representatives of the central station responding to an
alarm are unable to contact any of the parties listed in the alarm information card due to outdated
or inaccurate information provided by the user; or if none of the listed parties are available; or if
the listed parties fail to respond to the scene within thirty minutes of notice, such failure shall be
treated as a separate false alarm in addition to the alarm which prompted the police response.
D. In addition to submitting the alarm information card, users of local alarm systems shall post, near
the front entrance and near the alarm, at a position readable from ground level, a code number
furnished by the alarm coordinator to allow reference to the alarm information card required by
this section.
9.44.050 User Instructions
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=9_PUBLIC_PEACE_MORALS_AND_WELFARE 17/19
Every alarm business selling, leasing, or furnishing to any user an alarm system which is installed on
premises located in the City shall furnish the user with written instructions that enable the user to
operate the alarm system properly.
9.44.060 False Alarms
A. For each false alarm to which emergency personnel are dispatched (even if the call is
subsequently cancelled) in any calendar year, the alarm user shall be issued a warning or shall
pay an administrative service fee to the City according to the following schedule:
First three false alarms Warning
Fourth false alarm Fifty dollars ($50.00)
Fifth false alarm Seventy-five dollars ($75.00)
Sixth through ninth false alarms One hundred dollars ($100.00)
Tenth and all subsequent false alarms Two hundred dollars ($200.00)
B. All administrative service fees assessed under this Chapter shall be paid to the City within (30)
days of the date the notice of the assessment of the service fee is mailed to the alarm user. If
any service fee is not paid within the time set forth above, late penalties shall be assessed
against the alarm user according to the following schedule:
1-60 days Ten dollars ($10.00)
61-90 days Twenty dollars ($20.00)
91-120 days Thirty dollars ($30.00)
C. The City may use all available legal remedies to collect delinquent service fees and late
penalties. If a delinquent service fee is owed by a business, payment of the fee and late penalties
is required prior to the renewal of the alarm user's business license.
D. An alarm permit shall be suspended for any failure by the alarm user to pay any administrative
service fee and applicable late penalties imposed pursuant to this Chapter within (120) days of
the date that notice of the assessment of the service fee is mailed to the alarm user. The Public
Safety Director may also suspend any alarm permit if the Director determines that the alarm
system in question has a history of unreliability, which unreliability shall be presumed upon the
occurrence of ten false alarms in any calendar year. A suspension for unreliability may be lifted
upon a showing that the conditions which caused the false alarms have been corrected. An
alarm user whose alarm permit is suspended from the City shall pay a reinstatement fee of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) to the City before such permit shall be reinstated. Notwithstanding the
above, a fire alarm permit shall not be suspended if such an alarm is required by the building
code or any statute, law, or other ordinance.
E. Any person who uses, maintains, operates or is in control of any operational alarm system in the
City while the alarm permit for such alarm system is suspended shall be guilty of a Class C
Misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 3-11, Amended 02/15/2011)
9.44.070 Right To Hearing And Appeal
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=9_PUBLIC_PEACE_MORALS_AND_WELFARE 18/19
A. An alarm user shall have the right to request a hearing to contest the imposition of any penalty
under this Article including the imposition of any fee, suspension of any permit, or the
determination of a false alarm. A written request for a hearing must be filed by the alarm user
with the Department of Public Safety within ten (10) business days of the date of mailing of the
notice of imposition of the penalty. Notice of the imposition of a penalty shall be considered
satisfied if sent by regular mail to the alarm user's address listed in the alarm user's alarm
information card. The request for a hearing shall include the alarm user's name, address,
telephone number, and a statement of the reasons for disputing the imposition of the penalty. A
timely request for a hearing shall stay the imposition of any penalty until the hearing is decided.
The City's determination of a false alarm, the imposition of an administrative service fee, or
suspension of a permit shall be considered final if the alarm user fails to request a hearing within
the time period set forth above.
B. The alarm coordinator shall conduct hearings requested by alarm users and shall affirm, modify,
or vacate the imposition of the penalty after considering all of the evidence presented. An alarm
shall be presumed to be a false alarm unless the alarm user can establish the existence of an
emergency or other hazard at the time of the alarm by a preponderance of the evidence. The
burden of providing the existence of an emergency shall be upon the alarm user. Hearings shall
be conducted informally. Formal rules of evidence and court procedure shall not apply. Because
the hearings are administrative in nature, hearsay is admissible, but evidence must have some
probative weight and reliability to be admitted.
C. An alarm user may appeal the decision of the alarm coordinator to the City Council by filing a
written request for a hearing with the City Recorder within ten (10) business days of the decision
rendered in the initial hearing. If no request for an appeal hearing is made within the ten day
period, the decision rendered in the initial hearing shall be considered final. The appeal hearing
shall be in a public meeting. The City Council shall affirm, reserve, or modify the decision
rendered in the initial hearing and the action taken in the appeal hearing shall be final.
9.44.080 Deliberate False Alarms
No person shall cause any alarm to be transmitted to the Department of Public Safety knowing the same
to be false or without basis in fact. Central stations shall not request emergency personnel to respond to
alarm scenes when monitoring equipment indicates an alarm system malfunction. A first violation of this
section shall be a Class C Misdemeanor. Any violation of this section which occurs within three years of
a prior conviction of this section shall be a Class B Misdemeanor.
9.44.090 Local Alarm System-Cutoff Required
Alarm systems which use a local audible or visual alarm device to attract the attention of the public shall
be equipped with an automatic cutoff-device which will terminate the audible or visual alarm within thirty
minutes. However, this section shall not apply to fire alarms, strobe lights, and fire gongs.
9.44.100 Public Safety Call Records
Alarm businesses which request the response of emergency personnel to alarm signals shall maintain a
record of all alarms reported to the Department of Public Safety, stating the time, date and location of
the alarm and the name, address and phone number of the alarm user from which the alarm originated.
The records shall indicate the cause of the alarm, if known. This record shall be current and shall be
made available to the Director of Public Safety or his/her designated representative at any time during
normal business hours.
9.44.110 Administration And Enforcement
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=9_PUBLIC_PEACE_MORALS_AND_WELFARE 19/19
The Director of Public Safety shall have power to make such reasonable rules and regulations as may,
in the discretion of the Director of Public Safety, be deemed necessary to implement the provision of this
chapter.
9.44.120 Operational Defects To Be Remedied
A. The sensory mechanisms used in connection with alarm systems shall be adjusted to suppress
false alarms so that the device will not be actuated by impulses due to transient pressure
changes in water pipes, short flashes of light, wind noises such as the rattling or vibrating of
doors or windows, vehicular noise adjacent to the installation, radio frequency energy, nonintrusive
motion or other forces unrelated to genuine alarms.
B. All components of an alarm system must be maintained in good repair by the alarm user so as to
assure reliability of operation.
9.44.130 Automatic Dialing And Prerecorded Message Alarm Systems Unlawful
It is unlawful to maintain, operate, connect or allow to be maintained, operated or connected, any alarm
system or automatic dialing device which automatically dials the Department of Public Safety and then
relays any prerecorded message indicating the existence of an emergency situation.
9.44.140 City Liability Limitations
Nothing in this Article shall create or be construed to create a duty upon the Department of Public Safety
or the City to respond to any alarm whether or not the alarm is false. An alarm, like any other request for
service from the Department of Public Safety, may be responded to within the resources of the
Department of Public Safety in light of other responses required by the Department of Public Safety at
the time of the alarm.
9.44.150 Violation Penalty
Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter, the failure of any person to comply with the requirements of
this Chapter shall constitute a Class C Misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 03-10, Enacted 02/16/2010)
9.48 Beer Regulations
9.48.010 Restrictions On The Sale, Possession, And Consumption Of Beer
9.48.010 Restrictions On The Sale, Possession, And Consumption Of Beer
A. It is unlawful for any person to sell beer, light beer, malt liquor, malted beverage, or other
alcoholic beverages through a drive up window.
B. It is unlawful for any person to possess or consume beer in any public building, public park or
public stadium. Public building, park and stadium shall have the meanings defined in §9.04.030.
C. It is a Class B Misdemeanor to violate any provision of this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 18-13, Enacted 10/01/2013)
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=10_TRAFFIC_AND_PARKING 1/7
10 TRAFFIC AND PARKING
10.04 Traffic And Motor Vehicle Regulations
10.08 Careful Driving
10.12 Parking And Vehicle Impoundment
10.16 Parking Regulations
10.04 Traffic And Motor Vehicle Regulations
10.04.010 Adoption Of Selected Utah State Traffic Laws
10.04.015 Street Legal All-Terrain Vehicles
10.04.020 Citation
10.04.030 Violation - Penalties
10.04.010 Adoption Of Selected Utah State Traffic Laws
A. Titles 41 and 53 of Utah Code Annotated, as they may from time to time be amended, are
adopted by reference and are made a part of the ordinances of Spanish Fork City as if fully set
forth in the body of the municipal code and shall take effect and be controlling within the limits of
the city; provided, however, that this chapter is not intended to nor does it purport to grant to the
city any powers or jurisdiction not specifically or by implication granted by law. Any section
included within Titles 41 and 53 of the Utah Code dealing with administration by state agencies
or other matters not applicable to traffic and motor vehicle control and regulation are hereby
excluded from the said ordinances of the city.
B. All ordinances of Spanish Fork City or statutes of the State of Utah relating to foot or vehicular
traffic as set forth in paragraph A shall be applicable and enforceable upon public school property
of the Nebo School District located within Spanish Fork City.
1. For purposes of subparagraph B, any reference to "highway", "street", "public right of
way", "roadway", "public roadway", or other similar term used to designate thorough fares
for use by motor vehicles shall include and refer to school parking lots, rights of way,
roads, lanes, or other areas designated for vehicular use on school property.
(Ord. No. 07-93, Amended 08/04/1993)
(Ord. No. 09-93, Amended 11/03/1993)
10.04.015 Street Legal All-Terrain Vehicles
(Ord. No. 15-09, Enacted 08/18/2009)
(Ord. No. 12-14, Repealed 06/03/2014)
10.04.020 Citation
Where a citation or complaint is issued, it shall be sufficient to use the number of the Utah Code followed
by "the ordinances of Spanish Fork City" to show the section of the ordinance of the city which has been
violated.
10.04.030 Violation - Penalties
Any person violating, causing or permitting a violation of any provision of this chapter or the provisions
adopted or incorporated by reference is guilty of an infraction unless, within the provisions of the chapter
or provisions adopted or incorporated by reference, a greater or lesser penalty is specifically provided.
(Ord. No. 04-93, Amended 04/07/1993)
(Ord. No. 13-16, Amended 08/16/2016)
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=10_TRAFFIC_AND_PARKING 2/7
10.08 Careful Driving
10.08.010 Improper Lookout
10.08.020 Private Drives And Parking Lots
10.08.010 Improper Lookout
It is a class C misdemeanor for any person to drive any vehicle on the streets of the city without keeping
a reasonable and proper lookout for other traffic, objects, fixtures or property thereon or adjacent
thereto.
10.08.020 Private Drives And Parking Lots
It is a class C misdemeanor for any person to drive non stop through or across any private driveway or
parking lot, or to block the access or use of any private driveway or parking lot by those entitled to the
access or use thereof.
10.12 Parking And Vehicle Impoundment
10.12.010 Illegally Parked Vehicles
10.12.020 Notice To Owner
10.12.030 Procedure For Owner To Claim Vehicle
10.12.040 Unclaimed Vehicles - Advertisement And Auction
10.12.050 Owner May Receive Proceeds Of Sale - Conditions
10.12.060 Record Of Impoundment And Disposal Of All Vehicles
10.12.070 Not To Prevent Criminal Prosecution
10.12.080 Improperly Registered Vehicles
10.12.090 Parking Of Cars On Vacant Lots
10.12.100 Snow Removal From Streets (Repealed)
10.12.110 Angle Parking
10.12.120 Violations
10.12.010 Illegally Parked Vehicles
A. Towing and impoundment. The following vehicles, together with or in addition to any other
vehicles parked in violation of any provision of this title or the laws of the state, are declared to be
nuisances:
1. Any unattended vehicle stopped, standing or parked in violation of any of the provisions of
this title;
2. A vehicle found upon the streets or alleys of the city with faulty or defective equipment;
3. A vehicle left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct or at any subway where such vehicle
constitutes an obstruction to traffic;
4. Any vehicle upon a street so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the
person in charge of the vehicle is by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an
extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal;
5. Any vehicle left unattended upon a street or alley and so parked illegally as to constitute a
definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic;
6. Any vehicle continuously parked upon any public street or right of way for seventy two
(72) hours.
7. Any vehicle the driver of which has been taken into custody by the police department
under such circumstances as would leave the vehicle unattended in a street, alley or
restricted parking area;
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=10_TRAFFIC_AND_PARKING 3/7
8. Any vehicle found being driven on the streets not in a proper condition to be driven;
9. Any vehicle found so parked as to constitute a fire hazard or an obstruction to fire fighting
apparatus.
B. The same may be summarily abated by removing any vehicle by or under the directions or at the
request of a police officer to a place of storage by means of towing or otherwise.
C. It shall be illegal for any camp trailer, mobile home, semi trailer, utility trailer, or any other type
trailer which is not capable of self-propulsion, but which in some manner must be towed or pulled
to remain upon any public street or right of way for a period of time in excess of twenty four (24)
hours.
(Ord. No. 04 93, Amended 04/07/1993)
10.12.020 Notice To Owner
As soon as is reasonable under the circumstances, a written notice that the vehicle has been impounded
shall be mailed to the owner of the vehicle and any recorded lien holder thereof at their last known
address as shown by the records of the Motor Vehicle Division or the Utah State Tax Commission. If the
license plates on the vehicle are from another state, written notice shall be mailed to the department of
motor vehicles in that state, requesting the department of motor vehicles in that state to notify the
registered owner of that vehicle that the same has been impounded by the police department and that
the same shall be sold at public auction as is provided by this chapter, if not claimed by the owner or his
or her proper representative.
10.12.030 Procedure For Owner To Claim Vehicle
Before the owner or his or her agent shall be permitted to remove a vehicle which has been impounded
he or she shall;
A. Furnish satisfactory evidence to the police department of his or her identity and his or her
ownership of the vehicle;
B. Request and obtain from the police department a written order to the place of storage in which
the vehicle is impounded, authorizing the release of the vehicle to the owner or his or her agent
upon the payment to the place of storage of towing and storage charges reasonably incurred in
the towing and storage of the vehicle from the date of said impounding to the time of presenting
the order of release from the police department therefore;
C. Sign a written receipt for the vehicle and deliver the same to the place of storage upon receiving
the impounded vehicle.
10.12.040 Unclaimed Vehicles - Advertisement And Auction
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=10_TRAFFIC_AND_PARKING 4/7
If, at the expiration of fifteen (15) days after mailing the notice provided for in '10.12.020 such vehicle is
not redeemed by the owner or his/her proper representative, the chief of police or his/her authorized
agent shall proceed to sell the same at public auction to the highest bidder after first giving at least ten
(10) days’ notice of sale by publishing the notice at least once in a newspaper published in the city
stating the time and place of the sale. The notice shall also describe the vehicle to be sold with
reasonable certainty and shall state to whom, if anyone, the records of the office of the Motor Vehicle
Division or the State Tax Commission show the same to belong, and if the name of the owner or
recorded lien holder, if any is known, the police department shall send the owner or recorded lien holder
a copy of the notice as published immediately after the publication of the same, which notice shall be
mailed to their address as shown on the records of the Motor Vehicle Division or the Utah State Tax
Commission. A copy of this notice as published shall immediately, after publication, be mailed to the
owner of the place of storage. The money received by the chief of police or his/her authorized agent
from the sale of any vehicle shall be applied first to the actual cost of towing and storage of the
impounded vehicle, then to pay the cost of advertising the notice of sale, and the balance, if any, shall
then be paid into the city treasury to be used as hereinafter provided.
10.12.050 Owner May Receive Proceeds Of Sale - Conditions
At any time within one (1) year from and after the date of sale, the former owner of the vehicle sold
appears and makes a claim, and upon application to the city council and upon presentation of
satisfactory proof that he/she was the owner of the vehicle sold, shall be paid the proceeds of the sale
less the necessary expenses thereof and less the towing, impounding, and storage charges provided for
in '10.12.010. and '10.12.030.
10.12.060 Record Of Impoundment And Disposal Of All Vehicles
The police department shall keep a record of all vehicles impounded by manufacturer's name or make,
body type, motor and license number, the names and addresses of all persons claiming the same and
such other descriptive matter as may identify the vehicles, the nature and circumstances of the
impounding thereof, and the violation on account of which the vehicles were impounded, the date of the
impounding and the name and address of any person to whom any vehicle is released.
10.12.070 Not To Prevent Criminal Prosecution
The impoundment of a vehicle shall not prevent or preclude the institution and prosecution of criminal
proceedings against the owner or operator of the impounded vehicle.
10.12.080 Improperly Registered Vehicles
The police department may immediately impound in a proper place of storage all vehicles found that are
improperly registered, stolen or bear defaced motor numbers, and shall within ninety six (96) hours
thereafter notify in writing the motor Vehicle Division or the Utah State Tax Commission of the
impounding, setting forth in the notice the date found, the address where found, the make, registration
number and date and place where stored.
10.12.090 Parking Of Cars On Vacant Lots
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=10_TRAFFIC_AND_PARKING 5/7
It shall be an infraction for the owner of a motor vehicle, camper, trailer, boat, or other type of vehicle to
park it or allow it to be parked on a vacant lot or parking lot owned by another person for the purpose of
displaying it for sale, unless the owner or lessee of the property on which it is parked has city business
license to engage in the business of selling motor vehicles, campers, trailers, boars, or other vehicles at
that location. It shall also be a class C misdemeanor for the owner or lessee of such property to allow
another person to park a motor vehicle, camper, trailer, boat or other vehicle on the property for the
purpose of displaying it for sale unless such owner or lessee has a city business license to engage in the
business of selling such merchandise at that location.
(Ord. No. 13-16, Amended 08/16/2016)
10.12.100 Snow Removal From Streets (Repealed)
(Ord. No. 09 03, All of 10.12.100 Repealed, 12/02/2003)
10.12.110 Angle Parking
Angle parking is allowed in Spanish Fork City only where Spanish Fork City has striped the street to
indicate angle parking is allowed. Cars may be allowed to park diagonally to the curb within the parking
areas so striped. In all other locations on public streets, the parking shall be parallel.
(Ord. No. 19-97, Enacted 10/21/1997)
10.12.120 Violations
A person who violates any provision of this Chapter is subject to receiving an administrative notice of
violation and handling the matter administratively, if they so desire. If an alleged violator wants to
challenge the violation or otherwise does not want to resolve the matter administratively they shall
receive a citation to court. Violations referred to court are infractions.
(Ord. No. 05-15, Amended 02/03/2015)
10.16 Parking Regulations
10.16.010 Parking Prohibited
10.16.020 Parking Of Trucks
10.16.030 Wrecked Or Disabled Vehicles
10.16.040 Snow Removal
10.16.050 Violations
10.16.010 Parking Prohibited
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle on either side of Main Street south of I-15
or north of the Spanish Fork River between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. It shall also be
unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on either side of the street between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 5:00 a.m. on Center Street between Main Street and 100 East, on 100 East between
Center Street and 100 South, and on 100 South between 100 East and Main Street.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle on either side of Main Street, between 5:00
a.m. and 11:00 p.m., south of I-15 and north of the Spanish Fork River for a period of time longer
than three consecutive hours.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle on either side of Kirby Lane, or Kirby Court
for a period of time longer than two consecutive hours.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=10_TRAFFIC_AND_PARKING 6/7
D. “Vehicle” is defined to include, but not necessarily be limited to, automobiles, trucks, trailers,
mobile homes, travel trailers, boats, motorcycles, buses, snowmobiles, and other objects used or
capable of being used for transportation purposes whether for the transport of humans, animals
or freight of any kind.
(Ord. No. 02-03, Amended 02/04/2003)
(Ord. No. 03-03, Amended 04/01/2003)
(Ord. No. 10-06, Amended 09/01/2006)
(Ord. No. 07-14, Amended 05/06/2014)
(Ord. No. 19-18, Amended 10/02/2018)
10.16.020 Parking Of Trucks
A. No truck or truck trailer with rated capacity of 2 1/2 tons or more, or licensed for more than
24,000 pounds gross, shall be allowed to be parked on the public streets in residential districts
for a period of time in excess of two (2) hours, except while actually loading or unloading
merchandise. In no event, shall it remain parked for longer than eight (8) hours.
B. Except as set forth in subparagraph A, no truck with a rated capacity of 2 1/2 tons or more, or
licensed for more than 24,000 pounds gross weight shall be parked on any public street closer
than thirty (30) feet to the entrance or exit or intersection with any private driveway, private street,
alley, or public street.
C. For purposes of this section, a truck shall be deemed parked, even though the motor is running,
if the vehicle is left standing for any period in excess of three (3) minutes when the same is not
attended by a driver lawfully authorized to drive the said vehicle (except when loading or
unloading as provided in paragraph A above).
D. In addition to any other remedies available under this section, any truck or truck trailers parked
illegally under this section, which has had a previous violation, may be impounded and towed.
The, requirements of chapter 10.12 shall be applicable to any such truck which is impounded.
(Ord. No. 09-93, Enacted 11/03/1994)
(Ord. No. 06-99, Enacted [D], 05/04/1999)
10.16.030 Wrecked Or Disabled Vehicles
A. As used in this section, wrecked or disabled vehicle means any motor vehicle, off-road vehicle,
trailer, or other mode of transportation use for travel on streets or highways or for recreational
pursuits "off-road", which cannot be started or operated without additional parts or additional
assembly.
B. No more than one wrecked or disabled vehicle may be stored on any premises in Spanish Fork
City, with the exception of a business properly licensed within a commercial or industrial zone
which stores such vehicles as a part of its business. The one vehicle which is allowed to be
stored must be screened from public view by means of a solid visual barrier fence, opaque
covering, or garage or similar structure.
C. In addition to any criminal or administrative penalties, the City retains the right to dispose of such
vehicles and charge the costs thereof against the owner of the property where the vehicle was
improperly stored, as well as against the vehicle owner. It will be an infraction.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=10_TRAFFIC_AND_PARKING 7/7
(Ord. No. 03-98, Enacted 04/07/1998)
(Ord. No. 05-15, Amended 02/03/2015)
(Ord. No. 13-16, Amended 08/16/2016)
10.16.040 Snow Removal
Parking is prohibited on city public streets during snow removal operations. All vehicles are to be
removed from city public streets during snow storms and for up to 48 hours thereafter, or until snow
plowing and snow removal efforts are completed, as determined by the Public Works Department,
whichever is sooner. During snow storms shall mean at the point in time that snow begins to accumulate
on the streets, rather than melt. The Mayor has the authority to extend the 48 hours in the event of an
unusually large storm which takes City crews more than 48 hours to clear the streets of snow. Notice of
the extension is to be posted on the City web page, SFCN, and through mass communication
messages.
10.16.050 Violations
The registered owner(s) of a vehicle which is in violation of this Chapter is subject to receiving an
administrative notice of violation and handling the matter administratively, if they so desire. If the
registered owner wants to challenge the violation or otherwise does not want to resolve the matter
administratively, they shall receive a citation to court. Parking violations referred to court are infractions.
The registered owner(s) is responsible for a vehicle in violation of this Chapter, whether or not they were
driving the vehicle, and whether or not they were responsible for where the vehicle was parked.
Administrative fees shall be established by the Council in the City’s annual budget, or by resolution.
(Ord. No. 05-15, Amended 02/03/2015)
(Ord. No. 01-16, Created 02/16/2016)
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=12_STREETS_AND_SIDEWALKS 1/6
12 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
12.04 Excavation, Improvements And Alterations
12.08 Shade Trees
12.12 Public Parades And Other Special Events
12.04 Excavation, Improvements And Alterations
12.04.010 Permit Required
12.04.020 Barricades And Lights Required
12.04.030 Obstruction Of Sidewalks Or Streets
12.04.040 Depositing Material On Streets And Sidewalks Prohibited
12.04.050 Sidewalk Obstruction
12.04.055 Prohibited Activities On Sidewalks
12.04.060 Violation - Penalty
12.04.010 Permit Required
A. No person, firm, partnership, corporation, or entity of any kind shall open up, break, dig,
excavate, construct, reconstruct, repair, alter a grade in or upon any public street, sidewalk, curb,
curbcut, driveway, or gutter for any purpose or in any manner commence any construction in or
upon any public street or sidewalk without first procuring from the city engineer a permit for the
specific construction or other work to be undertaken.
B. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, or entity of any kind desiring to obtain a permit to
construction, reconstruct, repair, alter, or grade any sidewalk, curb, curb cut, driveway, gutter, or
street on the public streets of this city shall meet the following requirements in order to obtain
said permit, provided, however, that city crews, engaged in any of the above activities while
employed by the city, shall be exempt from the permit required herein.
1. Provide the name and address of the party obtaining the permit;
2. Provide the name and address of the party doing the work;
3. Provide the location of the work area;
4. Attach a plan showing the details of the proposed alteration;
5. Provide the estimated cost of the alteration;
6. Provide a bond in an amount to be set by the city engineer based upon the extensiveness
of the project and the estimated cost of the project;
7. Have the party performing the work prequalify, using the forms provided by the city
engineer as they may from time to time be changed;
8. Pay a filing fee for the permit to cover the actual expenses incurred by the city in
inspecting the work and insuring compliance with the permit, the plans, and any
applicable laws, such as the building code, fire code, etc, including compliance with
standards to be established by the city engineer in order to insure safe and quality
construction.
9. To provide proof of insurance satisfactory to the City consistent with coverages and
amounts required by the City Construction and Development Standards. Said insurance
shall also include a certificate which names the City as an additional insured.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=12_STREETS_AND_SIDEWALKS 2/6
C. It is unlawful for any person having made an excavation in any street or sidewalk, whether by
permit or otherwise, to fail, neglect or refuse for a period of five days after notice, to restore or
replace said street or sidewalk to its normal condition. The replacement of any street or sidewalk
must be made to the specification of the city as determined by the city engineer or other
authorized person.
(Ord. No. 17-96, Amended, 12/04/1996)
12.04.020 Barricades And Lights Required
It is unlawful for any person, by or for whom any excavation, construction, reconstruction, repair, or
alteration made in a public street or sidewalk, to fail to cause a barricade, rail or other sufficient fence to
be placed so as to enclose such excavation, construction, reconstruction, repair, or alteration made in a
public street or sidewalk, together with the dirt, gravel or other material thrown therefrom, and to
maintain such barricade during the whole time for which such excavation, construction, reconstruction,
repair, or alteration is made in a public street or sidewalk, continues; and it is unlawful for any person to
fail to have lighted lanterns or some other proper and sufficient lights fixed to parts of such barricade, or
in some other proper manner over or near the excavation, construction, reconstruction, repair, or
alteration is made in a public street or sidewalk, and over and near the dirt, gravel or other material
taken therefrom, and so kept from the beginning of twilight through the whole of every night during all
time such excavation, construction, reconstruction, repair, or alteration is made in a public street or
sidewalk, exists. It is unlawful for any person maliciously or wantonly and without legal cause, to
extinguish, remove or diminish said lights or to tear down or remove any rail, fence or barricade fixed in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
12.04.030 Obstruction Of Sidewalks Or Streets
A. Every person who obstructs any sidewalk or street within the limits of this City, in any manner, so
as to obstruct the free travel thereon is guilty of a Class C Misdemeanor. Any person or
organization desirous of barricading or otherwise obstructing a street or sidewalk for such
purposes as sidewalk sales, celebrations, carnivals, and such other activities as may be
approved by City Council, may obtain a permit from the chief of police to so obstruct the sidewalk
and/or street for a specified period of time in order to engage in the specified activity. Any such
person or organization so obtaining a permit shall be liable to the City for any injury to person or
property which may occur as a result of the obstruction and shall hold the city harmless from any
such liability. The permit required by this section shall be in addition to any permit required by the
State of Utah or any other governmental entity.
B. A person is guilty of a Class C Misdemeanor if he or she excavates or digs in or constructs any
object or structure, places or causes to be placed any sign, billboard, or display, or any object of
any kind or character whatever in, over, or across any property belonging to the city including but
not limited to the following; rights-of-way, utility poles, sidewalks, streets, roads, sewers, ditches,
culverts, gutters, pipelines, and conduit; provided that any such conduct shall not be unlawful if
such a person obtains prior written permission for his or her acts from the City Council.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=12_STREETS_AND_SIDEWALKS 3/6
C. Any sign, billboard, display, or other object prohibited in subparagraph (B) which has been
placed without prior written permission from the City, may be removed by the City, under the
direction of the public works director, City planner, or their designee(s), without prior notice. Any
cost incurred by the City may be assessed against the person, corporation, or other entity
responsible for the improper placement. Any legal action required to collect those costs will also
obligate the responsible party for attorney's fees. Any person, company, or other entity owning a
sign billboard, display, or other object removed by the City may have it returned by paying a civil
fee in the amount of up to $25.00 per sign, based upon the value of the sign, at the discretion of
the enforcement officer. If no request for return is made within fourteen (14) days of removal, the
City may forfeit or otherwise dispose of the sign(s).
(Ord. No. 08-06, Enacted, 07/18/06)
12.04.040 Depositing Material On Streets And Sidewalks Prohibited
A. It is unlawful for any person to throw, cast, put into, drop, leave, or track in or onto any street,
gutter, sidewalk, storm drain, or public place any construction materials, stones, gravel, sand,
coal, dirt, mud, manure, garbage, debris, leaves, lawn or hedge clippings, or rubbish of any kind.
B. Any persons violating subsection (A) shall be civilly liable for the cost of cleaning the subject
street, gutter, sidewalk, storm drain, or public place. Criminal proceedings under subsection (A)
shall not be a condition precedent to a civil claim under this subsection (B). Spanish Fork City
may bring a claim under this subsection for reimbursement of any and all costs incurred in
cleaning the subject property.
C. For any new construction, the contractor shall be responsible for the acts of his/her
subcontractors, suppliers, independent contractors, employees, or other person on the site or
near the premises at the bidding or invitation of the contractor who violates any provision of
subparagraph (A). Such contractor shall not be criminally liable, but shall be civilly liable and
shall be subject to a work stoppage imposed by the Spanish Fork City building inspector until
such conditions are rectified. In the event of an immediate safety concern, the city may proceed
to clean up the debris or other items without notice, and bill the same to the contractor. The cost
may be deducted from any bond or deposit posted by the contractor.
D. A person who violates this Section is subject to receiving an administrative notice of violation and
handling the matter administratively, if they so desire. If an alleged violator wants to challenge
the violation or otherwise does not want to resolve the matter administratively they shall receive a
citation to court. Violations referred to court are infractions.
(Ord. No. 11-95, Enacted, 06/07/1995);
(Ord. No. 11-98, Amended (C), 07/21/1998)
(Ord. No. 12-16, Created (D), 08/16/2016)
12.04.050 Sidewalk Obstruction
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit any construction equipment, construction
materials, or other type of stone, gravel, coal, dirt, mud, manure, garbage, debris, leaves, lawn or
hedge clippings, or rubbish of any kind or of a similar nature upon the sidewalks within the city.
B. During construction, the Spanish Fork City building inspector may authorize the bridging of
sidewalk and curb and gutter with dirt, sand, or other material for a period not to exceed twenty
one (21) days in order to transport heavy materials onto the construction site without breaking or
cracking the sidewalk or curb and gutter. The building inspector shall have the absolute
discretion to make such authorization and to establish the time periods therefore, not to exceed
twenty one (21) days.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=12_STREETS_AND_SIDEWALKS 4/6
(Ord. No. 11-95, Enacted, 06/07/1995)
12.04.055 Prohibited Activities On Sidewalks
It is unlawful to use roller blades, skates, skateboards, or similar devices on the public sidewalks in, and
adjacent to, abutting, or in front of public parks, public facilities, recreational facilities, the C-2 zone
fronting Main Street between 100 South and 400 North, and any SC-1 zone.
(Ord. No. 02-96, Enacted, 02/07/1996)
12.04.060 Violation - Penalty
A. A person is guilty of a Class C Misdemeanor if, by act of commission or omission, he or she
violates any provision of this chapter. Each day of a continuing violation shall be considered a
separate violation.
B. A person violating any provision of this chapter shall receive a minimum mandatory fine of not
less than $250.00 per violation.
C. In addition to any police officer, the City Public Works Director or, up to five of his/her designees
are authorized to issue citations for any violation of this chapter, but not for violation of any other
chapter.
(Ord. No. 11-95, Renumbered, 12.04.030, 06/07/1995)
(Ord No. 11-98, Amended, 07/21/1998)
12.08 Shade Trees
12.08.010 Permitted Trees In Parkstrips
12.08.020 Distance Restrictions
12.08.030 Shade Tree Commission
12.08.040 Violations
12.08.010 Permitted Trees In Parkstrips
The following trees are permitted in the parkstrips:
A. Columnar Norway Maple (Acer Platanoides >Columnare'),
Japanese Zelkova (Zelkova Serrata),
Norway Maple (Acer Platanoides),
Red Maple (Acer Rubrum),
Bur Oak (Quercus Macrocarpa),
Columnar English Oak (Celtis Occidentalis),
Kentucky Coffee Tree (Cymnocladus Diocius),
Red Oak (Quercus Rubra),
Sycamore Maple (Acer Pseudoplatanus),
Thornless Honey Locust (Glenditsia Triacanthos Inermis),
Crimson King Maple (Acer Platanoides >Crimson King'),
Hedge Maple (Acer Campestre),
Little Leaf Linden (Tilia Cordata),
Redmond Linden (Tila Euchlora >Redmond'),
Bradford Pear (Pyrus Callyerana >Bradford'),
Golden Rain Tree (Koelreuteria Paniculata),
Japanese Pagoda Tree (Sophora Japonica),
Marshall Seedless Ash (Fraxinus Pennsylvanica Lanceolata >Marshall Seddless'),
Bechtel Crabapple (Malus Ioensis >Klehms Improved'),
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=12_STREETS_AND_SIDEWALKS 5/6
Eastern Redbud (Cercis Canadensis),
Flowering Plum (Prunus Cerasifera),
Kwansan Cherry (Prunus Serrulata),
Washington Hawthorn (Crataegus Phaenopyrum).
B. All other trees, except those identified in paragraph A, are prohibited in the parkstrip.
(Ord. No. 16-98, Enacted, 12/01/1998)
12.08.020 Distance Restrictions
A. No tree may be planted within thirty feet of intersecting sidewalk corners.
B. No tree may be planted within ten feet of any water meter, electric meter, junction box,
transformer, other electrical facility, or utility pole.
C. Smaller trees should be planted in any area where the potential exists that limbs may grow into
power or phone lines. Trees which interfere with public utilities will be trimmed at the owner's
expense.
(Ord. No. 16-98, Enacted, 12/01/1998)
12.08.030 Shade Tree Commission
(Ord. No. 16-98, Enacted, 12/01/1998)
(Ord. 05-07, Repealed 12.08.030, February 20, 2007)
12.08.040 Violations
Any person violating '12.08.010 or 12.08.020 of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class C Misdemeanor.
Removal of the offending tree shall be grounds for dismissal of any charges.
(Ord. No. 16-98, Enacted, 12/01/1998)
12.12 Public Parades And Other Special Events
12.12.010 Parade And Special Event Regulations
12.12.020 Parking On Parade Or Special Event Route
12.12.030 Exceptions
12.12.040 Violations
12.12.010 Parade And Special Event Regulations
It shall be unlawful to for any person to claim, reserve, or occupy, or attempt to claim, reserve, or
occupy, either in person or by the placement of ropes, tents, chairs, sleeping bags, blankets, or other
devices or barriers, any public property as position for observing a public parade before 6:00 p.m. on the
day prior to the Fiesta Days Mammoth Parade.
This section shall not allow any person to occupy a position on a public street or right-of-way, to obstruct
a public sidewalk or to occupy any unsafe position or any position which may cause damage to public or
private property.
(Ord. No. 03-00, Enacted, 05/02/2000)
12.12.020 Parking On Parade Or Special Event Route
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=12_STREETS_AND_SIDEWALKS 6/6
After 11:00 p.m. on the day preceding the Fiesta Days Mammoth Parade and continuing until the
conclusion of the parade, it shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle or trailer on the public streets which
will be used as the parade route. Motor vehicles or trailers parked in violation of this section shall be
considered a public nuisance and may be immediately towed from the public street.
(Ord. No. 03-00, Enacted, 05/02/2000)
12.12.030 Exceptions
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent Spanish Fork City, Parade or Special Event Committees or
Organizations, or persons otherwise authorized from reserving places on public property for observation
of said parade, or from erecting and controlling seating on public property for the observation of said
parade. Any such special seating may be authorized only by a permit issued by the City.
(Ord. No. 03-00, Enacted, 05/02/2000)
12.12.040 Violations
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a Class C Misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 03-00, Enacted, 05/02/2000)
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 1/80
13 UTILITIES
13.04 General Utility Regulations
13.08 Electric Utility
13.12 Solid Waste Utility
13.16 Stormwater Utility
13.20 Telecommunications Utility
13.24 Wastewater Utility
13.28 Water Utility
13.04 General Utility Regulations
13.04.010 Definitions
13.04.020 General
13.04.030 Utility Service
13.04.040 Extension Of Utility Systems
13.04.050 Protection And Access To City Utilities
13.04.010 Definitions
For the purpose of this Title, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the
meanings given herein:
A. "As-built(s)". Drawings depicting infrastructure as actually constructed. These drawings are
typically surveyed and mapped by the City. They are integrated into the overall City utility maps.
B. "City". Spanish Fork City.
C. "City Council". The governing body of Spanish Fork City.
D. "City Engineer". The City Engineer for Spanish Fork City or his/her authorized representative.
E. "Construction Standards". The Construction Standards formally adopted by Spanish Fork City.
F. "Easement". A non-possessory interest in real property acquired by a person, corporation,
municipality, or other legal entity that entitles the holder the right to use of the owner’s land in the
manner specified in the easement documents.
G. "Person". A Person is any individual, corporation, partnership, firm, association, company, trust,
estate, any other legal entity or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns, or body politic
organized or existing under the laws of this or any other state or country, including any agency of
the State of Utah and the United States government. The masculine gender shall include the
feminine and the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context.
H. "Property Owner". The owner of record of real property.
13.04.020 General
The City provides the following utility services to the residents of the City:
A. Electricity;
B. Solid Waste disposal;
C. Stormwater drainage;
D. Telecommunications, including cable television, internet, and telephone, where possible;
E. Wastewater collection and treatment;
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 2/80
F. Water including drinking water and pressurized irrigation where possible.
The City will maintain these utilities in accordance with accepted utility practices in order to minimize
outages and backups and protect Persons and property from dangerous conditions, and provide a safe
working environment for its employees. The City Manager is responsible to establish policies and
procedures necessary for the management, control, and proper maintenance of the City utility systems.
A. Ownership of Utility Systems. All utility system components related to source development,
distribution, or transmission shall be the property of the City.
B. Ownership of Utility Services. Metered services up to and including the meter shall be the
property of the City. Non-metered services up to the property line shall be the property of the
City.
C. Severability. If any provision of this Title is held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any
court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect other sections, provisions, clauses,
or applications which can be implemented without the invalid provision, clause, or application. To
this end, the provisions of this Title are declared to be severable.
D. As-builts. Developers shall pay a fee to the City for the City to survey and map As-builts.
E. Criminal Violation. Unless otherwise specifically provided in this Title, every person who
violates any provision of this Title is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. Each day that a violation of
any provision of this Title continues constitutes a separate and distinct offense.
F. Civil Penalty. In addition to any criminal penalties, offenders shall be assessed a civil fee
established by the City Council in a resolution or in the budget. In addition and offender is liable
for any damages caused, including attorney’s fees, expert witness fees, and any other costs
attributable to the violation.
13.04.030 Utility Service
Every person desiring to obtain utility services from the City shall contract therefore, in writing, upon
forms furnished by the City.
A. Rates. The rates for City utility services shall be adopted by the City Council in a resolution or in
the budget. The City Manager is responsible to, establish policies and procedures for levying,
billing, guaranteeing, and collecting charges for utility services.
B. Meters. Except as otherwise expressly permitted by this Title, all structures, dwelling units, and
establishments using metered utilities from City systems must have such number and type of
meters connected to the utility systems as are necessary, in the judgment of the City Engineer, to
adequately measure use to the respective users.
Meters will be furnished by the City at the expense of the applicant, developer, or user, who shall
be required to pay for the number of meters to be installed on the premises to cover the cost of
the meters and their installation.
C. Statements. The City shall provide to each customer receiving utility services a statement
detailing the amount of utility service charges assessed them once each month or at such other
regular interval as set forth by policy. Said statement shall separately specify the amount of the
bill for the utility services used, the place of payment, and the due date.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 3/80
D. Delinquency and Loss of Utility Service. If any person fails to pay the utility charges within
thirty days of the date due, the City shall have the authority to direct that some or all utility
services to the premises involved be discontinued.
In addition to terminating utility service, the City is authorized and empowered to enforce the
payment of all delinquent utility service charges by an action at law or by referral to a collection
agency. In such event, the city shall be entitled to recover its costs and attorney fees.
E. Reinstatement of Utility Service. Before utility service for discontinued services shall again be
provided, all delinquent charges must have been paid to the City, together with such extra charge
for turning the utilities on and off as the City Council may have established in the annual budget.
It is unlawful for any person, after utility service has been turned off at his/her premises for
nonpayment of utility charges or other violation of the rules and regulations pertaining to the
utility service, to turn on or allow the services to be turned on or used without permission from the
City.
F. Unauthorized Use. It is unlawful for any person to use or obtain utility services from the
premises of another without the express permission of the other and the City.
G. Liability. The City shall not be liable for any damage to a utility service user by reason of
stoppage or interruption of his/her utility services caused by force majeure, scarcity of resources,
accidents to the utility systems, equipment malfunction, the result of maintenance and extension
operations, from actions of other parties, or from any unavoidable cause.
Nothing in this Title shall be construed to relieve or lessen the responsibility of any person
owning, operating, or installing anything related to or connected to any utility system for damages
to anyone injured or damaged either to person or property by any defect therein.
The City or any agent thereof shall not be held liable by reason of the inspection authorized
herein or any approval resulting from inspections by any City inspector.
H. Service Laterals. The City will maintain utility service laterals from the main line to and including
the meter on metered services and from the main line to property line on unmetered services.
The user shall maintain lines beyond these points. The user shall be responsible to clean
sanitary sewer and storm drain service laterals to the main lines.
All users of City utility services shall keep their service lines and connections and other
apparatus in good repair and protected from frost, trees, and other hazards at their own expense.
No person shall be allowed to dig into a City street for the purpose of laying, removing, or
repairing any utility line without first obtaining an excavation permit from the City.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 4/80
I. Building and Service Lateral Installation. Installations in and to buildings related to City utilities
shall comply with all applicable codes adopted by the City and shall comply with all licensing and
inspection ordinances now or hereafter adopted by the City, including the Construction
Standards.
Installations in and to buildings shall be subject to the inspection and approval of a City building
inspector before any building or structure shall receive service through a City utility system.
A City building inspector may require the removal of any flooring, wallboard, paneling, ceiling
materials, encasement, or any and all construction materials covering or obstructing free access
or view of any installation connected to a City utility system or device which has not been
inspected and received inspector's approval. A City building inspector shall not approve any
building utility system which has not been visually or otherwise inspected. The expenses of the
removal and reinstallation of any materials undertaken pursuant to this section shall be borne by
the owner or builder of said building or structure.
All costs and expense incidental to the installation and connection of a building to a City utility
system shall be borne by the owner(s). The owner(s) shall indemnify the City from any loss or
damage that may directly or indirectly be caused by the installation.
13.04.040 Extension Of Utility Systems
All utility system wiring, piping, and appurtenances installed in conjunction with the utilities of the City
shall be installed and inspected according to codes adopted by the City, the Construction Standards,
and as directed by the City Engineer. No unauthorized person(s) shall uncover, make any connections
with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any existing public utility or appurtenance thereof without first
obtaining written authorization from the City Engineer.
A City public works inspector may require the removal of any fill, concrete, landscaping, structure, or any
and all construction materials covering or obstructing free access or view of any installation connected to
a City utility system or device which has not been inspected, surveyed, and received inspector's
approval. A City public works inspector shall not approve any utility extension which has not been
visually or otherwise inspected and surveyed. The expenses of the removal and reinstallation of any
materials undertaken pursuant to this section shall be borne by the owner or contractor of said
installation.
A. Fees. All costs and expense incidental to the installation and connection of a utility extension to a
City utility shall be borne by the developer. The developer shall indemnify the City from any loss
or damage that may directly or indirectly be caused by the installation.
The City Engineer is responsible to establish policies and procedures for levying, billing, and
collecting fees for utility extensions and all other rules necessary for the management and control
of the extension of utility systems.
B. Utility Extensions in the City. Any person or persons desiring to have utility lines extended in
the City, and being willing to advance the whole expense of such extension, may make
application to the City Engineer. The City Engineer may grant or deny the petition to extend the
existing utility lines within the City.
C. Utility Extensions Out of the City. Extensions outside City limits must be approved by the City
Council. In the event the extension is granted, the City Engineer shall designate the route to be
taken. Plans and construction work shall be approved and bonded according to the City
development code, Construction Standards, and City Engineer. Any such extension shall be the
property of the City.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 5/80
13.04.050 Protection And Access To City Utilities
A. Access and Right of Entry. Employees or agents of the City shall have the right to enter upon
any premises at all reasonable hours for the purpose of reading the demarc boxes and utility
meters thereon. All other inspections, for whatever purpose, shall be made in accordance with
Spanish Fork Municipal Code §1.08.010.
Each utility user shall keep each demarc box or meter freely accessible to employees of the City
for the purpose of reading said meter and shall not obstruct access to said meter in any manner
whatsoever, including but not limited to obstructions or inaccessibility caused by buildings,
fences, gates, enclosures, vegetation, any structure of any kind, or by dogs or other animals.
In addition to any penalty imposed by this Chapter, the City may disconnect the utility service to
any user who obstructs or makes inaccessible or who allows to be obstructed or to become
inaccessible any demarc box or meter.
B. Tree and Vegetation Trimming or Removal. Spanish Fork City has the right to go upon private
property where it has easements, either formal or prescriptive, in order to trim or remove trees
and other vegetation to keep them from interfering with hydrants, utility boxes, and electrical,
sewers, meters and telecommunication lines. Tree and vegetation trimming does not have the
purpose of being aesthetically pleasing, but will be for the purpose of maintaining safe and
reliable lines.
The scope of any trimming or tree removal will be at the sole discretion of the City and will be
based upon potential public safety hazard, potential for property damage, and the type of trees or
vegetation involved and their propensity for rapid growth. If a tree needs to be removed, the City
will advise and work with the property owners, but removal will ultimately be the responsibility of
the owner. If the tree or vegetation is in the public right-of-way the City may proceed to remove
trees or vegetation. The City may top a tree if a property owner fails to timely remove it.
The property owner shall be responsible to trim around lines feeding a residence from a
transformer, pole, or junction box. Failure to trim will subject the property owner to damages if the
growth causes an outage. The property owner shall not be eligible to receive any reimbursement
from the City, or its subcontractors or suppliers for damage to the owner’s property due to their
failure to trim trees or other vegetation.
C. Willful or Malicious Acts and Damage. No person may willfully or maliciously:
1. Cut, break, or remove part of any component of a utility system without authorization from
the City;
2. Connect to any utility or intercept any transmission without applying or paying therefore;
3. Use or obtain by any means or device any utility except through a meter or other device
approved by the City Engineer;
4. Interfere with the use of any utility system or obstruct or postpone the transmission of
service systems or to procure or advise any such injury;
5. Perform, procure, or advise the performance or procurement of any said listed acts.
6. Open or operate any manhole, vault, hydrant, valve, or other utility appurtenance without
permission from the City.
13.08 Electric Utility
13.08.010 General
13.08.020 Rates
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 6/80
13.08.030 Net Metering
13.08.040 Large Solar Generation
13.08.010 General
This Chapter creates an electric utility known as Spanish Fork Electric, which shall be a division of the
Public Works Department. The electric utility shall provide electricity to the City. The electric utility shall
be responsible for the proper installation and maintenance of all electric facilities including but not limited
to: poles, conduit, conductor, substations, switching, transformers, meters, sectionalizers, and junction
boxes.
This Chapter is enacted to promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Spanish Fork City, by
providing for the efficient, safe, and environmentally sound distribution of electricity.
13.08.020 Rates
All users of the electric system shall pay a monthly base rate, a usage rate and any applicable power
cost adjuster (PCA). The City may, under normal circumstances, make adjustments as needed to
ensure equitable service charges.
13.08.030 Net Metering
Spanish Fork City allows small customer owned grid connected electric generating systems (net
metering) based upon the requirements and standards of this section. The system is limited to a
maximum of 25kW. The total energy generated by customer owned systems pursuant to this section
shall not exceed five percent (5%) of the average total energy load within the City for the three preceding
fiscal years. The total may be extended to 10% with City Council approval. Net metering allows for
interconnected non-utility owned electric generation to be connected for parallel operation with the
electrical system of Spanish Fork Electric. For net metering systems larger than 25kW refer to Spanish
Fork Municipal Code §13.08.040
Net metering will be allowed to interconnect with Spanish Fork Electric’s electrical distribution system at
a service level voltage only after determination by Spanish Fork Electric that such interconnection will
not interfere with the operation of the distribution circuit and ensures the safety of the electric utility
employees and customers.
A. Interconnection Requirements:
1. Customer shall comply with all the latest applicable National Electric Code (NEC)
requirements [NEC Articles 690 and 705], National Electrical Safety Code (NESC)
requirements, State of Utah requirements, building codes, and shall obtain building
permit(s) for the equipment installation.
2. Meter and transformer or transformer pole serving the Customer-Generator shall be
labeled to indicate potential electric current back feed. Spanish Fork Electric will provide
and install labels when Customer-Generator’s electric system is approved for
interconnection.
3. Customer shall provide space for metering equipment and meter base as per Spanish
Fork Electric requirements.
4. Customer’s over-current device at the service panel shall be marked to indicate power
source and connection to Spanish Fork Electric’s distribution system.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 7/80
5. The Customer shall assume the full responsibility for all maintenance of the generator and
protective equipment and keeping of records for such maintenance. These records shall
be available to Spanish Fork Electric for inspection at all times.
6. Customer’s power production control system shall comply with NEC Articles 690 and 705;
and applicable and current Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)
Standards including Standard number 1547 Interconnecting Distributed Resources with
Electric Power Systems for parallel operation with Spanish Fork Electric; in particular the
following:
7. Power output control system shall automatically disconnect from Spanish Fork Electric’s
source upon loss of voltage and not reconnect until Spanish Fork Electric’s voltage has
been restored for at least five (5) minutes continuously.
8. Power output control system shall automatically initiate a disconnection from Spanish
Fork Electric source within six (6) cycles if Customer’s voltage falls below 60 Volts rms to
ground (nominal 120 V rms base) on any phase.
9. Power output control system shall automatically initiate a disconnect from Spanish Fork
Electric’s system within two (2) seconds if the voltage rises above 132 Volts rms phase to
ground or falls below 104 Volts rms phase to ground (nominal 120 V rms base) on any
phase.
10. Power output control system shall automatically initiate a disconnection from Spanish
Fork Electric’s system within three (3) cycles for any reverse power flow condition.
11. Customer shall provide a written description of how the protection devices will achieve
compliance with the requirements of this policy as part of the Building Permit Application.
12. Customer shall furnish and install on customer’s side of the meter, a UL-approved safety
disconnect switch which shall be capable of fully disconnecting the Customer’s generating
facility from Spanish Fork Electric’s electric system. The disconnect switch shall be
located adjacent to Spanish Fork Electric’s meters and shall be of the visible break type in
a metal enclosure which can be secured by a padlock. The disconnect switch shall be
accessible to Spanish Fork Electric personnel at all times.
13. Additional Metering: For purposes of gathering research data, Spanish Fork Electric may,
at its expense, install and operate additional metering and data-gathering devices.
14. Solar Photovoltaic Equipment shall be in compliance with Underwriters Laboratories (UL)
1741, Standard for Static Inverters and Charge Controllers for Use in Photovoltaic
Systems; UL 1703, Standard for Safety: Flat-Plate Photovoltaic Modules and Panels; and
IEEE 1262-1995, Recommended Practice for Qualification of Photovoltaic (PV) Modules;
and the solar system shall be installed in compliance with IEEE Standard 929-2000,
Recommended Practice for Utility Interface of Photovoltaic Systems.
15. Wind turbines shall meet the requirements of Spanish Fork Municipal Code
§15.3.24.090(H).
B. Safety. All Safety and operating procedures for joint use equipment shall be in compliance with
the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) standard 29 CFR 1910.269, the
NEC, the NESC, State of Utah rules, City standards, and equipment manufacturer’s safety and
operating manuals.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 8/80
C. Guidelines for System Diagrams. A system diagram or schematic must be submitted with a
building permit application. The required System Diagram is one of the most important parts of
the application for interconnection. The system diagram is used by Spanish Fork Electric during
the review and approval process, and again during field testing and meter installation. The
diagram is a permanent record copy of the system and is filed with Spanish Fork Electric for
reference.
Discrepancies between the diagram and the actual installation as built are cause for rejection at
the final testing and net meter installation.
The System Diagram can be anything from a One-Line, to a Schematic, to a complete Wiring
Diagram that shows every wire and every connection throughout. Any of these are acceptable as
long as the minimum key information is included. Spanish Fork Electric has the discretion to
reject the diagram submitted and require a specified format. The diagram does not need to be
overly complex, but accuracy and clarity are critical. At a minimum, the System Diagram must
show how the components of the customer generator system are connected electrically.
Additional information, such as equipment part numbers and physical locations, should also be
included on the diagram. Some of this additional information may be contained in the application
forms as well, but documenting it on the System Diagram provides a single complete reference
for the project and speeds the engineering reviews and field work.
Some systems have more complex requirements for interconnection and will require much more
significant design drawings for review and approval.
The System Diagram should provide the information as described below:
1. Generator (PV panels, wind turbine, hydro turbine, etc.) - Include manufacturer, part
number, nameplate maximum capacity (kW), and physical location. For modular systems
(e.g. PV panels), also include: number of modules, configuration, nameplate maximum
capacity of each module, and total nameplate maximum capacity.
2. Inverter - Include manufacturer, type or series, part number, serial number, nameplate
maximum capacity (kW), output voltage, physical location.
3. Disconnect Switch - Include the physical location relative to the Spanish Fork Electric
service meter.
4. Electrical Service Panel -Include the panel or main breaker size and the position at which
the generation is connected. Show all panels (if there are multiple panels or subpanels)
even if not directly connected into the generation system.
5. Spanish Fork Electric Service Meter - Include existing meter serial number, meter form,
and class.
6. Other Related Equipment (battery banks, transfer or bypass switches, backup generators,
etc.).
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 9/80
D. License Approval.
1. Each customer desiring to engage in net metering must enter into a net metering license
agreement as prepared by Spanish Fork City. The license agreement will contain
additional conditions to maintain the integrity and reliability of the Spanish Fork Electric
system and/or conditions deemed necessary to maintain the health, safety, and welfare of
the residents and employees of the City.
2. The license agreement application shall be accompanied by the design or schematic
required by this section, together with a filing fee in the amount of $500.00. Adjustments
to the amount of the fee may be made by the City Council in the annual budget, or by
resolution.
3. The license may be revoked for violations of any of the terms of the license agreement or
for violation of any of the terms of this Chapter.
E. Temporary Connections. This section shall not apply to the temporary generation of electric
energy for emergency or standby purposes, except as noted below.
1. All emergency or standby generation shall not be interconnected with Spanish Fork
Electric’s system at any time. A positive, physical means of transferring and separating
loads between normal and alternate sources of supply must be used to prevent
inadvertent interconnection.
2. All emergency or standby generation shall comply with the provisions of the latest revision
of the National Electric Code and National Electrical Safety Code.
(ORD 02-18, amended 01/16/2018)
13.08.040 Large Solar Generation
Spanish Fork City permits commercial and industrial users to generate electric power with solar panels
upon meeting the requirements of this section. To qualify, the applicant must have a business location
within city limits, be current on its utility bill for the last three years or since its opening for business in the
City, whichever is shorter, apply for a large solar generation permit with Spanish Fork City and UMPA,
and pay an application fee established by the Council in the annual budget. In addition, the following
requirements must be met:
A. All electricity generated must be sold to UMPA at the rate established by UMPA;
B. All electricity consumed must be purchased from Spanish Fork City at the rate of the customer
category the applicant is in;
C. The solar electric generation system must have a generation capacity larger than 25 Kw and not
to exceed 750 Kw. Anything smaller must meet the net metering requirements of §13.08.030 and
anything larger is prohibited.
D. The applicant must enter into an interconnection agreement with the City and with UMPA;
E. The applicant must enter into a power sales agreement with UMPA;
F. The applicant must install the system according to the National Electric Safety Code, building
and fire codes, electric utility standards, UMPA requirements, and Spanish Fork City electrical
connection and solar panel regulations;
G. Pay an inspection fee upon installation in the amount established by the Council in the annual
budget to cover the costs of the inspection; and
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 10/80
H. Receive a permit from Spanish Fork City and UMPA to commence generation.
(ORD 02-18, created 01/16/2018)
13.12 Solid Waste Utility
13.12.010 Definitions
13.12.020 General
13.12.030 Dumping, Littering And Sanitary Condition Of Property
13.12.040 Solid Waste Vehicles And Contractors
13.12.050 Receptacles And Containers
13.12.060 Prohibited Solid Waste
13.12.010 Definitions
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the
meanings given herein:
A. Bin Container. Shall mean any large type of Solid Waste depository normally used in the
collection of Solid Waste from educational, multi-family, and commercial/industrial premises. It
shall include dumpsters, front end containers, roll off containers, and compaction units. When
used in reference to a Solid Waste Vehicle, container shall mean that part of such Solid Waste
Vehicle into which Solid Waste is emptied for transport and disposal purposes.
B. Curbside Can Receptacle. Shall mean a ninety (90) gallon or larger plastic, Solid Waste
depository designed and manufactured for automated collection of Solid Waste.
C. Food Waste. Shall mean every waste accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter, or food,
liquid or otherwise that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in, or storing of edible
materials.
D. Recyclable Material. Shall mean material which may be reused in a valuable form following a
remanufacturing process. Since specific items may change over time, specific items will be
spelled out in contracts between the City and recyclable providers.
E. Refuse. Shall mean waste material and rubbish of every character collected or accumulated
within the City, except Food Waste, and shall include but shall not be limited to grass, leaves,
sticks, bottles, tin cans, pasteboard boxes, rags, paper, sawdust, shavings, packing material and
other recyclable materials, but shall not include hazardous waste (as defined by appropriate
federal, state and local authorities), dangerous or corrosive chemicals, explosives, highly
flammable material, dead animals, poisons, heavy metals or metal parts, ashes, or bulky waste.
F. Solid Waste. Shall mean garbage, Recyclable Materials, Food Waste, and Refuse, both
collectively and separately, and shall not include hazardous or toxic wastes of any description.
G. Solid Waste Contractor. Shall mean any person engaged in the business of collecting, hauling
or transporting through the streets of the City any Solid Waste for disposal or for any other
purpose.
H. Solid Waste Vehicle. Shall mean any vehicle specifically designed and manufactured for the
purpose of collecting, transporting, or disposing of Solid Waste.
13.12.020 General
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 11/80
This Chapter creates a Solid Waste utility known as Spanish Fork Solid Waste, which shall be a division
of the Public Works Department. The Solid Waste utility shall provide for the collection, removal, and
disposal of Solid Waste from the City. The Solid Waste utility shall be responsible for the procurement,
delivery, retrieval, and maintenance of garbage and recycling Curbside Can Receptacles.
The City of Spanish Fork is hereby charged with the responsibility of ensuring that all residential,
educational, multiple dwelling, and commercial/industrial premises within the city are serviced by a Solid
Waste collection, transport, and disposal system.
The City may perform the service or may require the property owner and/or tenant to provide or
otherwise contract for the services. Before any entity, other than the City, operates as a Solid Waste
Contractor, it shall obtain a business license from the City as set forth in this Title.
This Chapter is enacted to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Spanish Fork City,
by providing for the efficient, safe, and environmentally sound collection, transportation, and disposal of
Solid Waste.
A. Rates. All residents shall pay a monthly rate per garbage or recycling Curbside Can Receptacle.
Residents will be required to have a minimum of one (1) garbage Curbside Can Receptacle
unless in a large multi-family development with Bin Containers. Residents with recycling
Curbside Can Receptacles may opt-out of the service each December. The City may, under
normal circumstances, make adjustments as needed to ensure equitable service charges.
B. Accumulation Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person owning and/or occupying any
premise or lot in the City to permit to collect or remain upon such premise or lot any Food Waste
or Refuse for a period of more than one (1) week, or any approved recyclable material for a
period of more than two (2) weeks, unless written approval is granted by the City. Accumulations
of leaves, grass, and other green materials used to produce mulch are excluded from the
requirements of this section.
It shall also be unlawful to accumulate any of the materials specifically excluded from the
definitions of Refuse, Food Waste, or Solid Waste herein. It shall be the responsibility of the
owner of the property to have all such materials removed within a reasonable time depending
upon the type of the materials, but in no event shall the materials be allowed to accumulate for
more than thirty (30) days.
C. Title to Solid Waste. The title to Solid Waste transfers to the City when it is placed curbside.
The generator of any Solid Waste may reclaim materials placed in a container or reciprocal at
any time prior to its collection.
13.12.030 Dumping, Littering And Sanitary Condition Of Property
A. Dumping and Littering. Except as provided by the terms of this Chapter, it shall be unlawful for
any person to place, deposit, bury, or dump upon any lot, street, alley, or into any water,
waterway, or container not intended for his or her use, within the City limits any Solid Waste or
other matter constituting a nuisance.
B. Sanitary Condition of Property. The occupant of any premises within the City shall be primarily
responsible for the sanitary condition of the premises. The owner of any unoccupied property
shall be primarily responsible for the sanitary condition of the property. It shall be unlawful for any
person to place, deposit, or allow to be placed or deposited on his/her premises or property any
Solid Waste, except as permitted by the terms of this Chapter.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 12/80
C. Enforcement. Authorized city representatives may, with a proper warrant or with the consent of
the owner or occupant of the premises, inspect any premises or lots within the City limits from
time to time in order to examine the sanitary conditions of the property and to determine whether
the property is in compliance with all applicable provisions contained in this Chapter. All persons
shall, within three (3) days after written notice of any violation, comply with all applicable City
ordinances and regulations.
13.12.040 Solid Waste Vehicles And Contractors
Solid Waste Contractors providing service in the City must have a business license. This license shall
not constitute a grant of franchise nor shall it confer any vested rights but shall be a license to perform
the services specified in this Chapter subject to the restrictions and limitations contained herein. The
license shall be subject to the requirements of Title 5, dealing with business licenses. All Solid Waste
Contractors, prior to making application for a business license, shall cause all vehicles to be properly
registered with the State of Utah, including compliance with any safety inspections, emissions testing,
and such other rules and regulations as may be required. Proof of compliance shall be provided upon
demand.
A. Solid Waste Vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person or governmental entity to operate any
Solid Waste Vehicle within the City limits unless the Solid Waste Vehicle shall conform to the
following minimum requirements:
1. The Solid Waste Vehicle body, container, and associated equipment must be in such
condition and repair as to ensure their safe operation.
2. The container of the Solid Waste Vehicle must be metal lined with steel or other suitable
metal to the full length, width and height of the container, and must be welded at all
seams so as to prevent the escape of any solid or liquid waste. The container shall be so
constructed as to prevent the spillage or loss of any solid or liquid waste during the
loading or transportation of the Solid Waste.
3. The name and telephone number of the Solid Waste Vehicle owner (either the City or the
Solid Waste Contractor operating the Solid Waste Vehicle) shall be displayed on both
sides of the Solid Waste Vehicle in legible letters and numbers at least four (4) inches in
height.
4. Each Solid Waste Vehicle shall display an identification number and tag, on both sides of
the Solid Waste Vehicle in legible numbers at least four (4) inches in height.
All Solid Waste Vehicles shall be kept in a neat and clean condition while operating within the
corporate City limits.
B. Transportation of Solid Waste. It shall be unlawful for any person to transport upon the streets
within the City any waste of any kind, unless the same is completely contained in a Solid Waste
Vehicle or is covered sufficiently to prevent the spillage or blowing of the waste, or the escape of
noxious or offensive odors, from the transporting vehicle. If a Solid Waste Contractor causes
Solid Waste to be deposited and remain on the streets of the City, the contractor shall be
responsible to clean up the material. If he or she fails to do so, the City may do it and charge the
Solid Waste Contractor the reasonable costs incurred.
C. Parking of Solid Waste Vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit, suffer, allow, or
cause any Solid Waste Vehicle controlled by him or her which is loaded with waste of any kind to
be or remain standing on any street within the City longer than is necessary for the purpose of
loading the Solid Waste Vehicle or moving the same to its destination in accordance with
applicable traffic laws and regulations.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 13/80
D. Disposal Site for Solid Waste. All residential Solid Waste collected within the City shall be
disposed of at a disposal site specified by the City.
E. Operating Hours. Solid Waste pickup shall only be allowed between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
8:00 p.m.
13.12.050 Receptacles And Containers
All Solid Waste, shall be placed in approved Curbside Can Receptacles or Bin Containers as described
herein, and shall be completely contained within the receptacles or containers. It shall be the
responsibility of users of all Curbside Can Receptacles or Bin Containers to see that the area around
such is kept neat, clean, and sanitary at all times.
A. Bin Containers. Institutional, commercial, industrial, and authorized multi-family premises shall
be supplied with Bin Containers by the owner unless the City authorizes the premises for
Curbside Can Receptacle service. All such containers shall be so constructed as to be capable
of pick up and emptying by Solid Waste Vehicles designed for that purpose and shall be so
constructed as to prevent the spillage or loss of any Solid Waste during the loading or
transportation of Solid Waste.
All Bin Containers shall have the name and telephone number of the authorized collector which
services them printed or displayed on the container in legible, four (4) inch high letters. Such
information shall be put in a location on the container so that the information is easily visible. All
containers must be in such condition and repair as to ensure safe operation. They shall be kept
in a neat, clean, and sanitary condition.
Bin Containers shall be emptied at least once each week. City may require bins if too many
Curbside Receptacles are being used.
B. Curbside Can Receptacles. All residential dwelling units, unless otherwise authorized by the
City Engineer, shall have Curbside Can Receptacles. All Residential Curbside Can Receptacle
Solid Waste removal may only be provided by the City, either itself or through a contract with a
Solid Waste provider. The City will provide and own the Curbside Can Receptacles. Any damage
caused by improper use, or loss of the receptacle shall be the responsibility of the person using
them. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully break, deface, or damage any receptacle or
container.
Bulky waste such as stoves, refrigerators, water tanks, washing machines, furniture, large
concrete, and asphalt chunks and other waste materials, with weights and volumes greater than
those that can reasonably by accommodated by the collection vehicles for Curbside Can
Receptacles shall not be placed in Curbside Can Receptacles.
Curbside Can Receptacles may not contain waste that is industrial according to the Federal or
State definition, or is of such a volume and composition so as to indicate obvious commercial
activities rather than normal residential activities.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 14/80
C. Collection of Curbside Can Receptacles. Curbside Can Receptacles containing Solid Waste
shall be set out for collection at the front curb line of the premises, or at a location indicated by
the City. Receptacles shall be set out on the day of collection by 7:00 a.m. All empty receptacles
must be removed from the curb as soon as practicable after being emptied and, in every case,
must be removed from the curb the same day they are emptied.
All containers shall be located at appropriate places so as to be readily accessible for emptying
and so as not to constitute a nuisance or hazard. No container shall be permanently placed on a
City street, right of way, or sidewalk.
Solid Waste Vehicle operators shall not be required to pick up any Solid Waste that has been
spilled, or that is laying outside the receptacle or container unless the vehicle operator is
responsible for the spillage.
13.12.060 Prohibited Solid Waste
It shall be unlawful for any person to place materials excluded from the definition of Food Waste or
Refuse into receptacles or containers or to set such materials out for collection. Such items shall be
disposed of as directed by the City and at the owner's expense.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place materials excluded from the definition of recyclable materials
into receptacles or containers not identified for recyclable materials. Such items shall be disposed of as
Solid Waste or as otherwise directed by the City, and at owner’s expense.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place materials of any kind into a receptacle or container that is not
owned, or assigned, to that person. Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall knowingly
collect or dispose of:
A. Any unmarked sealed barrel for any reason;
B. Any sealed or unsealed barrel upon suspicion of hazardous waste content;
C. Waste that is hazardous by Federal or State definition. Any hazardous waste of any description.
This shall not apply to persons licensed pursuant to federal and state law to dispose of
hazardous wastes.
D. Waste that poses a danger to the truck and/or operator (e.g. hot ashes, ammunition, hazardous
or toxic chemicals or chemical agents, heavy or jagged metal, oversized concrete or rock
material, large sumps, large accumulations of human or liquid waste (as from RV holding tanks),
sod or dirt or other items that cause a fine dust/particles that is a hazard to the driver and his/her
ability to breathe.
E. Waste that is of such volume, weight, and/or composition that it cannot be reasonable
accommodated by the collection vehicles, including waste that is stacked/placed into the garbage
receptacle in a way where the lid to the receptacle cannot be closed fully.
13.16 Stormwater Utility
13.16.010 Definitions
13.16.020 General
13.16.030 Land Disturbance Permits
13.16.040 Stormwater System Design
13.16.050 Maintenance Agreement
13.16.060 Sediment And Erosion Control Plans
13.16.070 Post Construction
13.16.080 Waivers
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 15/80
13.16.090 Existing Land And Developments
13.16.100 Illicit Discharges Detection And Elimination
13.16.110 Enforcement
13.16.120 Violations And Penalties
13.16.130 Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP)
13.16.140 Long Term Storm Water Management Plan (LTSMP)
13.16.010 Definitions
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the
meanings given herein:
A. "Best Management Practices (BMP)". Physical, structural, and/or managerial practices that,
when used singly or in combination, prevent or reduce pollution of water.
B. "BMP Manual". The City SWMP, Standard Procedures, Storm Drain Design Manual, and
Constructions Standards.
C. "Channel". A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts flowing
water continuously or periodically.
D. "City Storm Water System". The drainage structures, conduits, ditches, combined sewers,
sewers, and all device appurtenances by means of which stormwater is collected, transported,
pumped, treated, or disposed of.
E. "Community Water". Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage
systems, springs, wetlands, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or
artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the City or which receive stormwater
originating in the City.
F. "Contaminant". Any physical, chemical, biological, or radiological substance or matter in water.
G. "Debris". Dirt, rock, sand, tree, grass clippings, or other rubbish, litter, etc.
H. "Design Storm Event". A hypothetical storm event, of a given frequency interval and duration,
used in the analysis and design of a stormwater facility.
I. "Developed Parcel". Developed Parcel shall be all property which is altered from a natural state
by grading, paving, compaction, construction of structures, impervious surfaces, or drainage
works so that stormwater runoff from the properties is changed in quantity, quality, or point of
discharge from that which would occur in its natural condition.
J. "Discharge". To dispose, deposit, spill, pour, inject, seep, dump, leak, or place by any means, or
that which is disposed, deposited, spilled, poured, injected, seeped, dumped, leaked, or placed
by any means including any direct or indirect entry of any solid or liquid matter into the City Storm
Water System.
K. "Drain Inlet". A point of entry, for stormwater, into a sump, detention/retention basin, storm drain
pipe, or ditch.
L. "Equivalent Service Unit (ESU)". Represents the amount of impervious surface in the average
residential lot within the City as adopted by the City Council in a resolution or in the budget when
setting rates.
M. "Erosion". The removal of soil particles by the action of water, wind, ice, or other geological
agents, whether naturally occurring or acting in conjunction with or promoted by anthropogenic
activities or effects.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 16/80
N. "Erosion and Sediment Control Plan". A written plan (including drawings or other graphic
representations) that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a
site during or after construction activities.
O. "General Construction Storm Water Permit". A permit required by the Utah Department of
Environmental Quality, Division of Water Quality prior to commencing construction of any project
within the City.
P. "High Priority Area". An area where land use or activities generate highly contaminated runoff,
with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater.
Q. "Illicit Connections". May be defined as either one of the following:
1. "Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface that allows a
contaminated or illicit discharge to enter the City Storm Water System.
Examples include, but are not limited to, any conveyance which allows non-stormwater
discharge such as sewage, processed wastewater, or wash water to enter the City Storm
Water System, and any connections to the system from indoor drains or sinks regardless
of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved;
or
2. "Any drain or conveyance connected to the City Storm Water System, whether or not
such connection results in discharges into that system, which has not been (1)
documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records submitted to the City, and (2) approved
in writing by the City.
R. "Illicit Discharge". Any discharge to the MS4 that is not composed entirely of stormwater,
stormwater that is being discharged without an approved treatment methodology, and not
specifically exempted under this Chapter. Illicit discharges include both direct connections (e.g.
wastewater piping either mistakenly or deliberately connected to the stormwater system) and
indirect connections (e.g., infiltration into the stormwater system or spills collected by drain
inlets).
S. "Impervious Surface". Any hard surface, other than the natural surface, that prevents or retards
the absorption of water into the soil, or that causes water to run off the surface in greater
quantities or at a greater rate of flow than the natural surface. Common impervious surfaces
include, but are not limited to, rooftops, streets, sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways,
parking lots, storage areas, compacted gravel and soil surfaces, and other similar structures
and/or surfaces.
T. "Irrigation Ditches". Gravity flow irrigation ditches having a right of water passageway by rightof-
way, easement, prescriptive easement, or ownership. Irrigation ditches also include those
facilities that function as a combined stormwater and irrigation conveyance intended at times as
a water routing and disposal system.
U. "Land Disturbing Activity". Any activity on real property that results in a change in the existing
soil cover (both vegetative and non-vegetative) and/or the existing soil topography. Landdisturbing
activities include, but are not limited to, development, re-development, demolition,
construction, reconstruction, clearing, grading, filling, and excavation.
V. "Land Disturbance Permit". Land Disturbance Permit issued by the City.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 17/80
W. "Low Impact Development (LID)". The control of the peak flow rates of stormwater discharge
associated with design storms specified in this ordinance or in the BMP Manual to reduce the
generation of post construction stormwater runoff to pre-construction levels or 100 year historical
runoff flow rates. LID practices should seek to utilize pervious areas for stormwater treatment
and to infiltrate stormwater runoff from Impervious Surfaces or semi-impervious services to the
maximum extent practical to provide treatment for both water quality and quantity.
X. "Maintenance". Any activity that is necessary to keep a stormwater facility in good working order
so as to function as designed. Maintenance shall also include the correction of any problem on
the property site that may directly impair the functions of the stormwater facility.
Y. "Maintenance Agreement". A document recorded with the Utah County Recorder that acts as a
property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance of a stormwater
management facility or stormwater BMP.
Z. "Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4)". The stormwater conveyance facilities
owned or operated by the City for the collection and transportation of stormwater, including the
streets and their drainage systems, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels,
storm drains, etc.
AA. "National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit (NPDES Permit)". A permit issued
by the Utah Division of Environmental Quality pursuant to 33 U.S.C. §1342.
AB. "Notice of Violation (NOV)". Whenever the City finds that a Person is in non-compliance with
this ordinance, he/she will be ordered to comply by giving written NOV to the responsible Person.
Requirements in this notice are at the discretion of the City Engineer, and may include
monitoring, payment to cover costs relating to the non-compliance, and/or the implementation of
BMPs.
AC. "Off-site Facility". A structural BMP located outside the subject property boundary described in
the permit application for land development activity, which provides an integral part of the storm
drain system for a given parcel.
AD. "On-site Facility". A structural BMP located within the subject property boundary described in the
permit application for land development activity.
AE. "Peak Flow". The maximum instantaneous rate of flow of water at a particular point resulting
from a storm event.
AF. "Pre-Existing Conditions". Conditions of property in its native state or changed under approval
by the City or changed property that is grandfathered.
AG. "Priority Area". Hot Spot as herein defined.
AH. "Retention/Detention Basin". A depression, designed with an inlet and outlet that regulates
water flow and allows debris to settle out, and is capable of detaining or retaining stormwater
runoff.
AI. "Runoff". That portion of the precipitation or other naturally or artificially occurring water on a
drainage area that is discharged from the area into the MS4. Also, water produced by storms,
surface drainage, snow and ice melt, and other water handled by the MS4.
AJ. "Sediment". Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported,
or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, gravity, or ice and has come to rest on the
earth's surface either above or below sea level or within any part of the storm drainage system.
AK. "Sedimentation". Soil particles suspended in stormwater that can or have settled in stream beds
and which disrupt the natural flow of the stream or otherwise disrupt the intended storm drain
system function.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 18/80
AL. "Sensitive Lands". Wetlands, slopes of 30% grade or greater, and other unique features on land
as designated by the City Engineer.
AM. "Soils Report". Study of soils on a subject property with the primary purpose of characterizing
and describing the soils. The soils report shall be prepared by a qualified soils engineer, licensed
in the State of Utah, who shall be directly involved in the soil characterization either by
performing the investigation or by directly supervising employees who do so.
AN. "Spanish Fork City Storm Water Management Program". Those certain manuals, drawings,
documents, specifications, ordinances, practices, and policies set in place by the City to regulate,
permit, manage, and otherwise oversee the discharge of stormwater within the corporate
boundaries of the City. This includes both those manuals and practices which are in place at the
time of the passage of this ordinance and those which will yet be put in place, adopted, or
revised in future actions.
AO. "Stabilization". Providing adequate measures, vegetative and/or structural, that will prevent
erosion.
AP. "Storm Drain Pipe". A closed conduit for transmitting stormwater that has been collected by
inlets or other means.
AQ. "Storm Water". Stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, surface runoff, street wash waters related to
street cleaning or maintenance, infiltration, and drainage.
AR. "Storm Drain Ditch". An open conduit for transmitting stormwater that has been collected or
routed by inlets, curb and gutter, or other means.
AS. "Storm Water Management". The programs adopted to maintain the quality and quantity of
stormwater runoff to pre-development levels.
AT. "Storm Water Management Plan". The drawings and other documents that comprise all the
information and specifications for the programs, drainage systems, structures, BMPs, concepts,
and techniques intended to maintain or restore quality and quantity of stormwater runoff to predevelopment
levels using LID and other BMPs.
AU. "Storm Water Master Plan". The most recent version of the City Storm Water Master Plan as
adopted by the City Council.
AV. "Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP)". A Technical Report including a copy of the
Land Disturbance Permit, Notice of Intent (NOI), if applicable, Storm Water Pollution Prevention
Plan during construction and post construction, storm water pollution prevention BMPs, spill
prevention and countermeasure information, inspection records, and signed and dated
Certification Statement from the Site Operator and the responsible person preparing the report.
AW. "Storm Water Runoff". Water flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from precipitation.
AX. "Storm Water Utility". The stormwater utility created by ordinance to administer the stormwater
management ordinance, and other stormwater rules and regulations adopted by City.
AY. "Structural BMPs". Devices that are constructed to control stormwater runoff.
AZ. "Sump". A formalized underground structure surrounded by drain rock, which acts as a detention
basin to allow the slow release of water into the surrounding sub-soil. Sumps generally receive
stormwater runoff from paved areas such as streets, parking lots, building roofs, etc.
BA. "Surface Water". Includes waters upon the surface of the earth created naturally or artificially
including, but not limited to, streams, ditches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, sloughs, canals, or other
bodies of water.
BB. "Utah Pollution Discharge Elimination System (UPDES)". The Pollution Discharge Elimination
System created by the State of Utah.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 19/80
BC. "Watercourse". A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or manmade,
which gathers or carries surface water.
BD. "Watershed". All the land area that contributes runoff to a particular point along a waterway.
13.16.020 General
There is created a stormwater utility known as Spanish Fork Storm Water, which shall be a division of
the Public Works Department. The stormwater utility shall provide and maintain stormwater drainage
facilities for the City. The stormwater utility shall be responsible for the proper installation and
maintenance of all storm water facilities including but not limited to all piping, clean out, junction,
retention and detention facilities, LID facilities, rivers, ditches, and wetlands to which the stormwater
system drains.
This Chapter is enacted to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Spanish Fork City,
by providing for the efficient, safe, and environmentally sound collection, treatment, and release of
stormwater and to comply with federal and state requirements.
A. Rates. All Developed Parcels shall pay a monthly storm drain fee. All single and multi-family
residential parcels shall be assessed one ESU per dwelling unit. All other developed parcels will
be assessed the number of ESU’s on the parcel, with a minimum of one ESU.
B. Obstruction of Facilities. It is unlawful for any person to obstruct or contribute to the obstruction
of the flow of stormwater runoff or non-stormwater runoff into any sump, retention basin, storm
drain, storm drain ditch, curb and gutter, drain inlet, or other associated structural controls that
convey stormwater and/or non-stormwater runoff.
It is unlawful for any person to cause any obstruction that inhibits the normal flow of stormwater
and/or non-stormwater runoff in any curb and gutter, unless the obstruction is associated with a
street and/or storm drainage improvements project and is authorized by the City Engineer and
granted with the issuance of a permit signed by the City Engineer.
It is unlawful for any person to cover over any drain inlet for any reason or purpose.
C. Dumping. It is unlawful for any person to dump, or allow to be dumped into any sump, detention
basin, storm drain, curb and gutter, drain inlet, storm drain ditch or other storm drainage structure
that conveys stormwater and/or non-stormwater, any type of debris, petroleum product,
chemical, paint, pesticide, herbicide, heavy metal, acid or base product, solid or liquid waste
product, hazardous waste product, and/or human or animal waste.
Soil, sediment, and debris brought onto streets and public ways must be removed by the end of
the work day by machine, broom, or shovel to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. Failure to
remove the sediment, soil, or debris shall be deemed a violation of this Chapter. The restrictions
set forth in this section shall not apply to the normal runoff of non-stormwater related to domestic
home uses; for example, lawn watering, washing cars, etc.
13.16.030 Land Disturbance Permits
No Land Disturbing Activities shall be allowed until a Land Disturbance Permit has been issued. Land
Disturbance Permits are required in the following cases:
? Land Disturbing Activity which generally disturbs one (1) or more acres;
? Land Disturbing Activity of less than one (1) acre of land if such activity is part of a larger
common plan of development that affects one (1) or more acres;
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 20/80
? Land Disturbing Activity of less than one (1) acre of land, if in the discretion of the City Engineer,
such activity poses a unique threat to water, public health, or safety;
? The creation and use of borrow pits or those excavation sites used to generate fill and/or
decorative material for off-site location;
? Development of a single-family home, which is not part of a subdivision project;
? Processing of earthen materials such as top soil and gravel screening;
? Construction of parking lots;
? Creation of an impervious area 0.25 acres/10,890 square feet constructed with compacted
gravel, asphalt, concrete, or other impervious or semi-impervious material;
? Creation or alteration of storm drain works or systems;
? Excavation or disturbance of more than 1,000 cubic yards of material in any non-agricultural
earth moving activity; and
? As otherwise required in this Section.
A. Drainage Channels, Waterways, and Sensitive Areas. Property owners shall not fill, alter, or
restrict natural channels, wetlands, waterways or any other Sensitive Lands without proper
permits from all responsible governing agencies, including a Land Disturbance Permit from the
City. Property owners proposing to redirect runoff, surface, and/or pipe flow to properties or
facilities outside Spanish Fork City boundaries must provide written approval from the applicable
governing agency. Discharges or modifications to irrigation ditches or canals require written
approval from the canal owners and applicable governing agencies. Property owners are
responsible for the protection of Channels located within their property in compliance with this
ordinance.
B. Building Permit. No building permit shall be issued until the applicant has obtained a Land
Disturbance Permit where the same is required by this Chapter.
C. Exemptions. The following activities are exempt from the Land Disturbance Permit requirement:
1. Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property,
or natural resources including activities required to promote public safety, repairs to water
lines, and/or other City infrastructure repairs.
2. Nursery operations conducted as permitted use.
3. Any agricultural activity.
4. Additions or modifications to existing single-family structures.
5. Landscape modifications resulting in disturbances below the limits identified in this
section.
6. Excavation activities necessary for public purposes approved by City.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 21/80
D. Application. Each Land Disturbance Permit application shall include the following information:
1. Name of applicant;
2. Address of applicant;
3. Name, address, and telephone number of the Property Owner;
4. Address and legal description of the subject property including the tax serial/parcel
number of the subject property;
5. Name, address, and telephone number of the contractor and any subcontractor(s) who
shall perform the land disturbing activity and who are responsible for the erosion and
sediment control plan;
6. A statement indicating the nature, extent, and purpose of the land disturbing activity,
including the size of the area for which the permit shall be applicable, and a schedule for
the starting and completion dates of the land disturbing activity;
7. A sediment and erosion control plan according to requirements of this Chapter;
8. A Storm Water Management Plan (SWPPP) providing for stormwater management during
the land disturbing activity and after the activity has been completed;
9. Maintenance Agreement;
10. Recorded maintenance easements if necessary to ensure access to the site for the
purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the easements needed; and
11. The payment of appropriate fees.
E. Regulatory Agencies. The applicant shall obtain from any state or federal agency any other
appropriate environmental permits that pertain to the property. Copies of these approved permits
shall be included with the Land Disturbance Permit Application. However, the inclusion of those
permits in the application shall not preclude the City Engineer from imposing additional
development requirements and conditions, commensurate with this Chapter, on the development
of property covered by those permits. Failure of the applicant to obtain the necessary permits
may be a basis for denial of issuance of a Land Disturbance Permit among other required
permits. Such other required permits will be to obtain and maintain coverage during the duration
of the project under the UPDES with a Notice of Intent (NOI) permit. Developers are also
required to maintain a SWPPP during the duration of the project. A completed SWPPP is
required to obtain an NOI permit from the State.
F. Review and Approval. The City Engineer will review each application for a land disturbance
permit to determine its conformance with the provisions of this Chapter. Within 45 days after
receiving an application, the City Engineer shall provide one of the following responses:
1. Approval of the permit application;
2. Approval of the permit application, subject to such reasonable conditions as may be
necessary to secure the objectives of this Chapter; or
3. Denial of the permit application, indicating the reason(s) for the denial.
If the SWMP Administrator has granted conditional approval of the permit, the applicant shall
submit a revised plan that conforms to the conditions established. However, the applicant shall
be allowed to proceed with the land disturbing activity provided it conforms to conditions
established by the City Engineer, and provided the revised plan is submitted within 15 days.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 22/80
G. Permit Duration. Every land disturbance permit shall expire and become null and void if
substantial work authorized by such permit has not commenced within one hundred eighty (180)
calendar days of issuance, or is not complete within one year from the date of the
preconstruction meeting.
H. Notice of Construction. The applicant must notify the City ten (10) working days in advance of
the commencement of construction. Regular inspections of the stormwater management system
construction shall be conducted by the City. All inspections shall be documented and written
reports prepared that contain the following information:
1. The date and location of the inspection;
2. Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan;
3. Variations from the approved construction specifications;
4. Any violations that exist.
I. Performance Bonds. The City Engineer shall require the submittal of a performance bond in the
form of an escrow bond, letter of credit, or cash. The bond must be drawn on financial institutions
licensed to conduct business in the State of Utah. For single family residences, the performance
bond is required in cash. The bond shall be provided prior to issuance of a permit in order to
ensure that the storm water pollution prevention practices are installed by the permit holder as
required by the approved Storm Water Management Plan. Bonds shall be subject to the following
provisions:
1. The amount of the performance bond shall be the total estimated construction cost of the
structural BMPs approved under the permit plus any reasonably foreseeable additional
related costs, e.g., for administration, enforcement, etc.
2. The performance bond shall be forfeited for failure to timely complete work specified in
the Stormwater Management Plan.
3. The applicant shall provide an itemized construction cost estimate, complete with unit
prices, which shall be subject to acceptance, amendment, or rejection by the City
Engineer.
4. Alternatively, the City Engineer shall have the right to calculate the cost of construction
cost estimates and revise the opinion of probable costs accordingly.
5. The bond may be released in full only upon completion and City approval of all final
inspection punch list items and removal of all temporary control measures.
6. The City will make a final inspection of the structural BMP to ensure that it is compliant
with the approved plan and the provisions of this Chapter. Provisions for a partial pro-rata
release of the performance bond based on the completion of various development phases
may be made at the discretion of the City Engineer.
13.16.040 Stormwater System Design
A. Surface Irrigation Ditches and Facilities. Existing irrigation ditches located on the site or
straddling a site property boundary shall be piped with a sufficient size pipe to handle the
irrigation need and shall be coordinated with the City Engineer and the irrigation company or
ditch owner by following the provisions of Utah Code Ann. §73-1-15.5, unless otherwise
approved by the City Engineer.
Piping of irrigation ditches and modification to the diversion boxes require the irrigation company
to approve the construction plans. If the City Engineer deems the conditions onerous, he/she
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 23/80
may approve less onerous conditions. All work must meet the requirements of the BMP Manual.
Developers are responsible for the protection of surface irrigation ditches and facilities from
damage resulting from the development work.
B. Discharges to Private Ditches, Land, or Facilities. Discharges to private ditches, lands, or
facilities require written easements from the ditch, land, or facility owner(s).
C. Design Standards and Regulations. All work related to the City Storm Water System and MS4
shall meet the requirements of the BMP Manual, Land Disturbance Permit, and requirements set
forth in the most recent edition of the International Building Code, and the State of Utah UPDES
requirements.
D. Utah Registered Professional Engineer. Design of storm drain systems in City boundaries and
discharges into the City Stormwater System requires direct supervision of a Utah Registered
Professional Engineer, and shall carry his/her seal.
E. Low Impact Development (LID). All site designs shall implement LID principles as defined in
this Chapter and in the BMP Manual. Runoff rates from one lot to another may not exceed preexisting
conditions as defined by the City, nor in such a manner that may unreasonably and
unnecessarily cause more harm than formerly.
F. Channel Protection. Specific Channel protection criteria shall be provided as prescribed in this
Chapter and the BMP manual to protect stream Channels from degradation.
G. Critical Areas with Sensitive Resources. Stormwater discharges to critical areas with sensitive
resources (e.g. cold water fisheries, recharge areas, water supply reservoirs) may be subject to
additional performance criteria, or may need to utilize or restrict certain stormwater management
practices.
H. High Priority Area. Storm water discharges from High Priority Areas as defined in this Chapter
may require the application of specific structural BMPs and pollution prevention practices.
I. Storm Water Management Plan. All designs shall include Storm Water Management Plans as
defined in this Chapter. Storm Water Management Plans require Property Owners to manage
storm water runoff and sediment which originates on their property.
This responsibility may extend to the defining of agreements, easements, and other appropriate
measures to address storm water management. The Storm Water Management Plan shall
include sufficient information to allow the City Engineer to evaluate the environmental
characteristics of the project site, the potential impacts of all proposed development of the site,
both present and future, on the water resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of the
measures proposed for managing stormwater generated at the project site.
13.16.050 Maintenance Agreement
The Property Owner to be served by a Long Term Storm Water Management Plan (LTSMP) must
execute a Maintenance Agreement for the purpose of keeping the MS4 clean and to follow state law.
The maintenance agreement shall include the following provisions.
A. Owner Responsibility. Assign responsibility for the maintenance and repair of the stormwater
facility to the Property Owner upon whose property the facility is located.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 24/80
B. Owner Inspections. Provide for a periodic inspection by the Property Owner or qualified
designee for the purpose of documenting maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance
with the purpose and requirements of this Chapter. The Property Owner will arrange for this
inspection to be conducted by a qualified person as defined by the Utah Division of Water
Quality, who will submit a sealed report of the inspection to the City Engineer.
C. City Inspections. Grant permission to City’s employees or agents to enter the property at
reasonable times to inspect the stormwater facility to ensure that it is being properly maintained.
D. Minimum Maintenance Requirements. Provide that the minimum maintenance and repair
needs for detention and retention basins, and inlets and drainage pipes and any other
stormwater facilities including, but not limited to: the removal of silt, litter, and other debris, the
cutting of grass, grass cuttings, and vegetation removal, and the replacement of landscape
vegetation. It shall also provide that the Property Owner shall be responsible for additional
maintenance and repair needs consistent with the needs and standards outlined in the BMP
Manual.
E. Time Requirements for Maintenance. Provide that maintenance needs must be addressed in a
timely manner, on a schedule to be determined by the City Engineer.
F. Reimbursement of City Executed Maintenance. Provide that if the property is not maintained
or repaired within the prescribed schedule, City may perform the maintenance and repair at
Property Owner’s expense, and bill the same to the Property Owner. The Maintenance
Agreement shall also provide that unpaid City costs of performing maintenance shall be a lien
against the property until paid in full.
13.16.060 Sediment And Erosion Control Plans
The sediment and erosion control plan shall accurately describe the potential for soil erosion and
sedimentation problems resulting from land disturbing activity and shall explain and illustrate the
measures that are to be taken to control these problems. The length and complexity of the plan is to be
commensurate with the size of the project, severity of the site condition, and potential for off-site
damage.
The plan shall be prepared by a qualified individual as defined by the State of Utah. The plan shall also
conform to the requirements found in the BMP manual, and shall include at least the following:
A. Project Description. Include a project description which briefly describes the intended project
and proposed land disturbing activity including number of units and structures to be constructed
and infrastructure required.
B. Topographic Map. Include a topographic map with contour intervals of two (2) feet or less
showing present conditions and proposed contours resulting from land disturbing activity.
C. Existing Drainage Ways. Show all existing drainage ways, including intermittent and wetweather
drainage ways. Include any designated floodways or flood plains.
D. Existing Land Cover Description. Include a general description of existing land cover.
Individual trees and shrubs do not need to be identified.
E. Landscaping Plan. A landscaping plan must be submitted with the final design describing the
vegetative stabilization and management techniques to be used at a site after construction is
completed. This plan will explain not only how the site will be stabilized after construction, but
who will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site and what practices will be
employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 25/80
F. Tree Plan. Include a tree plan that shows stands of existing trees as they are to be preserved
upon project completion, specifying their general location on the property. Also, include any
proposed trees in the tree plan. Differentiation shall be made between existing trees to be
preserved, trees to be removed, and proposed trees.
Tree protection measures must be identified, and the diameter of the area involved must also be
identified on the plan and shown to scale. Information shall be supplied concerning the proposed
destruction of exceptional and historic trees in setbacks and buffer strips, where they exist.
Complete landscape plans may be submitted separately. The plan must include the sequence of
implementation for tree protection measures.
G. Process to evaluate LID design of overall site. All development and redevelopment in Spanish
Fork City are required to consider a LID approach for managing storm water. The planning and
design process are critical for the successful implementation of LID. The applicant must refer to
Section 3 of the Spanish Fork Storm Water Drainage Design Manual when designing or
redesigning storm water drainage systems.
H. Limits. Show approximate limits of proposed clearing, grading, and filling.
I. Minimizing the Disturbance Area and Soil Compaction. Minimize the amount of excavation
by designing the building/construction to the site topography rather than flattening the site to fit
the project. During construction, protect vegetation and native soil areas from disturbance and
soil compaction. Restrict construction vehicle traffic to designated driveways/accesses to reduce
damage to soils and vegetation. Designate specific staging areas for materials.
J. Flows. Show approximate flow calculations for existing stormwater leaving any portion of the
site. Also show the approximate flows leaving site after construction and incorporating water
Run-off mitigation measures. The evaluation must include projected effects on property adjoining
the site and on existing drainage facilities and systems.
The plan must address the adequacy of outfalls from the development: when water is
concentrated, what is the capacity of waterways, if any, accepting stormwater off-site; and what
measures, including infiltration, sheeting into buffers, etc., are going to be used to prevent the
scouring of waterways and drainage areas off-site, etc.
K. Soil Description. Include a general description of existing soil types and characteristics and any
anticipated soil erosion and sedimentation problems resulting from those characteristics.
L. Sedimentation Control Improvements. Identify location, size, and layout of proposed
stormwater and sedimentation control improvements.
M. Proposed Drainage Network. Complete plans for all the proposed drainage of the site. Include
any proposed drain tile, LID, or waterway extent and sizes. Also include all proposed sizing for
storm system piping, dewatering facilities, or other waterways.
N. Sequence of Work. Show the projected sequence of work represented by the grading, drainage,
and sedimentation and erosion control plans as related to other major items of construction,
beginning with the initiation of excavation and including the construction of any sediment basins,
retention facilities, or any other structural BMP’s.
O. Remediation Measures. Identify specific remediation measures to prevent erosion and
sedimentation Run-off. Plans shall include detailed drawings of all control measures used;
stabilization measures, including vegetation and non-vegetation measures, both temporary and
permanent. Detailed construction notes and a maintenance schedule shall be included for all
control measures in the plan.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 26/80
P. Detail Drawings. Include detail drawings for the construction of rock pads, wash down pads, and
settling basins for controlling erosion; road access points; eliminating or mitigating soil, sediment,
and debris on streets and public ways to a level acceptable to the City Engineer.
Q. Proposed Structures. Show proposed structures; location (to the extent possible) and
identification of any proposed additional buildings, structures, or development on the site.
R. Future Phasing Plans. Show future phasing plans and impervious areas, if applicable.
13.16.070 Post Construction
A. Re-vegetation. Any area of land from which the natural vegetative cover has been either
partially or wholly cleared by development activities shall be re-vegetated according to a
schedule approved by the City Engineer. The following criteria shall apply to re-vegetation
efforts:
1. Reseeding must be done with an annual or perennial cover crop accompanied by
placement of straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient coverage to control erosion until
such time as the cover crop is established over ninety percent (90%) of the seeded area.
2. Replanting with native woody and herbaceous vegetation must be accompanied by
placement of straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient coverage to control erosion until
the plantings are established and are capable of controlling erosion.
3. Any area of re-vegetation must exhibit survival of a minimum of seventy-five percent
(75%) of the cover crop throughout the full year immediately following re-vegetation. Revegetation
must be repeated in successive years until the minimum seventy-five percent
(75%) survival rate for one (1) year is achieved.
B. Inspections. Periodic inspections of Stormwater management facilities shall be performed as
provided for in this Chapter by the Owner and the City. This is defined in detail in §13.16.140.
C. Records. Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management
facility shall make records of the installation of the stormwater facility, and of all maintenance and
repairs to the facility, and shall retain the records for at least five (5) years. These records shall
be made available to the City Engineer during inspection of the facility and at other reasonable
times, upon request. This is defined in detail in §13.16.140.
D. Violations. If a responsible party fails or refuses to meet the design or maintenance standards
required for stormwater facilities under this Chapter, the City Engineer, after reasonable notice,
may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance needs by performing all
necessary work to place the facility in proper working condition.
In the event that the storm water management facility becomes a danger to public safety or
public health, the City Engineer shall notify, in writing, the party responsible for maintenance of
the stormwater management facility. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall
have 15 days to effect maintenance and repair of the facility in an approved manner. In the event
that corrective action is not undertaken within that time, the City Engineer may take necessary
corrective action. The cost of any action by the City Engineer under this section shall be charged
to the responsible party, and may act as a lien against the property until paid in full. See
§13.16.110 and 13.16.120 for other enforcement, violation, and penalty provisions the City may
use.
13.16.080 Waivers
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 27/80
Every applicant shall provide for post construction stormwater management as required by this Chapter,
unless a written request to waive this requirement is filed and approved. Requests to waive the
stormwater management plan requirements shall be submitted to the City SWMP Administrator for
approval.
For post construction, minimum requirements for stormwater management may be waived in whole or in
part upon written request of the applicant, provided that at least one of the following conditions applies:
A. It can be demonstrated that the proposed development is not likely to impair attainment of the
objectives of this Chapter.
B. Alternative minimum requirements for on-site management of stormwater discharges have been
established in a stormwater management plan that has been approved by the City Engineer.
C. Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site facility. The off-site facility must be in
place and designed to provide the level of stormwater control that is equal to or greater than that
which would be afforded by on-site practices. Further, the facility must be operated and
maintained by an entity that is legally obligated to continue the operation and maintenance of the
facility.
In order to receive a waiver, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City Engineer and
SWMP Administrator that the waiver will not lead to any of the following conditions downstream:
A. Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, or other structures;
B. Degradation of biological functions or habitat;
C. Accelerated stream bank or streambed erosion or siltation;
D. Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, or property.
No land disturbance permit shall be issued where a waiver has been requested until the waiver is
granted. If no waiver is granted, the plans must be resubmitted with a Storm Water Pollution
Prevention Plan.
E. For Construction, an EPA Low Erosivity Waiver or Rainfall Erosivity Waiver may be used if it is
obtained in accordance with Appendix C.1 of the 2017 Construction General Permit. If this waiver
is filed with the State incorrectly, the owner of the property, or the contractor over the
construction will have seven days to complete a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan
(SWPPP) and file a Notice of Intent (NOI) with the State. If either party do not comply, subsection
F, of §13.16.110 may be issued and any necessary Enforcements or Penalties described in this
chapter.
13.16.090 Existing Land And Developments
Stormwater runoff shall be controlled to the extent reasonable to prevent pollution of local waters. Such
control measures shall include those methods and measures identified in the City SWMP. The following
requirements shall apply to all locations and developments at which land disturbing activities have
occurred previous to the enactment of this Chapter.
? Denuded Areas. Denuded areas must be vegetated or covered under the standards and
guidelines specified in the BMP Manual and on a schedule approved by the City Engineer.
? Cuts and Slopes. Cuts and slopes must be properly covered with appropriate vegetation and/or
properly designed retaining walls constructed.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 28/80
? Drainage Ways. Drainage ways shall be properly covered in vegetation or secured with rip-rap,
channel lining, etc., to prevent erosion.
? Clean-up Areas. Trash, junk, rubbish, etc. shall be cleared from drainage ways.
A. Notice. The City Engineer shall, in writing, notify the owners of existing locations and
developments of specific drainage, erosion, or sediment problems affecting such locations and
developments, and the specific actions required to correct those problems. The notice shall also
specify a reasonable time for compliance.
B. Inspection. The City Engineer may, to the extent authorized by state or federal law, establish
inspection programs to verify that all stormwater management facilities, including those built
before as well as after the adoption of this Chapter, are functioning within design limits.
These inspection programs may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not
limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints, or other
notice of possible violations; inspection of drainage basins or areas identified as higher than
typical sources of sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses or
industries of a type associated with higher than usual discharges of contaminants or pollutants or
with discharges of a type which are more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of
City’s NPDES/UPDES stormwater permit; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting
pursuant to environmental or safety laws.
Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records;
sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in drainage control
facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage control facilities and other BMPs.
C. Appeals. Corrective measures imposed by the City Engineer under this section are subject to
appeal as outlined in §13.16.120.
13.16.100 Illicit Discharges Detection And Elimination
This Section shall apply to all water generated on developed or undeveloped land and then entering the
MS4. No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the MS4 any discharge that is not
composed entirely of stormwater.
A. Exceptions. The commencement, conduct, or continuance of any non-stormwater discharge to
the MS4 is prohibited unless it is an uncontaminated discharge from the following sources:
1. Water line flushing or other potable water source;
2. Landscape irrigation or lawn watering with drinking water or City pressure irrigation water;
3. Diverted stream flows;
4. Rising ground water;
5. Groundwater infiltration to storm drains;
6. Uncontaminated pumped groundwater;
7. Water from foundation or footing drains;
8. Water from crawl space pumps;
9. Air conditioning condensation;
10. Springs;
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 29/80
11. Natural riparian habitat or wetland flows;
12. Swimming pools (if de-chlorinated - typically less than one PPM chlorine);
13. Firefighting activities;
14. Any other uncontaminated water source;
15. Discharges specified in writing by the City Engineer as being necessary to protect public
health and safety; or
16. Dye testing is an allowable discharge if authorized by the City Engineer.
The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an
UPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and
administered under the authority of the State of Utah Division of Water Quality, provided
that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or
order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has
been granted for any discharge to the MS4.
B. Illicit Connections. The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of illicit
connections to the MS4 is prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law
or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
C. Mitigation and UPDES Permits. Any person responsible for property or premises, which is, or
may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at the person's expense,
the BMP’s necessary to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the MS4. Compliance with
all terms and conditions of a valid UPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater
associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the
provisions of this section.
D. Notification of Spills. Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or
operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting in,
or may result in, illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into the MS4, the person shall take all
necessary steps to ensure the containment and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a
release of hazardous materials the person shall immediately notify emergency response
agencies of the occurrence.
In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, the person shall notify the City SWMP
Administrator or City Engineer in person, by telephone, or email, no later than the next business
day. Notifications in person or by telephone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and
mailed to the City SWMP Administrator within three (3) business days of the notice. If the
discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the
owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the
discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at
least three (3) years.
E. Non-Compliance. Circumstances or individuals that introduce pollutants to the MS4 may receive
enforcement, violations and penalties as stated in §13.16.110 and 13.16.120.
13.16.110 Enforcement
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 30/80
The City SWMP Administrator shall have the authority to issue notices of violation, stop work orders, and
citations, and to impose the civil penalties provided in this Chapter. The City SWMP Administrator shall
be permitted to enter and inspect any site that may discharge some water into the MS4 at all times to
investigate and determine compliance. Violations of this Chapter may result in penalties being assessed
as established herein, or by other applicable laws.
A. Responsible Parties. If in violation of this chapter, the responsible party is required to
immediately cease unacceptable disposal activities according to §4.2.3.6 of the Spanish Fork
City SWMP and State MS4Permit. The responsible party must remove and properly dispose of,
an illicit discharge(s) from the MS4, in accordance with §4.2.3.2.1 of the Spanish Fork City
SWMP and State MS4 Permit.
B. Notification of Violation (NOV). Whenever the City SWMP Administrator finds that any
permittee or any other person discharging non-storm water has violated or is violating this
Chapter or a permit or order issued hereunder, the City SWMP Administrator may serve upon
such person a written NOV.
Within seventeen (17) days of a NOV, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the
satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be
submitted to the City SWMP Administrator. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the
discharger of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the NOV.
C. Consent Orders. The City SWMP Administrator is empowered to enter into consent orders,
assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with
the person(s) responsible for the noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action(s) to be
taken by the person(s) to correct the noncompliance within a time period that is appropriate for
the severity of the noncompliance item. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as
orders issued pursuant to paragraphs (D) and (E) below.
D. Show Cause Hearing. The City SWMP Administrator may order any person who violates this
ordinance, permit or order issued hereunder, to show cause why a proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the person(s) specifying the time and place for the
meeting with the City SWMP Administrator, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for
such action, and a request that the violator show cause why this proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by certified mail
(return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing.
E. Compliance Order. When the City SWMP Administrator finds that any person has violated or
continues to violate this Chapter or a permit or order issued thereunder, he/she may issue an
order to the violator directing that, following a specific time period, adequate structures or
devices, be installed or procedures implemented and properly operated to prevent future
violations. Orders may also contain such other requirements as might be reasonably necessary
and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including the construction of appropriate
structures, installation of devices, self-monitoring, and management practices.
F. Cease and Desist Orders. When the City SWMP Administrator finds that any person has
violated or continues to violate this Chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, the City
Engineer or City SWMP Administrator may issue an order to cease and desist all such violations
and direct those persons in noncompliance to:
1. Comply forthwith; or
2. Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly
address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and terminating
the discharge.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 31/80
G. Conflicting Standards. Whenever there is a conflict between any standard contained in this
ordinance, BMP Manual, or any other applicable regulations the strictest standard shall prevail.
H. SWPPP Enforcement. If the Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan is out of compliance,
enforcement will follow the SWPPP Enforcement BMP in the City BMP manual while using
§13.16.110 and 13.16.120.
13.16.120 Violations And Penalties
Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter, who violates the provisions of any permit issued
pursuant to this Chapter, or who fails or refuses to comply with any lawful communication or notice to
abate or take corrective action by the City Engineer or SWMP Administrator, shall be guilty of a Class C
Misdemeanor. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate violation.
A. Penalties. In addition to any criminal penalties, each violation may also subject the violator to
civil penalties of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) per day for each day of violation.
B. Measuring Civil Penalties. In assessing a civil penalty, the City Engineer may consider:
1. The harm done to the public health or the environment;
2. Whether the civil penalty imposed will be a substantial economic deterrent to the illegal
activity;
3. The economic benefit gained by the violator;
4. The amount of effort put forth by the violator to remedy the violation;
5. Any unusual or extraordinary enforcement costs incurred by the City;
6. The amount of penalty established by ordinance or resolution for specific categories of
violations; and
7. Any equities of the situation which outweigh the benefit of imposing any penalty or
damage assessment.
C. Recovery of Damages and Costs. In addition to the civil penalty outlined above, City may
recover:
1. All damages proximately caused by the violator to City, which may include any
reasonable expenses incurred in investigating violations of and enforcing compliance with
this Chapter, or any other actual damages caused by the violation.
2. The costs of City’s maintenance of stormwater facilities when the user of such facilities
fails to maintain them as required by this Chapter.
D. Legal Action. The City may bring legal action to enjoin the continuing violation of this Chapter,
and the existence of any other remedy, at law or equity, shall be no defense to any such actions.
The City is entitled to recover its attorney’s fees incurred in enforcing the provisions of this
Chapter.
E. Remedies Cumulative. The remedies set forth in this Section shall be cumulative, not exclusive,
and it shall not be a defense to any action, civil or criminal, that one or more of the remedies set
forth herein has been sought or granted.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 32/80
F. Civil Fine Pass-through Recovery. In the event that a non-domestic user discharges water into
the MS4 which causes the City to violate any conditions of its state or federal stormwater
discharge obligations and the City is fined by the State of Utah or EPA for such violations, then
such non-domestic user shall be fully liable for the total amount of the fines and civil penalties
assessed against the City, together with all administrative costs incurred, including attorney’s
fees.
G. Appeals. Any person aggrieved by the imposition of a civil penalty or damage assessment as
provided by this Chapter may appeal said penalty or damage assessment to the City Council.
Notice of appeal must be filed with the City Recorder within 10 days of receipt of notice of the
civil penalty or damage assessment. A hearing with the City Council will be scheduled within 30
days of the receipt of the notice of appeal by the City Recorder. The decision of the City Council
shall be final and non-appealable.
13.16.130 Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP)
Developing a SWPPP is required by the UPDES before an NOI permit is obtained. A SWPPP is one of
the most important requirements of the permit. A SWPPP should be kept at the site, and updated as
need to reflect the current SWPPP activities on the site. Said SWPPP must be approved by the City
SWMP Administrator or a Storm Water Consultant hired by Spanish Fork City to perform such actions.
The SWPPP must abide by all items mentioned in §4.2.4 of the State Small MS4 UPDES Permit.
A. Developers or Construction Operators must obtain and maintain Notice of Intent (NOI) coverage
under the current Utah Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (UPDES) Storm Water General
Permit for construction, or an individual permit. The permit must be kept current for the duration
of the project. The NOI permit requires construction control provisions as described in
§13.16.060, to affirmatively apply, at a minimum, to all construction sites that disturb equal to or
larger than one acre, or disturb less than one acre but are part of a common plan of
development.
B. Developers or Construction Operators must maintain a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan
(SWPPP) approved by the City SWMP Administrator. The SWPPP must be kept current and
maintained for the duration of the project. SWPPP compliance, at a minimum, must include
provisions related to, among other things, the following items:
1. Assemble a storm water team;
2. Describe the nature of the construction activities;
3. Document information for emergency-related projects;
4. Describe the sequence and estimated dates of construction activities;
5. Include a site map;
6. List construction-site pollutants;
7. Identify all non-storm water discharges;
8. Provide buffer documentation, if applicable;
9. Describe storm water control measures;
10. Describe pollution-prevention procedures;
11. Describe procedures for inspection, maintenance, and corrective action;
12. Document staff training; and SWPPP certification
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 33/80
C. Non-Compliance. Sites that become non-compliant with their SWPPP may receive enforcement,
violations and penalties as stated in §13.16.110 and 13.16.120.
D. Spanish Fork City uses the State provided Construction General Permit (CGP) or Common Plan
of Development (CPoD) SWPPP templates. When creating your SWPPP, BMP’s must be
implemented. The BMP’s must be described in detail in the appendices stated in the State
SWPPP templates. The CPOD SWPPP template provides a list of sources that provide BMP
details to include in your SWPPP. Spanish Fork City also has a BMP manual with detailed BMP’s
that can be included in your SWPPP.
13.16.140 Long Term Storm Water Management Plan (LTSMP)
A Long Term Storm Water Management Plan (LTSMP) or Post-Construction Control ordinances are
designed to ensure that the storm water runoff associated with new development to mirror the predevelopment
storm water runoff of the previously undeveloped site or to improve the storm water runoff
of a redeveloped site and reduce the discharge of storm water to the MS4.
A. A LTSMP is required at commercial properties developed after 2015, new developments,
redeveloped sites, and for any site that the City Engineer or City SWMP Administrator requires.
B. A Maintenance Agreement is a mandatory document for sites required to implement an LTSMP.
The maintenance agreement must be agreed upon and signed to legally bind the Property
Owner and Spanish Fork City to the agreement. The document will last for the existence of the
current established development of such property, beginning once both Property Owner and
Spanish Fork City sign the agreement.
C. Sites required to maintain an LTSMP must address Best Management Practices (BMP’s), both
structural and non-structural, that will be used to reduce pollutants and mitigate discharge to the
MS4.
D. Non-Structural BMP’s are required to be used that address the pollutants that the owner/operator
knows will enter or is susceptible to enter the MS4. Such pollutants must be listed in the LTSMP.
E. The City SWMP Administrator must inspect permanent structural BMP’s at least once, or as
necessary during installation of said BMP’s.
F. Inspection Process
1. Both the owner/operator and City must perform inspections on a monthly scheduled
basis, and as needed. High risk sites may require inspection more frequently.
2. The maintenance agreement must be kept current, particularly for the owner/operator of
the site.
3. Spanish Fork City holds the right to conduct oversight inspection of any BMP’s as
frequently as the City determines necessary for each individual site.
4. Account for any transfers in leases and/or deeds.
5. The city holds the right to perform maintenance or correct neglected MTSMP items at the
owner/operator’s expense.
6. An annual maintenance and inspection report are required by the owner/operator. This
must be documented no later than the end of January of each new year.
7. Access for City inspections at least once every 5 years, or more frequently, to ensure the
owner/operator has been performing adequate maintenance and that BMP’s are working.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 34/80
G. Non-Compliance. Sites that become non-compliant with their LTSMP will receive enforcement,
violations and penalties as set forth in §13.16.110 and 13.16.120.
(Ord. No. 18-18, Replaced 09/18/2018)
13.20 Telecommunications Utility
13.20.010 General
13.20.020 Utility Rules And Regulations
13.20.030 Damage To Property - Interruption Of Service - Liability
13.20.040 Installations
13.20.050 Telecommunications Competition
13.20.010 General
There is created a telecommunications utility known as Spanish Fork Community Network (SFCN),
which shall be a division of the Information Systems Department. The telecommunications utility shall
provide telecommunication services including but not limited to: internet services, cable television,
telephony, data transmission, and other telecommunications related services to City residents. The
telecommunications utility shall be responsible for the proper installation and maintenance of all City
telecommunication facilities including but not limited to: poles, conduit, conductor, nodes, switches,
junction boxes, and head end.
SFCN is hereby granted authority to construct, own, purchase, hire, lease, maintain, and operate all
aspects of the telecommunications system within the City. SFCN may enter into operation,
management, license, joint construction, or other agreements with cable television providers, internet
service providers, local telephone exchange carriers, and/or other telecommunications companies in
order to provide quality telecommunications services to its subscribers.
Residents of the City, where such services are available, may subscribe to such telecommunications
services as may be offered by the City, or may elect to not subscribe for such services. Subscribers will
be bound by the requirements of the subscription contract.
Fiber and/or electronic cabling and other equipment installed by or at the direction of SFCN for the
distribution of telecommunications services shall be the property of the City.
This Chapter is enacted to promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Spanish Fork City, by
providing for the efficient, safe, affordable, and environmentally sound distribution of
telecommunications.
13.20.020 Utility Rules And Regulations
Spanish Fork City has the right to go upon private property where it has easements, either formal or
prescriptive, in order to trim trees and other vegetation to keep them from interfering with the
telecommunications cabling. Tree and vegetation trimming does not have the purpose of being
aesthetically pleasing, but will be for the purpose of maintaining safe and reliable lines. The scope of any
trimming will be at the sole discretion of SFCN, and will be based upon equipment and facilities present,
and the type of trees or vegetation involved and their propensity for rapid growth. If a tree should need to
be removed, the City will still advise and work with the property owners, but removal will ultimately be
the responsibility of the owner, unless the tree or vegetation is in the public right-of-way. In such an
event the City will decide and may proceed to remove a tree or vegetation. The City may top a tree if a
property owner fails to timely remove it.
13.20.030 Damage To Property - Interruption Of Service - Liability
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 35/80
All consumers of telecommunications services from SFCN shall be responsible for all damages to or
loss of property belonging to the City located on such consumer's premises unless occasioned by cause
beyond their control or by the negligence of the telecommunications utility. The telecommunications
utility shall not be responsible for any interruption or failure to supply telecommunications services.
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to relieve or lessen the responsibility of any person owning,
operating or installing cabling, wires, fixtures, appliances, apparatus, construction, or equipment for
damages to anyone injured or damaged either in person or to property by any defect therein.
13.20.040 Installations
All installations related to the telecommunications utility shall comply with all applicable codes adopted
by the City and shall comply with all licensing and inspection ordinances now or hereafter adopted by
the City, including the design and development standards.
13.20.050 Telecommunications Competition
The City promotes and encourages competition for voice, data, video, and video programming services
that make the latest and best technology available and which keep service prices affordable for all City
residents and businesses.
The City will manage access to the public easements and rights-of-way for telecommunications
purposes in a nondiscriminatory, competitively neutral, and in a nonexclusive manner, and, to the extent
allowed under applicable law, receive fair compensation therefore.
Telecommunications and video programming franchises and licenses will be managed to preserve the
integrity of the City infrastructure, assure efficient use of City property, and ensure compliance with City
ordinances, rules, and regulations. The following guidelines shall be in effect:
A. Minimal disruption of public and private property will be a priority;
B. Telecommunications and video programming franchises will be required to place their facilities
underground in situations where existing utility services are underground and/or whenever
existing overhead facilities go underground and/or whenever City policy so requires;
C. All construction and development standards of the City shall be followed.
Any franchise fees assessed against private businesses providing telecommunications services shall
have a like cost assessed against the telecommunications utility.
13.24 Wastewater Utility
13.24.010 Definitions
13.24.020 General
13.24.030 Disposal Of Waste
13.24.040 Septic Tanks And The Private Disposal Of Wastewater
13.24.050 Sump Pumps
13.24.060 Shared Sewer Laterals
13.24.070 Discharging Into City Wastewater System
13.24.080 Hauled Wastes
13.24.090 Commercial Food Waste Grinders
13.24.100 Notification Requirements For Hazardous Waste
13.24.110 Industrial Discharges - Notice, Permitting And Regulations
13.24.120 Permits
13.24.130 Special Agreements And Contracts
13.24.140 Restricted Substances - Discharge Alternatives
13.24.150 Industrial Pretreatment
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 36/80
13.24.160 Industrial User Compliance Assurance
13.24.170 Tests, Sampling, Measurements, Analyses - Standards
13.24.180 Accidental Discharge Control Plan
13.24.190 Pretreatment Facilities
13.24.200 Confidential Information
13.24.210 Publication Of Users In Significant Noncompliance
13.24.220 Violations
13.24.230 Treatment Bypasses
13.24.010 Definitions
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the
meanings given herein:
A. "Act" or "The Act". Shall mean the Federal Water Pollution Control Act also known as the Clean
Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §1251 et seq. and any subsequent amendments thereto.
B. "Approval Authority". Shall mean the State of Utah, Department of Environmental Quality,
Division of Water Quality or its successor agency.
C. "Authorized Representative".
1. If the user is a corporation or limited liability company:
a. The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation, or the
member or manager of the LLC, in charge of a principal business function, or any
other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the
corporation; or
b. The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities,
provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions that govern
the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of
making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other
comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with
environmental laws and regulation; can ensure that the necessary systems are
established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for
individual wastewater discharge permit requirements; and where authority to sign
documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with
corporate procedures.
2. If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor,
respectively.
3. If the user is a Federal, State, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official
appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the
governmental facility, or their designee.
4. The individuals described in paragraphs 1 through 3, above, may designate a Duly
Authorized Representative if the authorization is submitted in writing to the Wastewater
Division Manager, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the
overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall
operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility
for environmental matters for the company.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 37/80
D. "Best Management Practices (BMPs)". Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices,
maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in
§13.24.070. BMPs may also include, but are not limited to, treatment requirements, operating
procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal,
or drainage from raw materials storage.
E. "Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD)". Means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at
twenty degrees centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter.
F. "Building Drain". Means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge from waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and
conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the
building wall.
G. "Building Sewer". Means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place
of disposal, also called house connection.
H. "Business Classification Code" or "BCC". Shall mean a classification of discharges based on
the 1972 Standard Industrial Classification Manual as amended, Office of Management and
Budget of the United States of America.
I. "Contamination". Shall mean an impairment of the quality of the waters of the state by waste to
a degree which creates a hazard to the environment or public health through poisoning or
through spread of disease, as described in Standard Methods.
J. "Control Authority". Spanish Fork City.
K. "Cooling Water". Shall mean water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooler, or
refrigeration unit to which the only pollutant added is heat.
L. "Daily Maximum". The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a pollutant collected during
a calendar day.
M. "Daily Maximum Limit". The maximum allowable discharge limit of a pollutant during a calendar
day. Where Daily Maximum Limits are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total
mass discharged over the course of the day. Where Daily Maximum Limits are expressed in
terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the
pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day.
N. "Direct Discharge". Shall mean the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly into
the waters of the State of Utah.
O. "Discharger". Shall mean any person who discharges or causes the discharge of wastewater
into a POTW system.
P. "Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)". Shall mean the United States Environmental
Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as designation for the
administrator or other duly authorized official of said Agency.
Q. "Existing Source". Any source of discharge that is not a “New Source.”
R. "Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard" or "Categorical Standard". Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and
(c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. §1317) that apply to a specific category of users and that appear in 40
CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 38/80
S. "Floatable Oil". Shall mean oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by
gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. Wastewater shall be
considered free of floatable oil if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere
with the treatment system.
T. "Food Waste". Means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation,
cooking, and serving of foods.
U. "Grab Sample". A sample that is taken from a waste stream without regard to the flow in the
waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes.
V. "Hazardous Waste". Hazardous Waste as defined in 40 CFR 261.3, which is incorporated
herein and made a part hereof.
W. "Indirect Discharge". Shall mean the introduction of pollutants into a POTW from any nondomestic
source regulated under §307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act. An indirect discharge is the
introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any non-domestic source.
X. "Industrial Waste". Shall mean the wastewater from industrial processes, trades, or businesses
as distinct from domestic or sanitary waste.
Y. "Industrial Waste Surcharge". A charge levied on industrial users of the sewage treatment
works for the additional cost of treating waste discharges of an abnormal strength or
characteristic. This charge includes capital as well as operating and maintenance costs.
Z. "Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit". A permit to deposit or discharge industrial waste
into any sanitary sewer under the jurisdiction of the City.
AA. "Interference". A discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from
other sources, both:
1. Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge
processes, use or disposal; and
2. Therefore, is a cause of a violation of Spanish Fork City’s UPDES permit or of the
prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following
statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent State
or local regulations: §405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II
commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any
State regulations contained in any State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to
Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances
Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act.
AB. "Instantaneous Limit". The maximum or minimum concentration (or load) of a pollutant allowed
to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete, grab or composite
sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
AC. "Local Limit". Specific discharge limits developed to protect the POTW in accordance with 40
CFR 403.5 and enforced by Spanish Fork City upon industrial or commercial facilities to
implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in §13.24.070. The development
documents are kept on file at the Wastewater Division office.
AD. "Monthly Average". The sum of all “daily discharges” measured during a calendar month divided
by the number of “daily discharges” measured during that month.
AE. "Monthly Average Limit". The highest allowable average of “daily discharges” over a calendar
month, calculated as the sum of all “daily discharges” measured during a calendar month divided
by the number of “daily discharges” measured during that month.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 39/80
AF. "National Prohibitive Discharge Standard" or "Prohibitive Discharge Standard". Any
regulation developed under the authority of §307(b) of the Act or under 40 CFR 403.5.
AG. "Natural Outlet". Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a
watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or groundwater.
AH. "New Source".
1. Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge
of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed
Pretreatment Standards under §307(c) of the Act that will be applicable to such source if
such Standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
a. The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no
other source is located; or
b. The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or
production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an Existing
Source; or
c. The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure,
facility, or installation are substantially independent of an Existing Source at the
same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors
such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant,
and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of
activity as the Existing Source, should be considered.
2. Construction on a site at which an Existing Source is located results in a modification
rather than a New Source if the construction does not create a new building, structure,
facility, or installation meeting the criteria of §(1)(b) or (c) above but otherwise alters,
replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.
3. Construction of a New Source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the
owner or operator has:
a. Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction program
(1) any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or
(2) significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal
of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the
placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment;
or
b. Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or
equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time.
Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without
substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do
not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph.
AI. "Pass Through". A discharge which exits the POTW into Waters of the State in quantities or
concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources,
is a cause of a violation of any requirement of Spanish Fork City’s UPDES permit, including an
increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 40/80
AJ. "Person". Any individual, partnership, copartner ship, firm, company, corporation, limited liability
company, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal
entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all Federal,
State, and local governmental entities.
AK. "PH". Means a measure of the acidity or basicity of a solution, expressed in standard units.
AL. "Pollutant". Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage,
sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive
materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural
and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS,
turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).
AM. "Pretreatment" or "Treatment". The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful
state prior to, or in lieu of, discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the POTW.
The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes, or
process changes by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless
allowed by an applicable Pretreatment Standard.
AN. "Pretreatment Requirements". Any substantive or procedural requirement related to
pretreatment, other than a National Pretreatment Standard, imposed on an industrial user.
AO. "Pretreatment Standards". Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by
the EPA in accordance with §307 (b) and (c) of the Act, which applies to Industrial users, which
includes but is not limited to prohibited discharge standards, categorical Pretreatment Standards,
and Local Limits.
AP. "Prohibited Discharge Standards" Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain
substances as identified in §13.24.070.
AQ. "Properly Shredded Food Waste". The waste from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of
food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the
flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/4 inch in any
dimension.
AR. "Public Sewer". A common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility.
AS. "Publicly Owned Treatment Works" or "POTW". A treatment works, as defined by §212 of the
Act (33 U.S.C. §1292), which is owned by Spanish Fork City. This definition includes any devices
or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or
industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances, which convey wastewater to a
treatment plant. It also includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances if they convey wastewater
to a POTW Treatment Plant. The term also means the municipality as defined in section 502(4)
of the Act, which has jurisdiction over the Indirect Discharges to and the discharges from such a
treatment works.
AT. "Receiving Water Quality Requirements". Requirements for the POTW treatment plant effluent
established by the City or by applicable state or federal regulatory agencies for the protection of
receiving water quality. Such requirements shall include effluent limitations and waste discharge
standards, requirements, limitations, or prohibitions which may be established or adopted from
time to time by state or federal laws or regulatory agencies.
AU. "Sanitary Sewer". A pipe or conduit system and appurtenances for the collection, transportation,
pumping, and treatment of sewage.
AV. "Sewage". Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations,
etc.).
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 41/80
AW. "Sewer". A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
AX. "Significant Industrial User". Except as provided in paragraphs (3) of this Section, a Significant
Industrial User is:
1. An Industrial User subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
2. An industrial user that:
a. Discharges an average of twenty five thousand (25,000) gpd or more of process
wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler
blowdown wastewater); or
b. Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five (5) percent or more of
the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment
plant; or
c. Is designated as such by Spanish Fork City on the basis that it has a reasonable
potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any
Pretreatment Standard or Requirement.
3. Upon a finding that a User meeting the criteria of an Industrial User has no reasonable
potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any Pretreatment
Standard or Requirement, Spanish Fork City may at any time, on its own initiative or in
response to a petition received from an Industrial User, and in accordance with
procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such User should not be considered a
Significant Industrial User.
AY. "Slug Load" or "Slug Discharge". Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration, which could
cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in §13.24.070. A slug discharge is any
discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a
non-customary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass
through, or in any other way violate the POTW’s regulations, local limits or permit conditions.
AZ. "Standard Methods". The procedures described in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater as published by the American Public Health Association,
the American Waterworks Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
BA. "Standard Industrial Classification". A classification pursuant to the 1972 Standard Industrial
Classification Manual as amended, Office of Management and Budget of the United States of
America.
BB. "Storm Sewer". A sewer that carries only storm, surface, and groundwater drainage.
BC. "Stormwater". Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and
resulting therefrom.
BD. "Suspended Solid. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of or is suspended in
water, wastewater, or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering in accordance
with procedures set forth in Standard Methods.
BE. "Toxic Pollutants". Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations
promulgated by the administrator of EPA under §307(a) of the Act or which may be listed in any
schedule formulated by the Wastewater Division Manager and approved by the City Council.
BF. "Unpolluted Water". Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water
that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefitted by
discharge to the sanitary sewer and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 42/80
BG. "User" or "Industrial User". Shall mean a source of indirect discharge.
BH. "Utah Pollution Discharge Elimination System (UPDES Permit)". A permit issued pursuant to
§402 of the Act by the State of Utah.
BI. "Wastewater". The liquid and water carrying industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings,
commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, together with any infiltrating
groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated,
which enters the POTW.
BJ. "Wastewater Division Manager". The manager of the City wastewater collection system and
treatment plant. Except as otherwise provided herein, the Wastewater Division Manager shall
administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. Any powers granted to or
duties imposed upon Wastewater Division Manager may be delegated by the Wastewater
Division Manager to a duly authorized City employee.
BK. "Wastewater Facilities". The structures, equipment, and processes required to collect, carry
away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent.
BL. "Wastewater Treatment Plant" or "Treatment Plant (WWTP)". That portion of the POTW which
is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and compatible industrial waste.
BM. "Wastewater Treatment Works". An arrangement of devices and structures for treating
wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge. Sometimes this term is used as synonymous with
waste treatment plant or wastewater treatment plant or water pollution control plant.
BN. "Watercourse". A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water, either continuously or
intermittently.
BO. "Waters of the State". All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, water-courses, waterways, wells,
springs, irrigation systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water,
surface and underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow
through, or border upon this state or any portion thereof. Bodies of water confined to and
retained within the limits of private property, and which do not develop into or constitute a
nuisance, or a public health hazard, or a menace to fish and wildlife, shall not be considered to
be “waters of the state” under this definition.
13.24.020 General
There is created a wastewater utility known as Spanish Fork Wastewater, which shall be a division of the
Public Works Department. The wastewater utility shall provide wastewater collection and treatment for
the City. It shall be responsible for the proper installation and maintenance of all wastewater facilities
including, but not limited to: piping, manholes, siphons, lift stations, and treatment facilities.
A. This Chapter is enacted to promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Spanish Fork
City, by providing for the efficient, safe, and environmentally sound collection, treatment, and
release of wastewater. This Chapter sets forth uniform requirements for Users of the Publicly
Owned Treatment Works for Spanish Fork City and enables Spanish Fork City to comply with all
applicable State and Federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code
[U.S.C.] §1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (Title 40 of the Code of
Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 403) and the Utah Administrative Code R317-8-8. The
objectives of this ordinance are:
1. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Publicly Owned Treatment Works that
will interfere with its operation or contaminate the resulting sludge;
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 43/80
2. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Publicly Owned Treatment Works that
will pass through the Publicly Owned Treatment Works, inadequately treated, into
receiving waters, or the atmosphere, or otherwise be incompatible with the Publicly
Owned Treatment Works;
3. To protect both Publicly Owned Treatment Works personnel who may be affected by
wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public;
4. To promote reuse and recycling of wastewater and sludge from the Publicly Owned
Treatment Works;
5. To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance,
and improvement of the Publicly Owned Treatment Works; and
6. To enable Spanish Fork City to comply with its Utah Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other Federal
or State laws to which the Publicly Owned Treatment Works is subject.
B. This Chapter shall apply to all Users of the Publicly Owned Treatment Works. This Chapter
authorizes the issuance of individual wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring,
compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires
User reporting.
C. Rates. All users of the wastewater system shall pay a monthly base rate and a usage rate. The
City may, under normal circumstances, make adjustments as needed to ensure equitable service
charges.
D. Mandatory Connection to Public Sanitary Sewer. The owner(s) of all houses, buildings, or
properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated
within the City and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or
may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the City, is required, at the owner's
expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the
proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, within sixty days after date
of official notice to do so, provided, that said public sewer is within three hundred (300) feet of the
property line.
13.24.030 Disposal Of Waste
A. Excrement, Food Waste and Objectionable Wastes. It is unlawful for any person to place,
deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within
the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any human or animal excrement, Food
Waste, or other objectionable waste.
B. Disposal to Natural Outlets. It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City, or in
any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where
suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and all
State and Federal laws.
13.24.040 Septic Tanks And The Private Disposal Of Wastewater
Except as provided in this Chapter, it is unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic
tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. Where a public sanitary
sewer is not available under the provisions of this Chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a
private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this Chapter, if approved by the
City Engineer.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 44/80
A. Permit. Before commencement of construction of a septic tank or any other private wastewater
disposal system, the owner(s) shall first obtain a building permit, which will be approved by the
City Engineer.
B. Inspection. A permit for a septic tank or any other private wastewater disposal system shall not
become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. The
City shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction, and, in any event, the
applicant for the permit shall notify the City when the work is ready for final inspection, and
before any underground portions are covered.
C. State Regulations. The type, capacities, location, and layout of a septic tank or any other private
wastewater disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the Department of Public
Health and the Department of Water Quality of the State of Utah. A permit from the Utah County
Health Department is required prior to filing an application with the City. A permit from the Utah
Department of Water Quality may need to be obtained if required.
D. Lot Size. No permit shall be issued for a septic tank or any other private wastewater disposal
system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than five
(5) acres.
E. Outlets. Septic tanks or any other private wastewater disposal systems shall not be permitted to
discharge to any natural outlet.
F. Maintenance. The owner(s) of septic tanks or any other private wastewater disposal facilities
shall operate and maintain the facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the
City.
13.24.050 Sump Pumps
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the
basement floor. In all buildings in which any indoor building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the
public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
13.24.060 Shared Sewer Laterals
A separate and independent building sewer lateral shall be provided for every building; except where
one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be
constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer
from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building
sewer service, but the City does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage
caused by or resulting from any such single connection as designated in this section.
13.24.070 Discharging Into City Wastewater System
A. Unpolluted Non-sanitary Sewage Water. No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any unpolluted waters such as stormwater, surface water, groundwater, subsurface
drainage, or cooling water directly or indirectly to the City wastewater system. Types of these
discharges not allowed include but are not limited to: roof downspouts, foundation drains, land
drains, parking lot drains, and areaway drains.
B. Polluted Non-sanitary Sewage Water. Polluted non-sanitary sewage water may only be
discharged into the City wastewater system when authorized by the Wastewater Division
Manager.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 45/80
C. General Prohibited Discharges. No User shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the
POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes Pass Through or Interference. These general
prohibitions and specific prohibitions (listed in §13.24.070D) apply to all Users of the POTW
whether or not they are subject to categorical Pretreatment Standards or any other National,
State, or local Pretreatment Standards or Requirements.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 46/80
D. Specific Prohibitions. No User shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the
following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
1. Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited
to, waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees F (60 degrees C)
using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
2. Pollutants which will cause corrosive structural damage to the POTW, but in no case
Discharges with pH lower than 5.0, unless the works is specifically designed to
accommodate such Discharges;
3. Pollutants which will cause corrosive structural damage to the POTW, but in no case
discharges with a pH of more than 10.0.
4. Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the
POTW resulting in Interference;
5. Solids shall not be discharged that are greater than 1/4 inch;
6. Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge
at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause Interference with the POTW;
7. Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW resulting in Interference,
but in no case heat in such quantities that the temperature at the POTW Treatment Plant
exceeds 40 °C (104 °F) unless the Approval Authority, upon request of the POTW,
approves alternate temperature limits;
8. Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts
that will cause Interference or Pass Through;
9. Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW
in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems;
10. Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the POTW.
See §13.24.080.
11. Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or
by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to
life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair;
12. Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such
as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently
imparts color to the treatment plant’s effluent, thereby violating the City’s NPDES permit;
13. Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with
applicable State or Federal regulations;
14. Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, Noncontact Cooling
Water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the Wastewater
Division Manager;
15. Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes;
16. Medical Wastes, except as specifically authorized by the Wastewater Division Manager in
an individual wastewater discharge permit;
17. Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant’s
effluent to fail toxicity test;
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 47/80
18. Detergents, surface active agents, or other substances which that might cause excessive
foaming in the POTW;
E. Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this Section shall not be processed or stored
in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW.
13.24.080 Hauled Wastes
Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the Wastewater
Division Manager, and at such times as are established by the Wastewater Division Manager. Such
waste shall not violate §13.24.070 of this Chapter or any other requirements established by the City. The
Wastewater Division Manager may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain individual wastewater
discharge permits.
Only wastes from residential sewage disposal systems (i.e.: septic tank waste, cesspool waste) may be
discharged into the public sewer system by waste haulers.
Any wastes, including septic wastes removed by a hauler from nonresidential, industrial, or commercial
customers are specifically prohibited, and may not be discharged.
13.24.090 Commercial Food Waste Grinders
Mechanically operated grinders or disposals for producing ground food waste are permitted in
commercial establishments, provided all grinder installations be approved in writing by the Wastewater
Division Manager prior to their use. Each such grinder and disposer shall meet the following standards:
A. It shall use a wet process pulping system, including a pulper and a dewatering press, or other
devices, which discharge at least 75% of the volume of pulp or solid wastes run through it into a
garbage can or other container for transport to a proper and lawful solid waste disposal site.
B. It shall utilize a closed loop or other design which provides for a minimum of 85% use of
recirculated water.
C. The fluid discharged therefrom into the sewer shall flow readily through an approved trap or
interceptor, drain line, or soil line in a manner which prevents clogging or stoppage of the drain
line.
D. The entire installation shall comply in all particulars with the applicable provision of state and
local plumbing and electrical codes.
E. The grinder or disposal will be operated with only cold water flowing into the grinder while
connected to the POTW sewer.
13.24.100 Notification Requirements For Hazardous Waste
A. Any User who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the Wastewater
Division Manager, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and State hazardous
waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance, which, if otherwise
disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261. Such notification must include the
name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR 261, the EPA hazardous waste number,
and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the Industrial User discharges more
than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also
contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to
the Industrial User:
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 48/80
1. An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes;
2. An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste stream
discharged during that calendar month; and
3. An estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged
during the following twelve months.
B. All notifications must take place within 180 days after the discharge of the listed or characteristic
hazardous waste. Any notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each
hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed discharges must be submitted
under §13.24.110(L). The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants
already reported under the self-monitoring requirements of §13.24.160(B).
C. Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of paragraph A, above, during a calendar month
in which they discharge no more than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the
wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge
of more than fifteen (15) kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any
quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a
one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the User discharges more than such
quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification.
D. In the case of any new regulations under §3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of
hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the User must notify
the Wastewater Division Manager, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division
Director, and State hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety
(90) days of the effective date of such regulations.
E. In the case of any notification made under this Section, the User shall certify that it has a
program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree
it has determined to be economically practical.
F. This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be
discharged by this ordinance, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable Federal or State law.
13.24.110 Industrial Discharges - Notice, Permitting And Regulations
A. Industrial User Application Questionnaire. No person shall discharge, or cause to be
discharged, any commercial or industrial wastewaters directly or indirectly, or make a connection
to the sewage system or facilities owned by the City without first submitting a Notification of
Intent and a Discharge Industrial Wastewater Questionnaire to the Wastewater Division Manager
ninety (90) days prior to discharge. Those industries deemed significant by the Wastewater
Division Manager, and so notified, shall obtain a discharge permit prior to discharging as required
by ordinance. The ninety (90) day prior notice may be waived by the Wastewater Division
Manager, upon request and good cause. All permittees that will be continuing to discharge are
required to complete and application ninety (90) days prior to the permit expiring.
The Application shall include the following information:
1. Identifying Information.
a. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and
owner.
b. Contact information for the authorized representative and duly authorized
representative for the facility.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 49/80
c. The description of activities, facilities, and plant production processes on the
premises.
2. Environmental Permits. A list of any environmental permits held by or for the facility.
3. Description of Operations.
a. A brief description of the nature, average rate of productions (including each
product produced by type, amount, processes, and rate of production), and
standard industrial classifications of the operation carried out by such user. The
description should include a schematic process diagram, which indicated points of
discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes.
b. Types of wastes generated, and a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or
stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged
to the POTW.
c. Number and type of employees, hours of operations, and proposed or actual
hours of operation.
d. Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day)
e. Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all
sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all
points of discharge.
4. Time and durations of discharges.
5. The location for monitoring all wastes covered by the permit.
6. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per
day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to
allow the use of the combined waste stream formula as set out in §13.24.110(G).
7. Measurement of Pollutants.
a. The categorical Pretreatment Standards applicable to each regulated process and
any new categorically regulated processes for existing sources.
b. The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentrations,
and/or mass, where required by the Standard or by the Wastewater Division
Manager, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process.
c. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass,
where required shall be reported.
d. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in
accordance with procedures set out in section 13.24.170, Where the Standard
requires compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall
submit documentation as required by the Wastewater Division Manager or the
applicable Standards to determine compliance.
e. Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in
§13.24.170.
8. Any requests for a monitoring waiver for a pollutant neither present or expected to be
present in the discharge based on §13.24.160(C).
9. Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the Wastewater Division
Manager.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 50/80
B. Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the User for
revision.
C. Based on information provided by the permittee in §13.24.110(A), the City will within 30 days
determine if additional information is needed, a permit is not necessary, or if a permit will be
required to be issued before the Industrial User discharge is allowed to the POTW.
D. Should any of the information requested or supplied be considered by the User to be of a
confidential nature, the User should request confidential status in accordance with §13.24.200 of
this Ordinance. Information regarding sampling and analysis of the discharge is not considered
confidential information.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 51/80
E. Baseline Monitoring Reports
1. Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical
Pretreatment Standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination
under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing Categorical Industrial Users
currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the
Wastewater Division Manager a Baseline Monitoring Report which contains the
information listed in section 2, below. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of
their discharge, New Sources, and sources that become Categorical Industrial Users
subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the
Wastewater Division Manager a Baseline Monitoring Report which contains the
information listed in section 2, below. A New Source shall report the method of
pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A New Source
also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 52/80
2. The Baseline Monitoring Report shall include the following information:
a. All information required in §§13.24.110(A)(1), 13.24.110(A)(2), 13.24.110(A)(3),
and 13.24.110(A)(6).
b. Measurement of pollutants.
(1) All information required in §13.24.110(A)(7);
(2) The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile
the data necessary to comply with the requirements of this paragraph;
(3) Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment
facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated
process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the
regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment, the user should measure the
flows and concentrations necessary to allow the use of the combined
waste stream formula in 40CFR 403.6(e) to evaluate compliance with the
Pretreatment Standards. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit
has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e) this adjusted limit
along with supporting data shall be submitted to the Control Authority;
(4) Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with §13.24.170;
(5) The Wastewater Division Manager may allow the submission of a baseline
report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides
information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatments
measures; and
(6) The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling and
methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is
representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to
the POTW;
c. Compliance Certification. A statement, reviewed by the users Authorized
Representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether
additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is
required to meet the Pretreatment Standards and requirements.
d. Compliance Schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required for
the user to meet the Pretreatment Standards, the shortest schedule by which the
user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M must be provided. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable Pretreatment Standard. A compliance schedule
pursuant to this section must meet the requirements outlined in §13.24.110(C).
e. Signature and Report Certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be
certified in accordance with §13.24.120(G) of this ordinance and signed by an
Authorized Representative.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 53/80
F. Compliance Schedule and Progress Reports. The following conditions shall apply to the
compliance schedule required by §13.24.110(E)(2)(d):
1. The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the
commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation
of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable Pretreatment
Standards. Such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing
preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and
completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation;
2. No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months;
3. The user shall submit a progress report to the Wastewater Division Manager no later than
fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and final date of compliance
including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the
reason for any delay, and if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the
established schedule; and
4. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the
Wastewater Division Manager.
G. Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards. Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards
specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties which may be
discharged to a POTW by existing or new industrial users in specific industrial subcategories
have been established by EPA in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 and are
hereby incorporated. Users subject to categorical standards shall comply with these standards.
When wastewater subject to a categorical Pretreatment Standard is mixed with wastewater not
regulated by the same Standard, the Wastewater Division Manager shall impose an alternate
limit in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e).
H. State Requirements. Users must comply with Utah State Pretreatment Standards codified in
Rule R-317-8-8.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 54/80
I. Local Limits. The Wastewater Division Manager is authorized to establish Local Limits pursuant
to 40 CFR 403.5(c).
Local limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. All loading for
metallic substances are for total metal unless indicated otherwise. The development documents
for local limits are kept at the Wastewater Division office and can be reviewed if requested.
The Wastewater Division Manager may develop Best Management Practices (BMPs), by
ordinance or in individual wastewater discharge permits, to implement local limits and the
requirements of §13.24.070.
No Significant Industrial User or other designated non-SIU shall discharge wastewater containing
pollutants in excess of the specific local limits as established by the City as needed. The local
limits are developed and implemented per the requirements of 40 CFR 403.
The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass through and interference.
Allocations of constituents listed below will be distributed on a case by case basis. Oil and
grease shall be limited to a maximum daily concentration of 100 mg/l.
Constituent Maximum Allocatable Industrial Load
Arsenic 0.68 lb/day
Cadmium 0.07 lb/day
Total Chromium 27.48 lb/day
Chromium III 26.3 lb/day
Chromium IV 1.18 lb/day
Copper 1.15 lb/day
Lead 1.18 lb/day
Mercury 0.0005 lb/day
Molybdenum 0.94 lb/day
Nickel 4.77 lb/day
Selenium 0.19 lb/day
Silver 1.71 lb/day
Zinc 12.93 lb/day
Cyanide 0.29 lb/day
Phenol 3.34 lb/day
BOD5 2,400 lb/day
TSS 2,030 lb/day
Local requirements and limitations on discharge shall apply in any case where such
requirements and limitations are more stringent than Federal or State requirements and
limitations and have been approved.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 55/80
J. Spanish Fork City Right of Revision. Spanish Fork City reserves the right to establish, by
ordinance or individual wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements
on discharges to the POTW consistent with the purpose of this Chapter. In addition, the
Wastewater Division Manager is authorized to temporarily or permanently revoke or suspend
issuance of any type of permit at any time in order to protect the POTW from Pass Through or
Interference in order to maintain compliance with any UPDES permit requirement or pretreatment
program requirement. The Wastewater Division Manager shall also have the right to deny new or
increased contributions or to set additional conditions on such contributions to protect the POTW,
including limits that may be more stringent that the approved local limits.
K. Reports of Potential Problems. In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch
discharge, a Slug Discharge or Slug Load, that might cause potential problems for the POTW,
the User shall immediately notify either in person or via a phone conversation with the
Wastewater Division Manager of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the
discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by
the User.
A notice shall be permanently posted on the User’s bulletin board or other prominent place
advising employees who to call in the event of a discharge described in the paragraph above.
Employers shall ensure that all employees, who could cause such a discharge to occur, are
advised of the emergency notification procedure.
Significant Industrial Users are required to notify the Wastewater Division Manager immediately
of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a Slug Discharge.
In addition to the above, users are required, within five (5) days following a discharge in violation
of this ordinance, Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards, State or City regulations, to
submit to the Wastewater Division Manager a detailed written report describing the cause of the
discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent future occurrences. Such
notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may
be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to persons or
property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability
which may be imposed by this ordinance or other applicable law.
L. Reports of Changed Conditions. Users must notify the Wastewater Division Manager of any
significant changes to the user’s operations or systems which might alter the nature, quality, or
volume of its wastewater at least 90 days before the change, including changes that may affect
slug discharges to the POTW.
The Wastewater Division Manager may require the user to submit such information as may be
deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of an Industrial
User Application Questionnaire under §13.24.110. The Wastewater Division Manager may issue
an individual wastewater discharge permit or modify an existing wastewater discharge permits in
response to the changed conditions.
The Wastewater Division Manager may approve, deny or conditionally approve the change
based on the affects the change may have on the POTW and/or the pretreatment program.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 56/80
M. Treatment Upset Notification.
1. For the purposes of this Section, upset means an exceptional incident in which there is
unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical Pretreatment Standards
because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the User. An upset does not include
noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment
facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or
improper operation.
2. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance
with categorical Pretreatment Standards if the requirements of paragraph 3, below, are
met.
3. A User who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate,
through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence
that:
a. An upset occurred and the User can identify the cause(s) of the upset;
b. The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner
and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and
c. The User has submitted the following information to the Wastewater Division
Manager within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset [if this
information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five (5)
days]:
(1) A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance;
(2) The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not
corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue;
and
(3) Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent
recurrence of the noncompliance.
(4) In any enforcement proceeding, the User seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
(5) Users shall have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of
upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with
categorical Pretreatment Standards.
(6) Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to
maintain compliance with categorical Pretreatment Standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored
or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies
in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of
the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.
N. Wastewater Concentration Fees. Any user whose concentration of Biological Oxygen Demand
(BOD) and/or Total Suspended Solids (TSS) exceeds an average of 200 mg/l BOD and/or 250
mg/l TSS per month shall be assessed a surcharge, in addition to the monthly sewer charge as
set in the annual budget adopted by the City Council. The City shall take one sample per month
for testing, the results of which test shall establish that month's surcharge billing. The user may
request additional testing for fluctuating or abnormal conditions.
13.24.120 Permits
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 57/80
A. Permit Requirement. No Significant Industrial User shall discharge wastewater into the POTW
without first completing a baseline monitoring report and obtaining a wastewater discharge permit
as outlined in §13.24.110, except that a Significant Industrial User that has filed a timely
application pursuant to Section B below may continue to discharge for the time period specified
therein. The Wastewater Division Manager may require other users to obtain individual
wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter. Any
violation of the terms and conditions of an individual wastewater discharge permit shall be
deemed a violation of this Chapter and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the
sanctions outlined in §13.24.220. Obtaining an individual wastewater discharge permit does not
relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all Federal and State Pretreatment Standards
or Requirements or with any other requirements of Federal, State, and Local law.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 58/80
B. Conditions. An individual wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are
deemed reasonably necessary by the Wastewater Division Manager to prevent Pass Through or
Interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant’s effluent, protect
worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against
damage to the POTW.
1. Individual wastewater discharge permits must contain:
a. A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit issuance date,
expiration date and effective date;
b. A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior
notification to the Wastewater Division Manager in accordance with §13.24.120(D)
of this Chapter, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a
copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit;
c. Effluent limits, including Best Management Practices, based on applicable
Pretreatment Standards;
d. Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-keeping
requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants (or
best management practice) to be monitored, sampling location, sampling
frequency, and sample type based on Federal, State, and local law.
e. The process for seeking a waiver from monitoring for a pollutant neither present
nor expected to be present in the Discharge in accordance with §13.24.160(C).
f. A statement of applicable administrative, civil and criminal penalties for violation of
Pretreatment Standards and Requirements, and any applicable compliance
schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that
required by applicable Federal, State, or local law.
g. Requirements to control Slug Discharge, if determined by the Wastewater Division
Manager to be necessary.
h. Requirements to report immediately to the Wastewater Division Manager any slug
discharge or any changes at its facility affecting potential for a slug discharge.
i. Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the Wastewater Division Manager must be
included as a condition in the User’s permit, see §13.24.160(C) for additional
requirements
j. Requirements to notify the Wastewater Division Manager of changes to the
industrial users discharge (30) day prior to the change. The Wastewater Division
Manager may deny or conditional approve the change prior to the user making the
change at the facility that may impact the discharge at the facility to the POTW.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 59/80
2. Individual wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the
following conditions:
a. Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge,
and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
b. Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or
construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or
prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW;
c. Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or
other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately
prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges;
d. Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the
amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
e. The unit charge or schedule of User charges and fees for the management of the
wastewater discharged to the POTW;
f. Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling
facilities and equipment, including flow measurement devices;
g. A statement that compliance with the individual wastewater discharge permit does
not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable Federal
and State Pretreatment Standards, including those which become effective during
the term of the individual wastewater discharge permit; and
h. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Wastewater Division Manager to
ensure compliance with this ordinance, and State and Federal laws, rules, and
regulations.;
C. Duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years. A
permit may be issued for a period of less than 5 years or may be stated to expire on a specified
date at the discretion of the Wastewater Division Manager. Each individual wastewater discharge
permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. The user shall apply for permit
reissuance a minimum of ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit.
D. Transfer. Individual wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or
operator only if the permittee gives at least ninety (90) days advance notice to the Wastewater
Division Manager and the Wastewater Division Manager approves the individual wastewater
discharge permit transfer. The notice to the Wastewater Division Manager must include a written
certification by the new owner or operator which:
1. States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility’s
operations and processes;
2. Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur;
3. Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing individual wastewater
discharge permit;
4. The conditions of the permit will not change. Failure to provide advance notice of a
transfer renders the individual wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility
transfer.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 60/80
E. Modifications. The Wastewater Division Manager may modify an individual wastewater
discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
1. To incorporate any new or revised Federal, State, or local Pretreatment Standards or
Requirements;
2. To address significant alterations or additions to the User’s operation, processes, or
wastewater volume or character since the time of the individual wastewater discharge
permit issuance;
3. A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or
elimination of the authorized discharge;
4. Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to Spanish Fork City’s
POTW, City personnel, the treatment of sludge, or the receiving waters;
5. Violation of any terms or conditions of the individual wastewater discharge permit;
6. Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater
discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
7. Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical Pretreatment Standards pursuant to 40
CFR 403.13;
8. To correct typographical or other errors in the individual wastewater discharge permit; or
9. To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator
where requested in accordance with §13.24.120(D).
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 61/80
F. Revocation. The Wastewater Division Manager may revoke an individual wastewater discharge
permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
1. Failure to notify the Wastewater Division Manager of significant changes to the
wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
2. Failure to provide prior notification to the Wastewater Division Manager of changed
conditions pursuant to §13.24.110(L) of this ordinance;
3. Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge
permit application;
4. Falsifying self-monitoring reports
5. Falsifying certification statements;
6. Tampering with monitoring equipment;
7. Refusing to allow the Wastewater Division Manager timely access to the facility premises
and/or records;
8. Failure to meet effluent limitations;
9. Failure to pay fines;
10. Failure to pay sewer charges;
11. Failure to meet compliance schedules;
12. Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application
or reapplication;
13. Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted
facility; or
14. Violation of any Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, or any terms of the wastewater
discharge permit or this ordinance.
Individual wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or
transfer of business ownership. All individual wastewater discharge permits issued to a User are
void upon the issuance of a new individual wastewater discharge permit to that User.
G. Certification Statements. The following certification statement is required to be signed and
submitted by Users submitting permit applications in accordance with §13.24.110(A); Users
submitting baseline monitoring reports under §13.24.110(E); Users submitting reports on
compliance with the categorical Pretreatment Standard deadlines under §13.24.110(E); Users
submitting periodic compliance reports required by §13.24.160(B), and Users submitting an initial
request to forego sampling of a pollutant on the basis of §13.24.160(C). The following
certification statement must be signed by an Authorized Representative as defined in
§13.24.010(C): I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that
qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry
of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for
gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief,
true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false
information, including the possibility of fine and/or imprisonment for knowing violations.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 62/80
H. Certification of Pollutants Not Present. Users that have an approved monitoring waiver based
on §13.24.160(C) must certify on each report with the following statement that there has been no
increase in the pollutant in its waste stream due to activities of the User: Based on my inquiry of
the person or persons directly responsible for managing compliance with the Pretreatment
Standard for 40 CFR _______ [specify applicable National Pretreatment Standard part(s)], I
certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief, there has been no increase in the level of
______ [list pollutant(s)] in the wastewaters due to the activities at the facility since filing of the
last periodic report under §13.24.160(B).
13.24.130 Special Agreements And Contracts
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as prohibiting special written agreements between the City
and any other person allowing industrial waste or wastewater of unusual strength or character to be
admitted to the POTW, provided said person compensates the City for any additional costs of treatment.
A special agreement made pursuant to this section shall not, in any manner, waive any Pretreatment
Standard.
13.24.140 Restricted Substances - Discharge Alternatives
If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewer, which
waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in this Chapter, and which, in
the judgment of the Wastewater Division Manager, may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater
facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or
constitute a public nuisance, the Wastewater Division Manager may:
A. Reject the waters or wastes;
B. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;
C. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
D. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by
existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of this Title.
When considering the alternatives designated in this Chapter, the Wastewater Division Manager shall
give consideration to the economic impact of each alternative on the discharger. If the Wastewater
Division Manager permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of
the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the Wastewater Division
Manager. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the User from the
responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the City
under the provisions of this Chapter.
13.24.150 Industrial Pretreatment
A. Flow-Equalizing Facilities. The Wastewater Division Manager may require any person
discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a
suitable storage and flow control facility to ensure equalization of flow. An individual wastewater
discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
B. Dilution. No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a
discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with
the discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable Pretreatment Standard or
requirement. The Wastewater Division Manager may impose mass limitations on users who are
using dilution to meet applicable Pretreatment Standards, or in other cases where the imposition
of mass limitations is appropriate.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 63/80
C. Meters. When required by the Wastewater Division Manager, the owner(s) of any property
serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure together
with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such structures, when required, shall be
accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by
the Wastewater Division Manager. The structure shall be installed by the owner at owner's
expense and shall be maintained by owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
D. Separate Systems. The Wastewater Division Manager may require the use of separate systems
to handle sanitary and commercial or industrial wastewater for sampling purposes, or such that in
the event that the user's wastewater is or could cause an interference or a potential interference
with the POTW, that the discharge could be separated, preventing discharge to the POTW and
still allow the user's sanitary wastewater to discharge to the POTW.
E. Grease, Oil and Sand Interceptors. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when,
in the opinion of the Wastewater Division Manager, they are necessary for the proper handling of
wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that such
interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of a type and
capacity approved by the Wastewater Division Manager and shall be located as to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the
owner(s) shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the
captivated material and shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal which are
subject to review by the Wastewater Division Manager. Any removal and hauling of the collected
materials not performed by owner(s) or his/her/their personnel must be performed by currently
licensed waste disposal firms.
F. Flammable Substances. Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
G. Sampling Manholes. Sampling manholes shall be located in an area to allow for ease of
cleaning, sampling, and inspection by the User and the City. If located in a parking area parking
shall not be allowed on the sampling manhole.
13.24.160 Industrial User Compliance Assurance
The Wastewater Division Manager may require a user of industrial sewer services to provide information
needed to determine compliance with this Chapter. The required information may include:
? Wastewater discharge peak rate and volume over a specific time period;
? Chemical analyses of wastewaters;
? Information on raw materials, processes, and products affecting wastewater volume and quality;
? Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent, or other materials important to
sewer use control;
? A plot plan of sewers on the user's property showing sewer and pretreatment facility location;
? Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities;
? Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials through spills to the POTW.
Such information may be obtained by reports, site visits, questionnaires, permit applications, monitoring
programs and the copying of user records.
A. Final Compliance Report. Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical Pretreatment Standards, or in the case of a New Source following
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 64/80
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any User subject to such
Pretreatment Standards and Requirements shall submit to the Wastewater Division Manager a
report containing the information described in §§13.24.110(A)(6), 13.24.110(A)(7), and
13.24.110(E)(2)(b) of this Chapter. For Users subject to categorical Pretreatment Standards
expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of
operation), this report shall include the User’s actual production during the appropriate sampling
period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with §13.24.120(G) of
this ordinance. All sampling will be done in conformance with §13.24.170.
B. Periodic Compliance Reports. All permitted Significant Industrial Users must, at a frequency
determined by the Wastewater Division Manager submit no less than twice per year (June and
December) reports indicating the nature, concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are
limited by Pretreatment Standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily
flows for the reporting period. In cases where the Pretreatment Standard requires compliance
with a Best Management Practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the User must
submit documentation required by the Wastewater Division Manager or the Pretreatment
Standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the User. All reports, applications,
and/or submissions required by this Chapter shall be signed and certified, as outlined in
§13.24.120(G), by the permittee or an authorized representative of the user.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 65/80
C. The Wastewater Division Manager may authorize an industrial user subject to a Categorical
Pretreatment Standard to forego sampling of a pollutant regulated by a Categorical Pretreatment
Standard if the user has demonstrated through sampling and other technical factors that the
pollutant is neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge or is present only at
background levels from intake water and without any increase in the pollutant due to activities of
the industrial user. This authorization is subject to the following conditions:
1. The waiver may be authorized where a pollutant is determined to be present solely due to
sanitary wastewater discharged from the facility provided that the sanitary wastewater is
not regulated by an applicable Categorical Pretreatment Standard and otherwise includes
no process wastewater.
2. The monitoring waiver is valid only for the duration of the effective period of the individual
wastewater discharge permit, but in no case longer than five years. The user must submit
a new request for the waiver before the waiver can be granted for each subsequent
individual wastewater discharge permit. See §§13.24.110 and 13.24.120(A)(8).
3. In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the industrial user must provide
data from at least one sampling of the facility’s process wastewater prior to any treatment
present at the facility that is representative of all wastewater from all processes.
4. The request for a monitoring waiver must be signed by the Authorized Representative
and include the certification statement referred to in §13.24.120(G).
5. Non-detectable sample results may be used only as a demonstration that a pollutant is
not present if the EPA approved method from 40 CFR Part 136 with the lowest minimum
detection level for that pollutant was used in the analysis.
6. Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the Wastewater Division Manager must be included
as a condition of the user’s permit. The reasons supporting the waiver and any
information submitted by the user in its request for the waiver must be maintained by the
Wastewater Division Manager for three years after the expiration of the waiver.
7. Upon approval of the monitoring waiver and revision of the user’s permit by the
Wastewater Division Manager, the industrial user must certify on each report with the
statement in §13.24.120(H) that there has been no increase in the pollutant in its
wastewater due to activities of the industrial user.
8. In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present or is expected to be present
because of changes that occur in the User’s operations, the User must immediately:
Comply with the monitoring requirements of §13.24.160(B), or other more frequent
monitoring requirements imposed by the Wastewater Division Manager and notify the
Wastewater Division Manager.
9. This provision does not supersede certification processes and requirements established
in categorical Pretreatment Standards, except as otherwise specified in the categorical
Pretreatment Standard.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 66/80
D. The City may reduce the requirement for periodic compliance reports, based on Paragraph B
above, to a requirement to report no less frequently than once a year, unless required more
frequently in the Pretreatment Standard or by the Approval Authority, where the Industrial User’s
total categorical wastewater flow does not exceed any of the following:
1. Six hundred (600) gallons per day;
2. 0.9 pounds of biochemical oxygen demand per day; and
3. 0.01 percent of the maximum allowable headworks loading for any pollutant listed in the
Spanish Fork City WRF Pretreatment Program Local Limit Development Document.
Reduced reporting is not available to Industrial Users that have in the last two years been in
Significant Noncompliance, as defined in this Chapter. In addition, reduced reporting is not
available to an Industrial User with daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant levels that vary
so significantly that, in the opinion of the Wastewater Division Manager, decreasing the reporting
requirement for this Industrial User would result in data that are not representative of conditions
occurring during the reporting period.
E. Monitoring Facilities. All wastewater samples must be representative of the User’s discharge.
Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean,
and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a User to keep its monitoring
facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the User to claim that sample results are
unrepresentative of its discharge..
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 67/80
F. Right of Entry. The Wastewater Division Manager or designee shall have the right to enter the
premises of any User to determine whether the User is complying with all requirements of this
Chapter and any individual wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall
allow the Wastewater Division Manager ready access to all parts of the premises for the
purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and/or the performance of
any additional duties. Monitoring and inspections shall be conducted at a frequency as
determined by the City and may be announced or unannounced.
1. Where a User has security measures in force which require proper identification and
clearance before entry into its premises, the User shall make necessary arrangements
with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the
Wastewater Division Manager shall be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes
of performing specific responsibilities.
2. The Wastewater Division Manager shall have the right to set up on the User’s property, or
require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or
metering of the User’s operations.
3. The Wastewater Division Manager may require the User to install monitoring equipment,
as necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all
times in a safe and proper operating condition by the User at its own expense. All devices
used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated per manufacturers
recommendations to ensure their accuracy.
4. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be
inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the User at the written or verbal
request of the Wastewater Division Manager and shall not be replaced. The costs of
clearing such access shall be borne by the User.
5. Unreasonable delays in allowing the Wastewater Division Manager access to the User’s
premises shall be a violation of this ordinance.
6. The City may use a camera to photograph areas of the facility as necessary for carrying
out the duties of the pretreatment inspection including, but not limited to, documentation
of the User’s compliance status and for reinforcement of written reports. The User shall
be allowed to review copies of the photographs for confidentiality claims.
7. Fees associated with analysis of samples taken for purposes of compliance monitoring
shall be billed to and paid by the User.
G. Search Warrants. If the Wastewater Division Manager has been refused access to a building,
structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe
that there may be a violation of this Chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as
part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the City designed to verify compliance with
this Chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health,
safety, and welfare of the community, the Wastewater Division Manager may seek issuance of a
search warrant as authorized by law.
H. Notice of Violation/Repeat Sampling and Reporting. If sampling performed by a User
indicates a violation, the User must notify the Wastewater Division Manager within twenty-four
(24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The User shall also repeat the sampling and
analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the Wastewater Division Manager within
thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. Resampling by the Industrial User is not
required if the City performs sampling at the User’s facility at least once a month, or if the City
performs sampling at the User between the time when the initial sampling was conducted and
the time when the User or the City receives the results of this sampling, or if the City has
performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the Industrial User.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 68/80
I. Failure to Permit Inspection. In the event a duly authorized officer or agent of the City is
refused admission for any purpose, the Wastewater Division Manager may cause sewer service
to the premises in question to be discontinued until the City's agents have been afforded
reasonable access to the premises and sewer system to accomplish the inspection or sampling.
J. Recordkeeping. Users subject to the reporting requirements of this Chapter shall retain, and
make available for inspection and copying:
1. All records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this
Chapter,
2. Any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities
undertaken by the User independent of such requirements, and
3. Documentation associated with Best Management Practices established in §13.24.110(I).
Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the
person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses;
the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses.These records shall
remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended
for the duration of any litigation concerning the User or the City, or where the User has been
specifically notified of a longer retention period by the Wastewater Division Manager.
13.24.170 Tests, Sampling, Measurements, Analyses - Standards
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge
permit application, report, permit or other requirement by this Chapter shall be performed in accordance
with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto, unless otherwise specified
in an applicable categorical Pretreatment Standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or
analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the Part 136
sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and
analyses shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and
analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the Wastewater Division Manager or other
parties approved by EPA.
All laboratory samples collected for this ordinance shall be analysis by a laboratory that is either certified
by the Utah Bureau of Laboratory Improvements or approved by the Wastewater Division Manager.
Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based on data obtained through appropriate
sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report, based on data that is
representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period.
A. Except as indicated in subparagraphs B and C below, the User must collect wastewater samples
using 24-hour flow proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time proportional
composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the Wastewater Division Manager. Where
time proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the City, the samples
must be representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation)
specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected
during a 24-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total
phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile
organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite
samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in
approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the City, as appropriate. In addition, grab
samples may be required to show compliance with Instantaneous Limits.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 69/80
B. Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols, sulfides, and volatile
organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques.
C. For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90 day compliance reports required
in §§13.24.110(E) and 13.24.160(B), a minimum of four (4) grab samples must be used for pH,
cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for
which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are
available, the Wastewater division Manager may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports
required by paragraphs in §13.24.160, the Industrial User is required to collect the number of
grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance by with applicable Pretreatment
Standards and Requirements.
13.24.180 Accidental Discharge Control Plan
The Wastewater Division Manager shall evaluate whether each SIU needs an accidental discharge/slug
discharge control plan or other action to control Slug Discharges. The Wastewater Division Manager will
evaluate a SIU for a slug discharge control plan within the first year of determining that an IU is a SIU. If
the Wastewater Division Manager determines that the SIU does not require a slug discharge control
plan, then the SIU will be evaluated every two years, thereafter, for the need to develop a slug discharge
control plan. The Wastewater Division Manager may require any User to develop, submit for approval,
and implement such a plan or take such other action that may be necessary to control Slug Discharges.
Users shall submit an Accidental Discharge Control Plan within ninety (90) days after notification by the
Wastewater Division Manager. The control plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following elements:
A. Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges;
B. Description of stored chemicals;
C. Procedures for immediately notifying the Wastewater Division Manager of any accidental or Slug
Discharge, as required by §13.24.110(K);
D. Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or Slug Discharge. Such procedures
include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and
transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker
training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response.
Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the
owner's cost and expense. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not
relieve the user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the
requirements of this Chapter.
13.24.190 Pretreatment Facilities
Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this Chapter and shall achieve
compliance with all categorical Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards, Local Limits, and the
prohibitions set out in §13.24.070 within the time limitations specified by EPA, the State, or the
Wastewater Division Manager, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall
be provided, operated, and maintained at the User’s expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities
and operating procedures shall be submitted to the Wastewater Division Manager for review, and shall
be acceptable to the Wastewater Division Manager before such facilities are constructed. The review of
such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the User from the responsibility of modifying
such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the City under the provisions of this
Chapter.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 70/80
13.24.200 Confidential Information
Information and data on a User obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit
applications, individual wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the
Wastewater Division Manager’s inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public
without restriction, unless the User specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the Wastewater Division Manager, that the release of such information would divulge information,
processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable State law.
Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When
requested and demonstrated by the User furnishing a report that such information should be held
confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be
made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to
governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in
enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics and other effluent data, as defined at 40 CFR 2.302 shall not be recognized as
confidential information and shall be available to the public without restriction.
13.24.210 Publication Of Users In Significant Noncompliance
The City shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful public
notice within the jurisdictions served by the POTW, a list of the Users which, at any time during the
previous twelve (12) months, were in Significant Noncompliance with applicable Pretreatment Standards
and Requirements. The term Significant Noncompliance shall be applicable to all Significant Industrial
Users (or any other Industrial User that violates subsections C, D or H of this Section) and shall mean:
A. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six
percent or more of all measurements for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period
exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard, including instantaneous limits;
B. Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three percent or
more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period
equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the
applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants
except pH);
C. Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer-term average) that
the City determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or
pass through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public);
D. Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare,
or to the environment, or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority to halt
or prevent such discharge;
E. Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone
contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
F. Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports such as baseline
monitoring reports, periodic compliance reports, and reports on compliance with compliance
schedules.
G. Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
H. Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of Best Management Practices, which the
Wastewater Division Manager determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of
the local pretreatment program.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 71/80
13.24.220 Violations
A. Notification of Violation. When the Wastewater Division Manager finds that a User has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this Chapter, an individual wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other Pretreatment Standard or
Requirement, the Wastewater Division Manager may serve upon that User a written Notice of
Violation. Within ten (10) days of the receipt of such notice, an explanation of the violation and a
plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions,
shall be submitted by the User to the Wastewater Division Manager. Submission of such a plan
in no way relieves the User of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the
Notice of Violation. Nothing in this Section shall limit the authority of the Wastewater Division
Manager to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action,
without first issuing a Notice of Violation.
B. Consent Order. The Wastewater Division Manager may enter into Consent Orders, assurances
of compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any User responsible
for noncompliance. Such documents shall include specific action to be taken by the User to
correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall
have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to subparagraphs D
and E below and shall be judicially enforceable.
C. Show Cause Hearing. The Wastewater Division Manager may order a User which has violated,
or continues to violate, any provision of this Chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit,
or order issued hereunder, or any other Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, to appear before
the Wastewater Division Manager and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should
not be taken. Notice shall be served on the User specifying the time and place for the meeting,
the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the User show
cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall
be served personally or by certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days prior to
the hearing. Such notice may be served on any Authorized Representative of the User as
defined in §13.24.010(C) and required by §13.24.120(F). A show cause hearing shall not be a
bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the User.
D. Compliance Order. When the Wastewater Division Manager finds that a User has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this Chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or
order issued hereunder, or any other Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, the Wastewater
Division Manager may issue an order to the User responsible for the discharge directing that the
User come into compliance within a specified time. If the User does not come into compliance
within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities,
devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders
also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional selfmonitoring
and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged
to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a
Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the User of liability
for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a
bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the User.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 72/80
E. Cease and Desist Orders. When the Wastewater Division Manager finds that a User has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this Chapter, an individual wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other Pretreatment Standard or
Requirement, or that the User’s past violations are likely to recur, the Wastewater Division
Manager may issue an order to the User directing it to cease and desist all such violations and
directing the User to:
1. Immediately comply with all requirements; and
2. Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly
address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or
terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the User.
F. Administrative Fines.
1. When the Wastewater Division Manager finds that a User has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this ordinance, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or
order issued hereunder, or any other Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, the
Wastewater Division Manager may fine such User in an amount not to exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000) per violation. Such fines shall be assessed on a per-violation,
per-day basis. In the case of monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, fines
shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation.
2. Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after 30 calendar days, be assessed an
additional penalty of five percent (5%) of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue
thereafter at a rate of five percent (5%) per month. A lien against the User’s property shall
be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties.
3. Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the Wastewater
Division Manager to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within
ten (10) days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the Wastewater
Division Manager may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the User’s appeal is
successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to
the User. The Wastewater Division Manager may add the costs of preparing
administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine.
4. Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking
any other action against the User.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 73/80
G. Emergency Suspensions. The Wastewater Division Manager may immediately suspend a
User’s discharge, after informal notice to the User, whenever such suspension is necessary to
stop an actual or threatened discharge, which reasonably appears to present, or cause an
imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The Manager may
also immediately suspend a User’s discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that
threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an
endangerment to the environment.
1. Any User notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its
contribution. In the event of a User’s failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the
suspension order, the Wastewater Division Manager may take such steps as deemed
necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or
minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals.
The Wastewater Division Manager may allow the User to recommence its discharge
when the User has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Wastewater Division Manager
that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in
paragraph H below initiated against the User.
2. A User that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent
endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the
harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the
Wastewater Division Manager prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing
under §13.24.220(C) and (H). Nothing in this Section shall be interpreted as requiring a
hearing prior to any Emergency Suspension of a permit and/or discharge to the POTW.
H. Termination of Permit. Any User who violates the following conditions, provisions of this
Chapter, a Wastewater Discharge Permit, order, or any applicable federal, State, and/or City
regulation is subject to permit termination:
1. Violation of individual wastewater discharge permit conditions;
2. Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its
discharge;
3. Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
4. Refusal of reasonable access to the User's premises for the purpose of inspection,
monitoring, or sampling; or
5. Violation of the Pretreatment Standards in §13.24.070.
Such User will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an
opportunity to show cause under §13.24.220(C) why the proposed action should not be taken.
Exercise of this option by the Wastewater Division Manager shall not be a bar to, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the User.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 74/80
I. Appeal Procedure.
1. Any person, including the User, may petition the Wastewater Division Manager to
reconsider the terms of an individual wastewater discharge permit within ten (10) days of
notice of its issuance.
2. Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the
administrative appeal.
3. In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the individual wastewater discharge
permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition,
if any, it seeks to place in the individual wastewater discharge permit.
4. The effectiveness of the individual wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed
pending the appeal.
5. If the Wastewater Division Manager fails to act within ten (10) days, a request for
reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider an individual
wastewater discharge permit, not to issue an individual wastewater discharge permit, or
not to modify an individual wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final
administrative actions for purposes of judicial review.
6. If the decision of the Wastewater Division Manager is unsatisfactory to the User
appealing, he/she may file a written appeal to the City Council within ten (10) days after
receipt of the decision. The City Council must schedule a date to hear the appeal within
forty-five (45) days from the receipt of the notice of appeal. A decision on the appeal shall
be made within 21 days of the hearing. The decision, action, or determination of the
Wastewater Division Manager shall remain in effect during such appeal period. The
decision of the City Council shall be binding on all entities and the User until and unless
ruled otherwise by an appropriate court.
J. Judicial Remedies. If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastes into the
wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this Chapter, any order, or permit
issued hereunder, the City, may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief
in any court of competent jurisdiction within Utah County.
K. Injunctive Relief. When the Wastewater Division Manager finds that a User has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this Chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or
order issued hereunder, or any other Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, the Wastewater
Division Manager may petition the Court through the City Attorney for the issuance of a
temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific
performance of the individual wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed
by this Chapter on activities of the User. The Wastewater Division Manager may also seek such
other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the
User to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a User.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 75/80
L. Civil Penalties.
1. A User who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this Chapter, an
individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
Pretreatment Standard or Requirement shall be liable to the City for a maximum civil
penalty of $1,000 per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term
average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the
violation.
2. The Wastewater Division Manager may recover reasonable attorneys’ fees, court costs,
and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and
monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the City.
3. In determining the amount of civil liability, the Court shall take into account all relevant
circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation,
the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the
User’s violation, corrective actions by the User, the compliance history of the User, and
any other factor as justice requires.
4. Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any
other action against a User.
M. Criminal Prosecution.
1. A User who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this Chapter, an individual
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other Pretreatment
Standard or Requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 per violation, per day, and/or imprisonment
for not more than one (1) year, or both.
2. A User who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the POTW which causes
personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of Class B
misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of $1,000, and/or be subject to imprisonment
for not more than one (1) year, or both. This penalty shall be in addition to any other
cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under State law.
3. A User who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in
any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be
maintained, pursuant to this Chapter, individual wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any
monitoring device or method required under this Chapter shall, upon conviction, be
punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 per violation, per day, and/or imprisonment for
not more than one (1) year, or both.
N. Remedies Nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this Chapter are not exclusive. The
Wastewater Division Manager may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a
noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with
the City’s enforcement response plan. However, the Wastewater Division Manager is
empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user.
13.24.230 Treatment Bypasses
A. For the purposes of this Section,
1. Bypass means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a User’s
treatment facility.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 76/80
2. Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the
treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and
permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the
absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by
delays in production.
B. A User may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause Pretreatment Standards or
Requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient
operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of subparagraphs C and D of this
section.
C. Bypass Notifications.
1. If a User knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the
Wastewater Division Manager, at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass, if
possible.
2. A User shall submit oral notice to the Wastewater Division Manager of an unanticipated
bypass that exceeds applicable Pretreatment Standards within twenty-four (24) hours
from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be
provided within five days of the time the User becomes aware of the bypass. The written
submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the
bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the
anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce,
eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The Wastewater Division Manager
may waive the written report on a case by case basis if the oral report has been received
within twenty-four (24) hours.
D. Bypass.
1. Bypass is prohibited, and the Wastewater Division Manager may take an enforcement
action against a User for a bypass, unless
a. Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property
damage;
b. There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary
treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal
periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup
equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering
judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment
downtime or preventive maintenance; and
c. The User submitted notices as required under subparagraph C of this section.
The Wastewater Division Manager may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its
adverse effects, if [the Wastewater Division Manager determines that it will meet the three
conditions listed in this subparagraph D.
(Ordinance 23-18, Repealed & Reenacted 12/11/2018)
13.28 Water Utility
13.28.010 Definitions
13.28.020 General
13.28.030 Water Transfer
13.28.040 Backflow Prevention
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 77/80
13.28.050 Source Protection
13.28.010 Definitions
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the
meanings given herein:
A. "Pollution Source". Means point source discharges of contaminants to ground water or potential
discharges of the liquid forms of extremely hazardous substances which are stored in containers
in excess of applicable threshold planning quantities as specified in SARA Title III (SARA Title III
is the Emergency Planning and Community Right-To-Know section of the Superfund
Amendments and Reauthorization Act). Examples of possible pollution sources include, but are
not limited to, the following: storage facilities that store the liquid forms of extremely hazardous
substances, septic tanks, drain fields, class V underground injection wells, landfills, open dumps,
land filling of sludge and seepage, manure piles, salt piles, pit privies, and animal feeding
operations with more than ten animal units. The following clarify the definition of pollution source:
1. Animal Feeding Operation means a lot or facility where the following conditions are met:
animals have been or will be stabled or confined and fed or maintained for a total of 45
days or more in any 12 month period, and crops, vegetation forage growth, or postharvest
residues are not sustained in the normal growing season over any portion of the
lot or facility. Two or more animal feeding operations under common ownership are
considered to be a single feeding operation if they adjoin each other, if they use a
common area, or if they use a common system for the disposal of wastes.
2. Animal Unit means a unit of measurement for any animal feeding operation calculated by
adding the following numbers; the number of slaughter and feeder cattle multiplied by 1.0,
plus the number of mature dairy cattle multiplied by 1.4, plus the number of swine
weighing over 55 pounds multiplied by 0.4, plus the number of sheep multiplied by 0.1,
plus the number of horses multiplied by 2.0.
3. Extremely Hazardous Substances means those substances which are identified in the
SARA Title III Section 302.
B. "Potential Contamination Source". Means any facility or site which employs an activity or
procedure which may potentially contaminate ground water. A pollution source is also referred to
as a PCS.
C. "Regulatory Agency". Means any governmental agency with jurisdiction over hazardous waste
as defined herein.
D. "Sanitary Landfill". Means a disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescible wastes, or
hazardous wastes, are disposed of on land by placing earth cover thereon.
E. "Septic Tank/Drain-Field Systems". Means a system which is comprised of a septic tank and a
drain-field which accepts domestic wastewater from buildings or facilities for subsurface
treatment and disposal. By their design, septic tank/drain-field system discharges do not have
controls to prevent discharges to the ground water.
F. "Wellhead". Means the upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals, valves, and
other attachments.
13.28.020 General
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 78/80
This Chapter creates a water utility known as Spanish Fork Water, which shall be a division of the Public
Works Department. The water utility shall provide drinking water and pressurized irrigation water to the
City. The water utility shall be responsible for the proper installation and maintenance of all drinking
water and pressurized irrigation water facilities throughout the City, including but not limited to: pipes,
valves, services up to and including the meters, reservoirs, pump houses, springs, and wells.
This Chapter is enacted to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of Spanish Fork City,
by providing for the efficient, safe, and environmentally sound collection, treatment, and distribution of
drinking water and pressurized irrigation water.
The purpose of this Chapter also is to insure the provision of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply
for the City by the establishment of drinking water source protection zones surrounding the wellheads
and spring collection systems for all wells and springs which are the supply source for the City drinking
water system and by the designation and regulation of property uses and conditions which may be
maintained within such zones.
A. Rates. All users of the drinking water system shall pay a monthly base rate and a usage rate. All
users of the pressurized irrigation system shall pay a monthly base rate and a usage rate. The
City may, under normal circumstances, make adjustments to ensure equitable service charges.
B. Mandatory Connection to Public Sanitary Sewer. At such time as the drinking water system
becomes available to a property, located within the City, which is served by a private well, a
direct connection shall be made to the drinking water system within sixty (60) days in compliance
with this Chapter. The drinking water system shall be deemed available when the water mains
are within three hundred (300) feet of a building serviced by a private well.
C. Waste. No water user may waste water or allow water to be wasted by imperfect stops, taps,
valves, leaky joints or pipes, to allow tanks or watering troughs to leak or overflow, to wastefully
run water from hydrants, faucets or stops, through basins, toilets, urinals, sinks or other
apparatus, sprinklers or anything related to a sprinkler system.
D. Scarcity. In time of scarcity of water, as determined by the Mayor and the City Council, the
Mayor shall, by proclamation, limit the use of water to such extent as may be necessary to
protect the health and safety of the residents of the City. It is an infraction for any person by
themselves, or by family members, servants or agents, to violate any proclamation made by the
Mayor pursuant to this section.
E. Heavy Outlet or Sprinkler Use. It is unlawful for any Person to use such number of outlets or
sprinklers simultaneously as will, in the opinion of the City Engineer, materially affect the
pressure or supply of water in the municipal drinking water or pressurized irrigation systems.
The City Engineer shall, after a determination that such improper use exists, notify the affected
water user or the owner of the premises whereon such use occurs, of such determination, in
writing, and order such use discontinued and advise the user that such continued usage
constitutes a violation of this Chapter which shall be punishable as set forth in this Chapter.
F. Propulsion and Generation. No City water shall be used for the purpose of driving any motor,
siphon, turbine or other wheels, or hydraulic engines, or elevators, or for driving or propelling
machinery of any kind whatsoever, unless authorized by the City Engineer.
13.28.030 Water Transfer
Any Person desiring a connection to the City water system shall transfer to the City, or reimburse the
City for, the quantity of water rights as determined and established by Spanish Fork Municipal Code
§15.4.16.080.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 79/80
Water dedicated to the City will be valued by the volume the water right supplies the City in an 80%
precipitation year. The City Engineer shall determine whether a water right is acceptable for dedication,
for any water that is not described as acceptable in the resolution adopted under §15.4.16.080.
Land being developed which has Strawberry Water attached to it just prior to development, shall have
that water dedicated to the City while attached to the land before development. Excess dedicated water
than that required for development may be sold to the City or transferred to other land.
(Ord. No. 10-18, Amended 05/01/2018)
13.28.040 Backflow Prevention
It shall be unlawful, at any location supplied with water from the City drinking water distribution system,
to do any of the following:
? To install or use any physical connection or arrangement of piping or fixtures which may allow
any fluid or substance not suitable for human consumption to come in contact with water in the City
drinking water distribution system;
? To install any connection arrangement, or fixtures, without using a backflow prevention device or
assembly designed to prevent any fluid or other substance to come in contact with water in the City
drinking water distribution system. Any such device or assembly must be approved for installation
by the City Engineer, with respect to each application;
? To install any backflow prevention device or assembly as required by the version of the
International Plumbing Code in effect of the time of installation.
A. Right of Entry. Employees of the City shall have the right to enter any place which is plumbed
with water from the City drinking water distribution system to conduct a hazard survey or any
other examination or test reasonably necessary for the enforcement of this section.
B. Responsibility for Cost. Any user of drinking water installing a backflow prevention device or
assembly shall pay all costs for installation and testing.
C. Testing. Backflow prevention devices or assemblies required by this section shall be tested at
least once a year by a technician certified by the Utah State Bureau of Drinking Water
Committee. Test results shall be furnished to the Public Works Department of the City and the
Utah State Bureau of Drinking Water and Sanitation.
D. Violation. Drinking water service may be discontinued to any user who is found in violation of
this section and who fails to take corrective action within ten days after violation notification,
except that drinking water service may be discontinued immediately if a threat to the water
supply exists. Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be civilly liable to
Spanish Fork City, or to third persons suffering damage, for all damages proximately caused by
said violation.
E. Pressurized Irrigation Cross Connection. Pressurized irrigation water is not treated and is not
to be used for any drinking water purpose, but is for outdoor watering use only. No cross
connections with the drinking water system shall be allowed without backflow prevention. In
addition to any criminal penalty, such person shall also be subject to termination of drinking and
pressurized irrigation water service from the City and shall be responsible for the costs of
disinfecting the City’s drinking water system, together with all other costs incurred by the City as
a result of the cross connection.
13.28.050 Source Protection
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=13_UTILITIES 80/80
The policies and procedures for administration of any source protection zone established under this
Chapter, including without limitation those applicable to nonconforming uses, exceptions, enforcement,
and penalties, shall be the same as provided in the existing zoning ordinance as the same may from
time to time be amended.
A. Source Protection Zones. There is hereby established use districts to be known as zones one,
two, three, and four of the drinking water source protection area; identified and described in the
City’s drinking water source protection plans and as follows:
1. Zone one is the area within a 100-foot radius from a wellhead.
2. Zone two is the area within a 250-day ground-water time of travel to a wellhead, the
boundary of the aquifer(s) which supplies water to the ground-water source, or the
ground-water divide, whichever is closer.
3. Zone three (waiver criteria zone) is the area within a three year ground-water time of
travel to a wellhead or margin of the collection area, the boundary of the aquifer(s) which
supplies water to the ground-water source, or the ground-water divide, whichever is
closer.
4. Zone four is the area within a 15-year ground-water time of travel to a wellhead, the
boundary of the aquifer(s) which supplies water to the ground-water source, or the
ground-water divide, whichever is closer.
B. Permitted Uses in Source Protection Zones. The following uses shall be permitted within
drinking water source protection zones.
1. Any use permitted within existing agricultural, single family residential, multi-family
residential, and commercial districts so long as uses conform to the rules and regulations
of the regulatory agencies having jurisdiction.
2. Any other open land use where any building located on the property is incidental and
accessory to the primary open land use.
C. Unpermitted Uses in Source Protection Zones. The following uses or conditions shall be and
are hereby prohibited within drinking water source protection zones, whether or not such use or
condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as a part of a permitted use.
1. Zone one: the location of any uncontrolled PCS as defined herein.
2. Zone two: the location of a pollution source unless its contaminated discharges have a
control which prevents discharges to the ground water.
3. Zones three and four: the location of a PCS unless it can be controlled through land
management strategies including zoning and non-zoning controls which include, but are
not limited to, the following: zoning and subdivision ordinances, site plan reviews, design
and operating standards, source prohibitions, purchase of property and development
rights, public education programs, ground-water monitoring, household hazardous waste
collection programs, water conservation programs, memoranda of understanding, written
contract and agreements, and so forth.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=14_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 1/8
14 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
14.04 Building Regulations
14.08 Moving Buildings
14.12 Plumbing Code
14.16 Electrical Code
14.20 Energy Conservation In New Building Construction
14.24 Uniform Mechanical Code
14.28 Rating Of Contractors
14.32 Uniform Building Code For Abatement Of Dangerous Buildings
14.36 International Fuel Gas Code
14.04 Building Regulations
14.04.010 Building Code - Adopted
14.04.020 Plan Review Fees
14.04.030 Construction Phases
14.04.040 Violation
14.04.010 Building Code - Adopted
The City hereby adopts the State Construction and Fire Code, as set forth in Utah Code Annotated, Title
15A. All contractors and sub-contractors performing work authorized by a building permit shall be
licensed by the State of Utah, Division of Professional Licensing.
(Ord No. 28-94, Amended 11/16/1994)
(Ord No. 03-01, Amended 03/06/2001)
(Ord No. 16-09, Amended 08/18/2009)
(Ord No. 12-18, Amended 05/01/2018)
14.04.020 Plan Review Fees
The City will charge, as a plan check review fee, its actual costs incurred, which sum will be adjusted
annually based upon the costs incurred. The annual amount of the plan check review fee may be
established either by resolution or in the City's annual budget.
(Ord. No. 05-03, 06/15/2003 Amended)
14.04.030 Construction Phases
A. The City may issue a building permit upon application, in compliance with all laws, ordinances,
rules, and regulations. A partial building permit may be issued, upon application, and in
compliance with rules and regulations established by the City Building Official. A fee established
by the City Council, as adopted in the annual budget, may also be charged. The fee charged is in
addition to the fees charged for the issuance of a building permit. A partial building permit will
allow limited commencement of construction while the entire plans and specifications are under
review. The issuance of a partial building permit is no guarantee that a building permit will be
issued. Any applicant for a partial building permit may proceed with those items identified in the
permit, at their own risk.
1. No building permits will be issued until streets are in compliance with the applicable fire
code to allow access to the construction site by fire apparatus vehicles. The City Engineer
is hereby designated as the responsible official to determine compliance.
2. No building permit will be issued until the water transfer required by Spanish Fork
Municipal Code '13.12.010 (B) has been made.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=14_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 2/8
3. No building permit will be issued until all required impact fees have been collected.
4. Once all approvals have been granted, a building permit may be obtained.
B. No certificate of occupancy may be granted until roadbase, curb, gutter, and graveled driveways,
related to the premises are installed by the contractor or developer and approved by the City.
C. Upon issuance of a building permit a cash deposit in an amount to be established by the City
Council in the annual budget shall also be collected. This deposit is to guarantee that all of the
terms and conditions of the permit are met, site plan improvements are completed, any damage
done to City facilities is repaired, and all fees are paid. If all of the conditions of the permit are
met, the deposit shall be refunded to the person posting the same when a certificate of
occupancy is issued. In the event that the conditions are not met within one year from
occupancy, the deposit shall be forfeited to the City. The City may use the funds to install the
required improvements, up to the amount of the bond, or may place the deposit funds into the
general fund and perform the improvements later as part of a larger project.
D. The city building official may charge such fees for reinspection as are established by the City
Council in the annual budget. The building official may establish rules and regulations for any
appeals process concerning reinspection.
E. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be granted at the discretion of the building official
when there are no life threatening hazards on the property and the conditions set forth in subparagraph
(A) are met. The final checklist of terms to be completed must be minor in nature and
must be completed in the time frame designated. The city council, in the annual budget, may
establish a reasonable fee to be charged for the issuance of a temporary certificate of
occupancy. In the event a temporary certificate expires and a final certificate has not been
obtained, the City may disconnect all utility service to the property until the final checklist is
completed and a final certificate of occupancy is obtained, and may also forfeit the deposit
required in sub-paragraph C.
F. The applicant of a single family residential building permit may appeal an inspection to determine
whether an inspection constitutes a fair administration of the building code. A notice, in
compliance with the Utah Code Annotated 58-56-20 shall be included with the issuance of the
permit. The review contemplated by this section:
1. is separate and unrelated to an appeal under the applicable building code;
2. may not be used to review a matter that may be brought by appeal under the building
code;
3. may not result in a waiver or modification of the building code requirement or standard;
4. may not conflict with an appeal, or the result of an appeal under the building code; and
5. does not prohibit a person from bringing an appeal under the applicable building code.
(Ord. No. 10-95, Enacted (A,B), 06/21/1995)
(Ord. No. 03-97, Amended (A), Enacted (C,D,E), 02/18/1997)
(Ord. No. 06-04, Amended (A)(1), 04/20/2004)
(Ord. No. 09-05, Amended (A)(1), 07/05/2005)
(Ord. No. 06-09, Enacted 14.04.030(F), 04/21/2009)
(Ord. No. 03-16, Amended (c), 02/16/2016)
14.04.040 Violation
A. It shall be a Class C Misdemeanor to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish,
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=14_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 3/8
occupy, or use any building or structure in the City in violation of or without complying with the
provisions of the building code adopted under this title. It shall also be a Class C Misdemeanor
for any person to remove a stop work order properly posted upon a project or a building within a
project by the Building Official. It shall also be a Class C Misdemeanor for any person to ignore a
stop work order and continue working on any project or any building within a project.
B. The City Building Official is hereby granted authority to issue citations for any violation of the
building code adopted under this title.
(Ord. No. 10-95, Amended/Renumbered (14.04.030), 06/21/1995)
(Ord. No. 04-99, Amended 03/02/1999)
(Ord. No. 06-04, Amended 04/20/2004)
14.08 Moving Buildings
14.08.010 Permit - Required
14.08.020 Permit - Application
14.08.030 City Approval Of Application
14.08.040 Standard Required Before Occupancy
14.08.050 Bond Required
14.08.060 Old Site To Be Restored
14.08.070 Payment Of Expenses
14.08.080 Violation
14.08.010 Permit - Required
No permit shall be issued for the moving of any residential, commercial, or industrial building from one
site within the City to another site within the City, or from a site outside the City to a site within the City,
without first filing an application with the City building department and obtaining a permit therefore from
the City Building Official.
(Ord. No. 09-05, Amended 07/05/2005)
14.08.020 Permit - Application
The following information shall be filed with the City building department at the time application is made:
A. The location and address of the old and new site;
B. A plot plan of the new location, also showing adjacent lots on all sides of the property and
indicating all structures and improvements on said lots;
C. Plans and specifications for the proposed improvements at the new location including plans for
landscape treatment when required by the building inspector;
D. Before further consideration of said application, the building inspector must certify in writing that
the structure is sound enough to be removed and that the location and use of the building will
conform to the building and zoning ordinances of the city.
(Ord. No. 09-05, Amended 07/05/2005)
14.08.030 City Approval Of Application
The application shall then be submitted to the city building inspector for approval. Before the building
inspector may approve the application for the moving of a building he/she must find:
A. That the building will have no appreciable detrimental effect on the living environment and
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=14_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 4/8
property values in the area into which the structure is to be removed;
B. That the building is in conformity with the type and quality of buildings existing in the area into
which it is proposed to be moved;
C. That said building and the lot on which it is to be located conforms to the requirements of the
zoning ordinance and building code;
D. That its location on the lot does not in any substantial way adversely affect buildings or uses on
abutting property;
E. That all dedications and improvements as required by the city for streets and facilities and
buildings shall be provided in conformity with the standards of the city.
14.08.040 Standard Required Before Occupancy
Prior to occupancy the building shall be brought up to standards of the building code for a new building
and shall be painted, refurbished and maintained at that standard.
14.08.050 Bond Required
Before a permit to move a building may be granted the applicant shall post a bond or other assurance as
determined by the city building inspector to cover the costs of improvements established in the granting
of the permit.
14.08.060 Old Site To Be Restored
If the site to be vacated is within the city, the bond shall also cover the costs involved in cleaning up the
vacated site and restoring it to a safe and sightly condition.
14.08.070 Payment Of Expenses
In addition to the regular fees for inspection charges and for building permits, the applicant shall pay any
extraordinary expenses which may be incurred by the building inspector in travel to inspect the building
or any other similar expenses.
14.08.080 Violation
It shall be a Class C Misdemeanor to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, occupy, or
use any building or structure in the City in violation of or without complying with the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. No. 09-05, Amended 07/05/2005)
14.12 Plumbing Code
14.12.010 Plumbing Code Adopted
14.12.020 Violation
14.12.010 Plumbing Code Adopted
The City hereby adopts the nationally recognized plumbing code, as amended from time to time, as
adopted by the Utah Uniform Building Code Commission, subject only to those exceptions allowed by
state law as set forth in Utah Code Ann. '58-56-1 et seq.
(Ord. No. 28-94, Amended 11/16/1994)
(Ord. No. 03-01, Amended 03/06/2001)
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=14_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 5/8
14.12.020 Violation
It shall be a Class C Misdemeanor to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, occupy, or
use any building or structure in the city in violation of or without complying with the provisions of the
plumbing code adopted under this title.
(Ord. No. 06-04, Amended 04/20/2004)
14.16 Electrical Code
14.16.010 National Electrical Code Adopted
14.16.020 National Electric Safety Code Adopted
14.16.030 Violation
14.16.010 National Electrical Code Adopted
The city hereby adopts the National Electrical Code as amended from time to time, as promulgated by
the National Fire Protection Association, subject only to those exceptions allowed by State law, set forth
in Utah Code Annotated, '58-56-1 et seq. Any developer must meet the city construction and
development standards for construction to the meter, if more stringent than the National Electrical Code.
(Ord. No. 28-94, Amended 11/16/1994)
(Ord. No. 08-95, Amended 05/03/1995)
14.16.020 National Electric Safety Code Adopted
The city hereby adopts the National Electrical Safety Code as amended from time to time. Any
developer must meet the city construction and development standards for construction up to the meter, if
more stringent than the National Electrical Safety Code.
(Ord. No. 08-95, Reenacted 05/03/1995)
14.16.030 Violation
It shall be a class C misdemeanor to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, occupy or
use any building or structure in the city in violation of or without complying with the provisions of the
National Electrical Code, or the National Electrical Safety Code.
(Ord. No. 08-95, Renumbered (14.16.020), 05/03/1995)
14.20 Energy Conservation In New Building Construction
14.20.010 Adopted
14.20.020 Violation
14.20.010 Adopted
The city hereby adopts the Utah Code for Energy Conservation in New Buildings as amended from time
to time, as promulgated by the Utah Energy Office, subject only to those exceptions allowed by State
law as set forth in Utah Code Annotated, '63 9 45 et seq.
(Ord. No. 28-94, Amended 11/16/1994)
14.20.020 Violation
It shall be a Class C Misdemeanor to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, occupy, or
use any building or structure in the city in violation of or without complying with the provisions of the
code for energy conservation in new buildings adopted under this title.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=14_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 6/8
(Ord. No. 06-04, Amended 04/20/2004)
14.24 Uniform Mechanical Code
14.24.010 Mechanical Code Adopted
14.24.020 Violation
14.24.010 Mechanical Code Adopted
The City hereby adopts the nationally recognized mechanical code as adopted by the Utah Uniform
Building Code Commission, as amended from time to time, subject only to those exceptions allowed by
state law, as set forth in Utah Code Ann. '58-56-1 et seq.
(Ord. No. 28-94, Amended 11/16/1994)
(Ord. No. 03-01, Amended 03/06/2001)
14.24.020 Violation
It shall be a Class C Misdemeanor to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, occupy, or
use any building or structure in the city in violation of or without complying with the provisions of the
mechanical code adopted under this title.
(Ord. No. 06-04, Amended 04/20/2004)
14.28 Rating Of Contractors
14.28.010 Rating System-Created
14.28.020 Ratings System-Scoring
14.28.030 Failure To Obtain Acceptable Score
14.28.040 Time Periods
14.28.010 Rating System-Created
Each contractor performing work on behalf of Spanish Fork City will be rated, at the conclusion of each
project, based on its organization, management, and performance of the work. The rating will be based
upon a "contractor performance report," in the form attached hereto.
(Ord. No. 04-97, Enacted 03/11/1997)
14.28.020 Ratings System-Scoring
When each contractor is rated, he/she shall be awarded points in fifteen categories totaling one hundred
(100) points. An acceptable score shall be deemed to be seventy-five (75) points. Each contractor will be
evaluated by two employees or agents of the City: the Public Works Director or Assistant Public Works
Director; and the public works inspector, building inspector, or project inspector, depending on the
project. The average of the two evaluations shall be the contractors score.
(Ord. No. 04-97, Enacted 03/11/1997)
14.28.030 Failure To Obtain Acceptable Score
A. A contractor who fails to obtain a score of seventy (70) on any two projects over any consecutive
five year period will not be considered a responsible bidder.
B. A contractor who is not a responsible bidder, as established herein, will not be allowed to bid on
a City project until such time that there are not two consecutive scores under seventy points
within the last consecutive five year period.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=14_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 7/8
(Ord. No. 04-97, Enacted 03/11/1997)
14.28.040 Time Periods
A. For purposes of this chapter, the consecutive five year period shall be within five years from the
date of the notice to bid as prepared by the City or the City's agent.
B. The date of the contractors score shall be the date the Public Works Director, or Assistant Public
Works Director, reviews the evaluation with the contractor, at the conclusion of each project. The
Public Works Department is responsible to document the date of the review and to keep records
of the same in order for the City to comply with the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 04-97, Enacted 03/11/1997)
14.32 Uniform Building Code For Abatement Of Dangerous Buildings
14.32.010 Building Abatement Code Adopted
14.32.020 Violation
14.32.010 Building Abatement Code Adopted
The City hereby adopts the Uniform Code for Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, as it may be amended
from time to time, or such other nationally recognized code as may be adopted by the Utah Uniform
Building Code Commission, subject only to those exceptions allowed by state law as set forth in Utah
Code Ann. '58-56-1 et seq.
(Ord. No. 03-01, Enacted 03/06/2001)
14.32.020 Violation
It shall be a Class C Misdemeanor for any property owner or occupant to fail to abide by the directions of
the City Building Official in abating any dangerous building or any directive related thereto.
(Ord. No. 03-01, Enacted 03/06/2001)
14.36 International Fuel Gas Code
14.36.010 Fuel Code Adopted
14.36.020 Violation
14.36.010 Fuel Code Adopted
The City hereby adopts the International Fuel Gas Code, as amended from time to time, or such other
code as may be adopted by the Utah Uniform Building Code Commission, subject only to those
exceptions allowed by state law as set forth in Utah Code Ann. ' 56-58-1 et seq.
(Ord. No. 03-01, Enacted 03/06/2001)
14.36.020 Violation
It shall be a Class C Misdemeanor for any contractor, developer, owner, or occupant to violate the
provision of the International Fuel Gas Code, or such substitute code as may be adopted by the Utah
Uniform Building Code Commission.
(Ord. No. 03-01, Enacted 03/06/2001)
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=14_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 8/8
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 1/146
15 LAND USE
PART 1 GENERAL
PART 2 COMPREHENSIVE GENERAL PLAN
PART 3 COMPREHENSIVE ZONING ORDINANCE
PART 4 DEVELOPMENT
PART 1 GENERAL
15.1.04 Purpose And Applicability
15.1.04 Purpose And Applicability
15.1.04.010 Rules Of Construction
15.1.04.020 Definitions
15.1.04.030 Compliance And Enforcement
15.1.04.040 Notices
15.1.04.050 Appeal Process
15.1.04.060 Appeal Authority
15.1.04.070 Fees
15.1.04.080 Severability
15.1.04.090 Licensed Contractor
15.1.04.010 Rules Of Construction
For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this Title, certain words or terms are defined in § 020. Any
word not defined in this ordinance shall be construed as defined in the Building Code of the City, if
defined therein. If no definition is found in either this ordinance or the Building Code, then the word or
term shall be defined according to its commonly used meaning.
15.1.04.020 Definitions
"Accessory Use or Building": A subordinate use or building customarily incidental to and located upon
the same lot occupied by the main use or buildings.
"Accessory Apartment": A self-contained dwelling incorporated within an existing owner-occupied
structure that is designed as a single-family dwelling and does not substantially alter the structure or
appearance of the existing structure.
"Adult Day Care": Continuous care and supervision for three or more adults for at least four but less
than 24 hours a day, that meets the needs of functionally impaired adults through a comprehensive
program that provides a variety of health, social, recreational, and related support services in a
protective setting.
"Affected Entity": A government entity, school district, public utility, interlocal cooperative entity, or a
service or similar district, whose facilities are likely to require expansion or significant modification
because of an intended use of land, or the entity’s facilities or boundaries are within one mile of land
which is the subject of the land use ordinance change.
"Alluvial Fan Flooding": Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which
originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment
transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
"Apex": A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that
formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 2/146
"Area of Shallow Flooding": A designated AO or AH zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) with a one (1) percent chance or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to
three feet as well as a shaded X zone on a community’s FIRM with a one (1) percent chance or greater
annual chance of flooding to an average depth of less than one foot where a clearly defined channel
does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
"Area of Special Erosion Hazard": Island that is adjacent to or within 200 feet of the centerline of the
Spanish Fork River or within 100 feet of any other open channel facility that conveys runoff water located
within the corporate limits of City.
"Area of Special Flood Hazard": Is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1)
percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the
Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). After detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for
publication of the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AE, AH,
AO, or A1-99.
"Assisted Living Facility": A residential facility, licensed by the State of Utah, with a home-like setting
that provides an array of coordinated supportive personal and health care services, available 24-hours
per day, to residents who have been assessed under Utah Department of Health or the Utah
Department of Human Services rules to need any of these services. Each resident shall have a service
plan based on the assessment, which may include: (1) specified services of intermittent nursing care; (2)
administration of medication; and (3) support services promoting the resident’s independence and selfsufficiency.
Such facility does not include adult day care provided in conjunction with a residential facility
for persons with a disability.
"Attached Structure": Any structure that is attached to another structure by a common wall, or by a
footing or foundation and roof combination. This does not include an open breeze way.
"Automotive Repair": A facility which services motor vehicles with all types of repair work, including
major engine and transmission repairs, body work, painting, and similar activities.
"Automotive Service Station": A facility having pumps and storage tanks from which fuel is dispensed
into motor vehicles. Minor automotive repair may also be included as an incidental use.
"Base Flood": The flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year.
"Basement": Means any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides.
"Bed and Breakfast": A dwelling in which five (5) or fewer guest rooms are provided for overnight
lodging of travelers.
"Billboard": A freestanding ground sign designed or intended to direct attention to a business, product,
or service that is not sold, offered, or existing on the property where the sign is located.
"Blade Sweep": The diameter of the wind turbine blades as determined by the blade rotation.
"Building": A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls.
"Building Height": The vertical distance from the average finished grade surface of the building to the
peak of the roof.
"Building Setback Line": The required distance between the property line and closest point of any
building.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 3/146
"Caretaker Dwelling": A dwelling which in ancillary to the principal use of a property which is exclusively
occupied by an individual or individuals who are in charge of the maintenance of a building or business.
Caretaker dwellings shall not have more than one bedroom.
"Carwash (full service)": A carwash that is completely mechanized (drive-thru operation) and that is
ancillary to another use or an operation where the cleaning services are exclusively performed by
employees of the establishment without the aid of the patron or coin operated devices.
"Carwash (self-serve)": A business establishment which provides car cleaning services where part or
all of the cleaning is performed by the patron with the aid of coin operated cleaning devices.
"Child Care Center": Any facility in which child care is provided to 13 or more children, including the
provider’s own pre-school age children, on the premises at the same time.
"Church": A structure which is intended for conducting organized religious services for organizations
with tax-exempt status, with no overnight facilities. Secondary uses such as child care, senior services,
professional counseling, rehabilitation services, or similar uses are not included in the definition. A
church does not include organizations that violate Federal, State, or City laws or codes.
"City": Spanish Fork City.
"City Council": The governing body of the City, consisting of five elected council persons and the
Mayor.
"Civil Engineer": A person licensed with the State of Utah to practice as a professional engineer.
"Clinics, Emergency Medical Care Facilities": A medical facility for the diagnosis and treatment of
human patients which may include emergency services, but not overnight housing of patients.
"Commercial Child Care Center": Any facility located in a non-residential or non-industrial zone in
which child care is provided on the premises.
"Commission": The Planning Commission of Spanish Fork City, unless indicated otherwise.
"Completion Date": The date the entire subdivision, development, or construction is completed and an
approved final inspection statement is given.
"Comprehensive General Plan" or "General Plan": The land use element of the Comprehensive
General Plan document as approved by the City Council.
"Construction Plans and Profiles": Plans drawn by a civil engineer or land surveyor showing all
required improvements including the location, size, grade and elevations.
"Convenience Store": A building or use which is primarily engaged in the provision of frequently
needed, day to day retail goods including gasoline, food and non-food products.
"Council": The City Council.
"Critical Feature": An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which
the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.
"Design and Development Standards": The standards as referred to in this Title and adopted by the
Council.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 4/146
"Development": Any man-made change in improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited
to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations
or storage of equipment or materials.
"Developer": Person, Partnership, Limited Liability Company, Corporation, or other legal entity
developing residential, commercial or industrial property.
"Development Review Committee" or "DRC": A committee that provides technical review, analysis,
and recommendations to the Planning Commission and City Council related to the City’s
Comprehensive General Plan, Zoning Ordinance, subdivisions, capital facilities plans and site plans.
"Disability": A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of a person’s major life
activities, including a person having a record of such an impairment or being regarded as having such
an impairment. A “disability” does not include current illegal use of, or addiction to, any federally
controlled substance, as defined in Section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. 802 or
successor law.
A. “Major life activities” means functions such as caring for one’s self, performing manual tasks,
walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning and working.
B. “Has a record of such an impairment” means has a history of, or has been classified as having, a
mental or physical impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities.
"Duplex": A building designed for two (2) family units living independently of each other.
"Dwelling, Multiple-Family": A building arranged or designed to include three (3) or more dwelling
units, each to be occupied by one (1) family.
"Dwelling, Single Residence": A detached building designed for one family unit and having one main
kitchen.
"Elderly Person": A person who is 60 years old or older, who desires or needs to live with other elderly
persons in a group setting, but who is capable of living independently.
"Elevated Building": A non-basement building (i) built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-30, AE, A,
A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, elevated above the ground level by
means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the floor of the water and (ii)
adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the
magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, "Elevated
Building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with
openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters.
"Engineer": The person appointed by the City to be the City Engineer.
"Existing Construction": For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRM
effective before that date. "Existing Construction" may also be referred to as "Existing Structures".
"Fence": A structure serving as an enclosure, a barrier, or a boundary, usually made of posts or stakes
joined together by boards, wire, vinyl panels or fiberglass encapsulated foam panels.
"Final Decision": A decision by a land use authority which approves, approves with conditions, or
denies a land use application. A final decision is made by motion and majority vote in a public meeting,
or by a written decision if no vote is taken in the public meeting. When the land use authority is a staff
member, it is their decision, granting or denying a land use application in writing.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 5/146
"Final Plat": An original map or plat drawn on mylar in a form as approved by the City, showing all lots,
streets, utility easements, etc.
"Flag Lot": A lot of irregular configuration in which an access strip (a strip of land of a width less than the
required lot width) connects the main body of the lot to the street frontage.
"Flag Pole": A staff or pole that is no greater than 24 inches in diameter that exists for the primary
purpose of displaying a flag.
"Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)": Means an official map of the City, on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
"Flood Insurance Study": The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the Flood
Boundary-Floodway Map.
"Flood" or "Flooding": A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally
dry land areas from:
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
B. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
"Flood Proofing": Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments
to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and
sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
"Flood Protection System": Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized,
appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to
reduce the extent of the areas within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of
the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes.
These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering
standards.
"Floodplain Management Regulations": Zoning Ordinances, subdivision regulations, Building Codes,
health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and
erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local
regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage
prevention and reduction.
"Floodplain Management": The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures
for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control
works and floodplain management regulations.
"Floodplain": That area designated as a floodplain on the most recent Flood Insurance Rate Map, for
the City of Spanish Fork, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
"Flood-prone Area": Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see
definition of flood or flooding).
"Floodway (Regulatory Floodway)": The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the
water surface elevation more than a designated height.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 6/146
"Formally Initiated": An act taken to change or modify a land use ordinance by application or by motion
of the Planning Commission or City Council, made in a public meeting.
"Funeral Home": The provision of services including storing and preparing human remains for burial,
cremation, and arranging, managing, and conducting funerals.
"Garage": A building or indoor area with four walls, a roof and at least one door, of which the primary
purpose is to provide an enclosed space for parking or storing motor vehicles. Required garages must
have an unobstructed area that is at least nine (9) feet wide by 18 feet deep.
"General Plan": The Comprehensive General Plan of Spanish Fork City.
"Highest Adjacent Grade": The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction
next to the proposed walls of a structure.
"Historic Structure": Any structure that is:
A. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register.
B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
C. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior.
D. Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation
programs that have been certified either:
1. By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior.
2. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
"Home Child Care Center": Any single dwelling unit in which child care is provided for seven (7) to 12
children, including the provider’s own pre-school age children, on the premises at the same time.
"Home Occupation": An occupation, profession, activity, or use that is clearly incidental and secondary
to the use of a residential dwelling unit.
"Hospital": A facility used for inpatient or outpatient medical and healthcare-related uses or services
(one of which provides emergency medical services) or any incidental, ancillary or related uses or
services including but not limited to medical office, research and/or development, information
technology, warehouse and distribution, hospitality, food service and lodging.
"Hotel/Motel": A building which provides guest rooms for the overnight lodging of travelers. It may
include customarily incidental uses such as meeting rooms, restaurants, and gift shops.
"Impound Yard": A facility that provides for the secured storage of automobiles with or without the
permission of the owners by a person who is licensed to hold the automobiles.
"Improved Lot": A lot which has all the improvements required in Part 4 of this Title.
"Improvements": Includes roads, streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, grading, landscaping, water
systems, sewer systems, irrigation systems, drainage systems, power systems, fences, public facilities,
trees, and/or other items required by this Title.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 7/146
"Instructional Studio": A facility in which instruction is offered for piano, gymnastics, voice, art, or
similar activities.
"Jail": A place of incarceration owned and operated by the County or State.
"Juvenile Detention Facility": A place of temporary detention for delinquent juveniles, which either is
owned and operated by the State of Utah or is under contract with the State of Utah.
"Juvenile Secure Facility": A place of incarceration for delinquent juveniles, which either is owned and
operated by the State of Utah or is under contract with the State of Utah.
"Land Surveyor": A person licensed by the State of Utah to practice as a land surveyor.
"Land Use Authority": A person, board, commission, agency, or other body designated by ordinance to
act upon a land use application.
"Land Use Ordinance": A planning, zoning, development, or subdivision ordinance of the City, but does
not include the Comprehensive General Plan.
"Large Wind Energy System": Wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind turbine, a tower,
and associated control or conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity of more than 100 kW.
"Levee": A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in
accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to
provide protection from temporary flooding.
"Levee System": A flood protection system, which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated
structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance
with sound engineering practices.
"Lot": A parcel of land with frontage or other approved access to a public street, occupied or designed to
be occupied by a building and its accessory uses, and which has been subdivided or otherwise lawfully
permitted.
"Lot, Corner": A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets.
"Lot, Depth": The shortest distance between the midpoint of the front lot line and the midpoint of the
rear lot line.
"Lot, Interior": A lot other than a corner lot.
"Lot, Irregular": A building lot whose rear property line is not generally parallel to the front property line
such as a pie-shaped lot on a cul-de-sac, or where the side property lines are not parallel to each other.
"Lot, Through" or "Double Frontage": A lot which abuts upon two parallel or approximately parallel
streets.
"Lot Line":
A. Front: The lot line adjacent to a street, except as follows:
1. Corner Lot. The front shall be the direction in which the front door on the principal building
faces and the other shall be the corner side lot line.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 8/146
2. Through or Double Frontage Lot. The lot line which is obviously the front by reason of the
prevailing custom of the other buildings on the block. The other street frontage shall be a
rear lot line. Where such property line is not obviously evident, the Community
Development Director shall determine the front property line.
B. Rear: The lot line most nearly opposite the front property line or, if the front property is a curved
line, to a line tangent to the front property line at its midpoint.
C. Side: Those other lot lines not defined as a front or rear lot line.
"Lot Width": If the side lot lines are parallel, the shortest distance between these side lines. If the side
property lines are not parallel, the width shall be the distance between the side lines at the front setback
line, as in the following illustration:
"Lube Center": A facility which primarily provides oil change and similar servicing or performs minor
mechanical repair of motor vehicles. The outdoor overnight storage of vehicles is not permitted in
association with the Lube Center use.
"Manufactured Home": A transportable factory-built housing unit constructed on or after June 15, 1976,
according to the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974.
"Master Planned Development (MPD or Planned Unit Development)": A residential development
which typically contains common design elements, some variation in dwelling types, and common open
space or parks.
"Mother-in-law Apartment": See Accessory Apartment.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 9/146
"Municipal Utility Easement": an easement which:
A. Is not a public utility easement pursuant to Utah Code Ann. §54-3-27;
B. Is entirely owned by Spanish Fork City; and
C. Is either:
1. Not being used or occupied; or
2. Is being exclusively used and occupied by Spanish Fork City or its approved franchisees
to provide utility services, such as sanitary sewer, culinary water, pressurized irrigation
water, storm water, broadband, telecommunications, etc.
"Museum": A building or place where works of art, scientific specimens, historic artifacts or other objects
of permanent value are kept and displayed.
"New Construction": For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974,
whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain
management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction"
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
"Non-complying Structure": A structure that (1) legally existed before its current land use designation;
and (2) because of one or more subsequent land use ordinance changes, does not conform to the
setback, height restrictions, or other regulation excluding those regulations, which govern the use of
land.
"Non-conforming Use": A use of land that:
A. Legally existed before its current land use designation; and
B. Has been maintained continuously since the time a land use ordinance governed the land; and
C. Because of one or more subsequent land use ordinance changes, does not conform to
regulations that now govern the use of the land.
"Nursing" or "Retirement Homes": A long term residential facility for elderly, or otherwise ill persons
which may include some or all of the following: individual dwelling units, living and sleeping rooms, a
common dining room, skilled nursing care, recreational facilities, and transportation for social and
medical purposes. Such facility does not include an adult day care facility or adult day care provided in
conjunction with a residential facility for elderly persons or a residential facility for persons with a
disability.
"Office": A building or portion of a building where services are performed involving predominately
administrative, professional, or clerical operations.
"Offsite Facilities": Facilities outside of the boundaries of the subdivision or development site which are
designated and located to serve the needs of the subdivision or development or adjacent property,
usually lying between a development and existing facilities.
"Onsite Facilities": Facilities installed within or on the perimeter of the subdivision or development site.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 10/146
"Outdoor Commercial Recreation Facility": Enterprises which include such uses as miniature golf
courses, batting cages, waterslides, swimming pools or other similar activities that do not involve
motorized vehicles.
"Outdoor Display Area": An area that is designated on a Site Plan for the outdoor display of the
following items that are available for retail sale or rent: new or used automobiles, trailers, boats,
recreational vehicles, construction equipment, or other finished products.
"Outdoor Storage Area": An area that is designated on a Site Plan for the storage of raw materials,
finished products, vehicles, trailers or other equipment used in connection with a business located on the
same site.
"Parcel of Land": A contiguous area of land in the possession or ownership of one person with one tax
identification number.
"Personal Service Business": A business involved in a service that does not usually produce a
commodity. Typical uses include beauty and barber shops, tanning salons, massage therapists, laundry
and dry-cleaning establishments, shoe repair, tailors, insurance agents, lawyers, accountants, and
medical providers.
"Planning Commission": The Planning Commission of Spanish Fork City.
"Porch": a covered approach on a platform to a pedestrian entrance to a building which is open on at
least two sides. The purpose of a porch is to shelter persons, not to shelter cars, material, or other
equipment.
"Preliminary Plat": A map or plat of a proposed subdivision or development with accompanying
supplementary documents.
"Principal Building": A primary building located upon a lot, or a building that provides services in direct
support of a property’s primary use. Properties that are developed in a campus fashion may have more
than one principal building located on an individual parcel.
"Private School, Academic": A parochial or private institution offering academic or religious curriculum
which is accredited to grant a degree or other indication of successful completion of an instructional
program. The definition includes elementary, middle, junior, and high schools, colleges and universities.
This does not include post high school educational facilities or educational facilities which include
residential facilities for its students.
"Recreational Vehicle, Trailer," or "Motorhome": Means a vehicle, which is:
A. Built on a single chassis.
B. 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections.
C. Designed to be self-propelled or be permanently towable by a light duty truck.
D. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
"Rehabilitation/Treatment Facility": A facility owned and operated by a government entity to provide
temporary occupancy and supervision of individuals (adults/juveniles) in order to provide rehabilitation,
treatment, or counseling services. Without limitation, such services may include rehabilitation, treatment,
counseling, or assessment and evaluation services related to delinquent behavior, alcohol and drug
abuse, sex offenders, sexual abuse, or mental health. Associated education services may also be
provided to juvenile occupants.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 11/146
"Residential Treatment Center": A 24-hour group living environment for four or more individuals
unrelated to the owner or provider that offers room or board and specialized treatment, rehabilitation, or
habilitation services for persons with emotional, psychological, developmental, or behavioral
dysfunctions, impairments, or chemical dependencies. In residential treatment, individuals are assisted
in acquiring the social and behavioral skills necessary for living independently in the community. This
does not include individuals who have been charged with the commission of any felony or who are sex
offenders.
"Residential Facility for Persons with a Disability": A residence in which eight (8) or fewer persons
with disability reside and which is:
A. Licensed or certified by the Department of Human Services under Title 62A, Chapter 2, of the
Utah Code, Licensure of Programs and Facilities.
B. Licensed or certified by the Department of Health under Title 26, Chapter 21, Health Care Facility
Licensing and Inspection Act.
"Residential Facility for Elderly Persons": A facility that houses and provides at least some services
that contribute towards the care of elderly residents.
"Retail Use": A business involved in the sale of commodities to ultimate consumers for personal or
household consumption.
"Sensitive Lands": Lands having any of the following characteristics: slopes in excess of 30%,
wetlands, 100-year floodplain, natural drainages, fault zones, streams, and lakes.
"Shelter Care Facility (Protective Housing Facility)": A facility either (1) operated, licensed or
contracted by a governmental entity, or (2) operated by a charitable, non-profit organization, which, for
no compensation provides temporary lodging, meals, and counseling to individuals and groups such as
the homeless, pregnant teenagers, victims of domestic violence, neglected children, and runaways.
Short-term care is typically less than 30 days.
"Sign": Any device used for visual communication which is intended to attract the attention of the public
and is visible from the public rights-of-way or other properties. The term “sign” shall not include any flag,
badge or insignia of any governmental unit nor shall it include any item of merchandise normally
displayed within a show window of a business.
"Sign, Awning": Signs which are placed on or integrated into a fabric or other material canopies which
are mounted on the exterior of a building.
"Sign, Billboard": A sign which is intended to advertise a business, commodity, service, entertainment,
product, or attraction sold, offered, or existing elsewhere than on the property where the sign is located.
"Sign, Construction and Development": A temporary sign providing information about future
development or current construction on a site, and the parties involved in the project.
"Sign, Directional": An on-premise sign that includes information assisting in the flow of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic such as enter, exit, and one-way.
"Sign, Directory": A sign, other than an identification sign, listing the names, uses, or locations of the
various businesses or activities conducted within a building or group of buildings, which is centrally
located and intended to provide on-site directions.
"Sign, Fascia": A sign which is mounted against the horizontal piece covering the joint between the top
of a wall and the projecting eaves of the roof.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 12/146
"Sign, Freestanding": A sign which is erected on its own self-supporting permanent structure, detached
from any supporting elements of a building.
"Sign, Identification": A sign that is designed and intended to identify only the business, place,
organization, building, street address, or person on the property on which it is located.
"Sign, Mansard": A sign permanently affixed to a wall or surface designed to protect the edge of a roof,
such surface being no more than 30 degrees from vertical.
"Sign, Menu Board": A permanently mounted sign displaying the menu and prices for a drive thru
restaurant.
"Sign, Monument": A freestanding sign whose sign face extends to the ground or to a base.
"Sign, Noncommercial": A sign which does not contain information or advertising for any business,
commodity, service, entertainment, product, or attraction.
"Sign, Nonconforming": A sign lawfully erected and maintained prior to the adoption of this ordinance
which does not conform with the requirements of this ordinance.
"Sign, Pole or Pylon": A freestanding sign, other than a monument sign, erected and maintained on a
mast(s) or pole(s) and not attached to any building.
"Sign, Political": A sign which supports any candidate for public office or urges action for or against any
other matter on the ballot of primary, general, or special elections.
"Sign, Portable": Any sign not affixed to a structure or ground mounted on a site.
"Sign, Projecting": A sign attached to a building or other structure and extending in whole or in part
more than 14 inches beyond the building.
"Sign, Reader Panel": A sign designed to permit immediate change of copy either manually or
electronically.
"Sign, Roof": A sign erected on a roof, or signs that project above the highest point of the roof line,
parapet, or fascia of the building.
"Sign, Shingle": A sign suspended from, and located entirely under a covered porch, covered walkway,
or awning.
"Sign, Temporary": A sign not intended or designed for permanent display.
"Sign, Wall": A sign mounted flat against and projecting less than 14 inches from, or painted on the wall
of a building with the exposed face of the sign parallel to the face of the wall.
"Sign, Window": A sign affixed to the interior or exterior of a window, or placed immediately behind a
window pane so as to attract the attention of persons outside the building.
"Solid Waste Transfer Facility": A publicly owned facility for the drop off and temporary holding of
refuse, green waste, compost, recyclables, and similar materials.
"Stacked Flat": One single residence dwelling unit attached to one or more single residence dwelling
units by common horizontal and vertical walls.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 13/146
"Start of Construction": Includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of
streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or
the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For
a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
"Streets": A thoroughfare which has been dedicated and accepted by the City Council, which the City
has acquired by prescriptive right or which the City owns, or is offered for dedication on an approved
recorded
"Final Plat": For further explanation see the streets section of the Construction and Development
Standards.
"Structure": A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above
ground, as well as a manufactured home.
"Subdivision": Any parcel of land that is divided, re-subdivided or proposed to be divided into two or
more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots, or other division of land for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, for offer, sale, lease, or development either on the installment plan or upon any and all other
plans, terms, and conditions. Subdivision includes:
A. The division or development of land whether by deed, metes and bounds description, devise and
testacy, lease, map, plat, or other recorded instrument; and
B. Divisions of land for all land for all residential and nonresidential uses, including land used or to
be used for commercial, agricultural, and industrial purposes.
"Substantial Damage": Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the
structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
"Substantial Improvement": Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before "Start of
Construction" of the improvement. This includes structures, which have incurred "Substantial Damage",
regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
A. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the City Building Official and
which are the minimum necessary conditions; or
B. Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a "historic structure".
"Supervisory Care Facility": A facility with characteristics of a residential facility for persons with a
disability or residential facility for elderly persons which has nine (9) or more individuals.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 14/146
"Tire Care Center": A facility which primarily sells and services automotive tires, provides oil change
and similar servicing, and performs minor mechanical repair of motor vehicles. The outdoor overnight
storage of vehicles is not permitted in association with the Tire Care Center use.
"Tower Height": The height of a wind turbine measured from the grade level to the hub.
"Townhome": One single residence dwelling unit constructed in a group of three or more attached units
in which each unit extends from the foundation to roof and with open space on at least two (2) sides.
"Transfer Facility": A publicly owned facility for the drop-off and temporary holding of refuge. The facility
is to be self-enclosed and completely fenced.
"Twin Home": One (1) single residence dwelling unit attached to one (1) other single residence dwelling
unit by a common vertical wall, with each dwelling unit located on a separate lot.
"Utilities": Includes culinary water lines; irrigation lines; sanitary and storm sewer lines; gas lines;
electric power lines; telecommunication lines; underground conduits; and junction boxes and all
appurtenances to the above.
"Wall": Barrier structure constructed of concrete, either precast or poured in place, or of individual
concrete units that are adjoined with mortar.
"Water Surface Elevation": The height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD
88) (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains
of riverine areas.
"Zoning Text Amendment": Change(s) to the wording of the comprehensive Zoning Ordinance, new
zones, and changes to the zone map.
"Xeriscape": Landscaping that utilizes climate appropriate or native vegetation, rocks, minerals and
other organic or non-organic materials to beautify property without creating a significant demand for
water to maintain plant life in the landscape.
(Ord. No. 07-09, Amended 02/10/2009)
(Ord. No. 12-09, Amended 08/04/2009)
(Ord. No. 02-10, Amended 02/16/2010)
(Ord. No. 15-13, Amended 09/03/2013)
(Ord. No. 04-14, Amended 04/01/2014)
(Ord. No. 13-14, Amended 08/19/2014)
(Ord. No. 15-14, Amended 10/07/2014)
(Ord. No. 02-15, Amended 02/03/2015)
(Ord. No. 11-15, Amended 06/16/2015)
(Ord. No. 15-15, Amended 09/15/2015)
(Ord. No. 05-16, Amended 04/05/2016)
(Ord. No. 14-16, Amended 09/20/2016)
(Ord. No. 04-17, Amended 02/07/2017)
(Ord. No. 20-18, Amended 11/20/2018)
15.1.04.030 Compliance And Enforcement
A. Designation. The Community Development Director is hereby designated and authorized as the
land use authority and the officer charged with the administration and enforcement of Parts 2 and
3 of this Title, unless specifically indicated otherwise.
The City Engineer is hereby designated and authorized as the land use authority and the officer
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 15/146
charged with the administration and enforcement of Part 4 of this Title, unless specifically
indicated otherwise.
B. Permits. The Building Official shall not grant a building permit or certificate of occupancy permit
nor shall any City Officer grant or authorize the issuance of any license or permit for the use of
any land or the construction or alteration of any building or structure on a lot which would be in
violation of any land use law, rule, or regulation of the State of Utah or of this Title. Any license or
permit issued in conflict with such provisions shall be null and void.
C. Violation. A person, Firm, Partnership, Limited Liability Company, Corporation, or other legal
entity violating any of the stipulations, conditions of approval, or any other provision of this Title
shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine or imprisonment, or by both. Any
such person, Firm, Partnership, Limited Liability Company, Corporation, or legal entity shall be
deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which any violation occurs.
In addition to, or independent of the criminal penalties provided above, the City may bring a civil
proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce compliance with the terms of this
ordinance, or to prevent, restrain, or abate any violation of the terms of this ordinance.
Any violation of this ordinance is declared to be a public nuisance, and instead of, or in addition
to, any criminal or civil enforcement measure authorized by this ordinance, may be enjoined or
restrained by the City as other nuisances are abated under authority of the Spanish Fork
Municipal Code.
D. Inspections. The City Engineer or his or her designee shall inspect all required improvements at
appropriate stages of construction as designated in the Construction Standards and the Design
and Development section of this Title.
(Ord. No. 14-16, Amended 09/20/2016)
15.1.04.040 Notices
Notices informing of public hearings shall provide a minimum of 10 days’ notice and shall be given as
follows: Zoning Map Changes, Zoning Text amendments, and Comprehensive General Plan
amendments shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the City.
Conditional Use Permits and specific property Zone Changes shall be posted on the subject property
and mailed to all property owners located within 300 feet of the subject property.
Land Use Ordinance amendments shall be mailed, sent by facsimile, or e-mailed to affected entities.
In addition to the above notices, all notices shall be posted on the City’s web page and the State Notice
Website.
(Ord. No. 11-09, Amended 09/15/2009)
(Ord. No. 04-14, Amended 04/01/2014)
15.1.04.050 Appeal Process
Any land use decision made under this Title may be appealed by an interested party by following the
procedures set forth in this section. All appeals shall be to the Appeal Authority identified in this Title.
Appeals from the Appeal Authority shall be to the District Court.
All appeals must be in writing and, unless otherwise indicated, must be filed within 15 days from the date
of a final decision by the appropriate land use authority.
Appeals must be received in the office of the City Recorder, and any fees paid, within the appeal time
limit.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 16/146
Matters considered by the Appeal Authority shall be de novo. Matters appealed to the District Court shall
be a review of the record made before the Appeal Authority or Council. No matter may be considered on
appeal which was not first presented to the land use authority for its consideration.
15.1.04.060 Appeal Authority
The Council shall act as the Appeal Authority for land use decisions made under this Title, except those
decisions made by the Council as the land use authority. In those instances when the Council is the land
use authority, appeals shall be filed directly with the District Court. All appeals shall follow the process
set forth in §15.1.04.050, unless more specific procedures are set forth for a specific appeal.
15.1.04.070 Fees
Fees for all services as required by this Title, including, but not limited to, Rezoning, Text amendments,
Conditional Use Permits, Variances, Design Review, Appeals, and Administrative Reviews shall be
established by the Council, either by resolution, or as part of the Annual Budget.
15.1.04.080 Severability
A. Whenever any provision of this Title refers to or cites a section of the Utah Code and that section
is later amended or superseded, this Title shall be deemed amended to refer to the amended
section or section that most nearly corresponds to that superseded section.
B. The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Title are severable, and if any
such section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase is declared unconstitutional or otherwise
invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction in a valid judgment or decree, such
unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remainder of this Title other than the part
determined to be unconstitutional or invalid.
15.1.04.090 Licensed Contractor
All work performed in accordance with this Title shall be performed by a contractor licensed to perform
such work by the State of Utah.
PART 2 COMPREHENSIVE GENERAL PLAN
15.2.04 Purpose And Applicability
15.2.04 Purpose And Applicability
15.2.04.010 Authority And Creation
15.2.04.020 Purpose
15.2.04.030 Amendments To The General Plan - Text And Maps
15.2.04.040 Hearings
15.2.04.010 Authority And Creation
There is hereby created a document known as the Spanish Fork City Comprehensive General Plan or
the “General Plan”.
15.2.04.020 Purpose
The purpose of the General Plan is to plan for present and future needs of the municipality and growth
and development of all or any part of the land with the municipality. The Plan provides for:
A. Health, general welfare, safety, energy conservation, transportation, prosperity, civic activities,
aesthetics, and recreational, educational, and cultural opportunities.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 17/146
B. The reduction of the waste of physical, financial, or human resources that result from either
excessive congestion or excessive scattering of population.
C. The efficient and economical use, conservation, and production of the supply of:
1. Food, water, drainage, sanitary, and other facilities and resources.
2. The use of energy conservation and solar and renewable energy resources.
3. The protection of urban development.
4. The protection or promotion of moderate income housing.
5. The protection and promotion of air quality.
6. Historic preservation.
7. Identifying future uses of land that are likely to require an expansion or significant
modification of services or facilities provided by each affected entity.
8. An official map.
15.2.04.030 Amendments To The General Plan - Text And Maps
A. General: Amendments to the General Plan which change property from one land use
designation to another or which amend text within the document or maps within the document
shall be adopted in accordance with this section.
B. Application: Applications shall be filed with the City Planner on a form provided by the City. The
application form will require the applicant to provide certain documentation and information about
the text change or the site, surrounding area, and proposed use that will help the DRC,
Commission, and Council to properly evaluate the request. The specific information to be
included with the application is described on the application form.
Any interested party may request a change in the text of the General Plan. Only the following
may request an amendment to change property from one land use designation to another:
1. The owner or any of the joint owners of the property.
2. The owners of 75% or more of the area covered by the application when the application
covers more than one property.
3. The Commission or Council on its own motion at a public meeting.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 18/146
C. Amendment Procedures:
1. Development Review Committee: Completed applications will be reviewed and evaluated
by the DRC. The DRC shall forward a recommendation to the Commission for approval,
approval with conditions, or denial based upon its evaluation.
2. Planning Commission: The Commission shall hold a public hearing to consider an
application. It shall also consider the recommendation of the DRC, together with
information provided by the applicant, and any statements made at the public hearing
both for and against the application. The Commission may recommend approval,
approval with conditions, or denial of the application to the Council.
3. City Council: The Council shall hold a public hearing to consider an application. It shall
consider the recommendations of both the DRC and Commission, together with
information provided by the applicant, and any statements made at the public hearing
both for and against the application. After the public hearing, the Council may approve,
approve with conditions, or deny the application.
15.2.04.040 Hearings
The Commission and Council shall each hold at least one (1) public hearing on General Plan
amendments. Notice shall be provided as set forth in §15.1.04.040.
PART 3 COMPREHENSIVE ZONING ORDINANCE
15.3.04 Purpose And Applicability
15.3.08 Administration
15.3.12 Zoning Districts
15.3.16 Zoning District Regulations
15.3.20 Overlay District Regulations
15.3.24 General Development Standards
15.3.04 Purpose And Applicability
15.3.04.010 Title
15.3.04.020 Authority And Purpose
15.3.04.030 Nonconforming Buildings, Uses, And Lots
15.3.04.010 Title
Part 3 of this Title shall be known as the “Zoning Ordinance of Spanish Fork City, Utah”. Within the
ordinance text, it shall be cited as “this ordinance”.
15.3.04.020 Authority And Purpose
This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Utah Code Annotated §10-9a-101 et
seq. (1953 as amended) to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community. It is
the intention of the Council that this ordinance and any amendments thereto implement the planning
policies as expressed and adopted in the General Plan. The purpose of this ordinance is to:
A. Establish land use classifications dividing the City into various zoning districts.
B. Govern the use of land for residential, commercial, office, industrial, and all other uses.
C. Regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings and other structures.
D. Limit the occupancy and size of yards and open spaces.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 19/146
E. Establish performance and design standards.
F. Establish boards and commissions and define powers and duties for each.
G. Provide procedures for changing zoning districts and the standards which govern these districts,
conditional use permits, variances and all other permits required by this ordinance.
H. Prescribe penalties for violations of this ordinance.
15.3.04.030 Nonconforming Buildings, Uses, And Lots
These regulations are designed to regulate and protect the rights of legally existing nonconforming uses
and noncomplying structures. Any lawful use or activity conducted under County zoning regulations at
the effective date of Annexation or under previous City zoning regulations in effect at the adoption of this
ordinance which no longer complies with the regulations of this ordinance shall be considered a legal
nonconforming use or noncomplying structure. The site, structure, or use will be encouraged to convert
to a conforming use in the future, although some limited expansion or enlargement may be allowed
subject to the provisions of this section. A nonconforming use is lost if it is abandoned. Abandonment
may be presumed to have occurred if:
A. A majority of the primary structure associated with the nonconforming use has been voluntarily
demolished without prior written agreement with the City regarding an extension of the
nonconforming use.
B. The use has been discontinued for a minimum of one year.
C. The primary structure associated with the nonconforming use remains vacant for a period of one
year.
D. A legal nonconforming use may continue subject to the following limitations:
1. A nonconforming building may not be reconstructed or structurally altered during its life to
an extent in the aggregate of 50% of the fair market value of the building.
2. A building which is nonconforming only as to setback regulations may be added to as
long as the portion to be added conforms to the setback regulations.
3. Any legal lot which does not conform to lot area or lot dimensions for the zoning district in
which it is located may be used for any use permitted in that district provided all other
applicable City and zoning regulations are complied with. However, substandard
residential lots will be restricted to the number of dwelling units allowed in accordance
with this ordinance, except as otherwise permitted in this section.
4. No nonconforming building or use shall be changed to another nonconforming use.
5. A noncomplying structure or a nonconforming use of a structure that has been damaged
by fire, flood, explosion, or an act of God can be rebuilt or repaired. The new structure
must be constructed using the same footprint as prior to being destroyed. The new
structure will need to meet all other applicable Building Codes and zoning regulations.
6. A noncomplying structure that has been allowed to deteriorate to a condition that the
structure is rendered uninhabitable and is not repaired or restored within six months after
written notice to the property owner from the City may not be reconstructed or restored
and any nonconforming use shall be lost.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 20/146
E. Expansion or Enlargement: Limited expansion or enlargement of a nonconforming use or
noncomplying structure, not to exceed 25% of the existing size of the current site or building
area, may be considered and approved by the Commission. The Commission will hold a public
hearing and review the expansion or enlargement generally in accordance with the findings for
Conditional Use Permits in §15.3.08.070 recognizing that not all of the findings may be met
because the use or building is nonconforming to certain zoning regulations and/or General Plan
policies. The Commission may place certain conditions, similar to those described in
§15.3.08.050, on the operation or expansion to help mitigate potential impacts and to increase
compatibility of the use with surrounding development and the City as a whole.
Nonconforming signs shall be removed or brought into conformance with this ordinance when:
1. More than 50% of the reproduction cost of the sign or sign structure has been damaged
or destroyed or has deteriorated to such an extent that the cost of repairs exceeds 50% of
the reproduction cost of the sign or sign structure.
2. The property undergoes development or redevelopment in accordance with the Design
Review section of this ordinance.
3. There is a change in the business name.
15.3.08 Administration
15.3.08.010 Administrative Bodies And Officers
15.3.08.020 Interpretations And Administrative Review
15.3.08.030 Annexations
15.3.08.040 Variance And Appeals
15.3.08.050 Amendments To The Zoning Ordinance - Text And Maps
15.3.08.060 Conditional Use Permits
15.3.08.010 Administrative Bodies And Officers
A. Community Development Director: The Community Development Director shall be responsible
for preparing, receiving, and reviewing applications under this Title. The Community
Development Director is the land use authority in those instances when he/she makes a final
decision with regard to a land use decision.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 21/146
B. Development Review Committee:
1. Purpose: The DRC is created to provide technical review, analysis, and recommendations
to the Commission and Council related to the City’s General Plan, Zoning Ordinance,
Subdivisions, Capital Facilities Plans, and Site Plans.
2. Organization: The DRC shall consist of the City Public Works Director, Engineering
Division Manager, Electric Division Superintendent, City Manager, City Community
Development Director, City Attorney, Public Safety Director, Parks and Recreation
Director and Building Official. An alternate member may be designated by each member,
who has the authority to attend and vote in the absence of the member. Other entities
may be invited to participate as non-voting members, such as utility companies, irrigation
companies, the US Postal Service or others. The City Public Works Director shall be the
chair of the DRC and shall retain the right to cast a vote while acting as chair. A quorum
of the Committee necessary before any business can be transacted shall consist of five
(5) voting members. A majority vote of a quorum shall be necessary to approve any item
or recommend approval of any item to the Commission or Council.
3. Policies and Procedures: The DRC shall adopt rules for its own organization for the
transaction of business, conduct of meetings, voting, etc. Such rules shall not be in
conflict with any ordinances or laws.
4. Powers and Duties: The DRC shall be the land use authority to review and approve Site
Plans and Final Plats. It shall also have the following powers and perform the following
duties:
a. Review and make recommendations to the Commission on General Plan
amendments, Preliminary Plats, Conditional Use Permits, non-conforming use
expansions, and amendments to the Zoning Ordinance and map.
b. Other such functions as may be assigned by the Council by resolution, ordinance
or directive.
(Ord. No. 23-10, Amended 11/16/2010)
(Ord. No. 10-12, Amended 08/21/2012)
(Ord. No. 15-13, Amended 09/03/2013)
(Ord. No. 14-16, Amended 09/20/2016)
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 22/146
C. Planning Commission:
1. Purpose: The Planning Commission is created to provide analysis and recommendations
to the Council related to the City’s General Plan, Zoning Ordinance, subdivisions, and
capital facilities plans.
2. Organization: The Commission shall consist of six (6) members, to be appointed by the
Mayor with the consent of the City Council from among qualified residents of Spanish
Fork. Members shall be selected without respect to political affiliations, and shall serve
without compensation except for reasonable expenses. Each member shall be appointed
for a term of three years or until his/her successor is appointed, and may serve only two
full successive terms. A Commission member may be removed by the Mayor if the
member fails to attend at least 50% of the Planning Commission meetings.
3. Policies and Procedures: The Commission shall adopt rules for its own organization for
the transaction of business, conduct of meetings, voting, etc. Such rules shall not be in
conflict with any ordinances or laws.
4. Powers and Duties: The Commission shall have the following powers and perform the
following duties in accordance with the requirements of the Utah Code:
a. Prepare and recommend a General Plan and amendments to the General Plan to
the Council.
b. Recommend Zoning Ordinances and maps, and amendments to Zoning
Ordinances and maps to the Council.
c. Recommend subdivision regulations and amendments to those regulations, and
review and make recommendations on proposed subdivisions to the Council.
d. Act as the land use authority for Preliminary Plats.
e. Act as the land use authority for the approval or denial of Conditional Use Permits.
f. Exercise any other powers that are delegated to it by the Council.
(Ord. No. 10-12, Amended 08/21/2012)
(Ord. No. 03-18, Amended 02/20/2018)
15.3.08.020 Interpretations And Administrative Review
A. Interpretations: The Community Development Director shall be responsible for interpretation of
the Zoning Ordinance and shall act as the land use authority unless specifically designated
otherwise. Interpretations may be considered if there is a question of clarity of any development
standard or permitted use as described in this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 14-16, Amended 09/20/2016)
15.3.08.030 Annexations
A. Application: A party seeking Annexation to the City shall submit an Annexation petition. Petition
is made by following the instructions on the electronic form provided by the Community
Development Department, which meets the criteria established by state law. The petition will be
placed on the Council agenda for rejection or acceptance for further review, the City Recorder
shall publish the notices, and provide the written notices as required by state law and follow the
requirements of state law. During the publication period, the petition will be forwarded to the
Community Development Director for presentation to the DRC and Commission, for their
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 23/146
recommendations.
The City may also initiate an Annexation as outlined in Utah Code Ann. §10-2-418 where islands
or peninsulas exist within its boundaries.
B. Development Review Committee: The DRC shall address the following items in its review of
the Annexation petition:
1. Whether the proposed property is within the Growth Management Boundary of the
General Plan.
2. Present and proposed land use and zoning.
3. Present and potential demand for various municipal services.
4. Distances from existing utility lines, public schools, parks, and shopping areas.
5. Specific time tables for extension of services to the area and how these services would be
financed.
6. Potential impact on existing and proposed streets.
7. The effect that the Annexation will have upon City boundaries and whether the
Annexation will create potential for islands, or difficult service areas.
8. An estimate of potential revenue verses potential service costs.
9. Requirements imposed by State law.
C. Planning Commission Review: The Commission shall consider the DRC recommendation,
together with testimony from the petitioner and other interested parties, and make a
recommendation on the Annexation and zoning districts to the Council.
D. City Council Review: If no protest is filed, a public hearing shall be scheduled before the
Council to act upon the petition. If a protest is filed, the Council shall schedule a public hearing to
act upon the petition after the Boundary Commission has rendered its decision. The petitioners
shall be responsible for the costs of any feasibility studies, which payment shall be made in
advance of the study. The Council may schedule the matter at any time to deny the petition.
E. Granting of Petition: If an Annexation petition is granted, an ordinance accepting the
Annexation and designating the zoning shall be prepared for the territory shown on the plat map.
A certified copy of the Annexation Ordinance and the Plat shall be filed in the office of the County
Recorder.
(Ord. No. 14-16, Amended 09/20/2016)
15.3.08.040 Variance And Appeals
A. General: Variances from the terms of this ordinance and appeals from decisions made by the
Community Development Director in administering or interpreting this ordinance shall be
processed and reviewed in accordance with this section.
B. Application: Only the owner of record, the equitable interest owner, or a person owning a
specific power of attorney with respect to the property may request a variance. Application is
made by following the instructions on the electronic form provided by the Community
Development Department and submitting all required materials. The application form will require
the applicant to provide certain documentation and information about the site, surrounding area,
and proposed use that will help the Appeal Authority properly evaluate the request. The specific
information to be included with the application is described on the application form.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 24/146
C. Findings: Variances to the terms of the Zoning Ordinance can only be granted by the Appeal
Authority, upon making the following findings:
1. Literal enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance would cause an unreasonable hardship for
the applicant that is not necessary to carry out the general purpose of the Zoning
Ordinance.
2. There are special circumstances attached to the property that do not generally apply to
other properties in the same district.
3. Granting the variance is essential to the enjoyment of a substantial right possessed by
other property in the same district.
4. The variance will not substantially affect the General Plan and will not be contrary to the
public interest.
5. The spirit of the Zoning Ordinance is observed and substantial justice done.
D. Review Procedures: The Appeal Authority shall hold a public meeting on the application. Prior
to the meeting, notice shall be provided as follows:
1. A notice of time and place of such meeting shall be posted on the City web page at least
10 days prior to the time of such meeting.
2. All property owners, as shown on the last tax assessment role, adjacent to or across the
street from the exterior boundaries of the property subject to the application shall be
deemed interested parties and shall be sent notice by first class mail, postmarked at least
10 days prior to the date of the scheduled public meeting.
Notwithstanding the notice requirements set forth above, the failure of any person or entity to
receive notice shall not constitute grounds for any court to invalidate the action for which the
notice was given.
The applicant and interested parties shall be permitted to address the Appeal Authority and
express any concerns. The Appeal Authority shall consider the recommendation of the
Community Development Director, together with information provided by the applicant and
interested parties at the public meeting both for and against the application. The Appeal Authority
may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application.
(Ord. No. 14-16, Amended 09/20/2016)
15.3.08.050 Amendments To The Zoning Ordinance - Text And Maps
A. General: Amendments to this Zoning Ordinance which change property from one zoning district
to another, which modify ordinance text, or which amend or modify stipulations or conditions of
approval shall be adopted in accordance with this section.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 25/146
B. Application: Application is made by following the instructions on the electronic form provided by
the Community Development Department and submitting all required materials. The application
form will require the applicant to provide certain documentation and information about the site,
surrounding area, and proposed use that will help the City properly evaluate the request. The
specific information to be included with the application is described on the application form.
Any interested party may request a change in the text of the Zoning Ordinance. Only the
following may request an amendment to change property from one zoning district to another:
1. The owner or any of the joint owners of the property.
2. The owners of 75% or more of the area covered by the application when the application
covers more than one property.
3. The Planning Commission or City Council on its own motion at a public meeting.
C. Findings: Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance and the Zoning Map may be approved only
upon making the following findings:
1. The amendment is consistent with the policies of the General Plan, including any policies
of the Capital Improvements Plan.
2. For amendments to the Zoning Map, consideration has been given to include any
conditions necessary to mitigate adverse impacts on adjoining or nearby properties.
D. Review and Public Hearing Procedures:
1. Development Review Committee: Completed applications will be reviewed by the DRC
and evaluated in accordance with the criteria described in the above “Findings”. The DRC
shall forward a recommendation to the Commission for approval, approval with
conditions, or denial based upon consideration and evaluation of the “Findings”.
2. Planning Commission: The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the application.
Prior to the hearing, notice shall be provided as set forth in §15.1.04.040. The
Commission shall consider the recommendation of the DRC, together with information
provided by the applicant, and any statements made at the public hearing both for and
against the application. The Commission may recommend approval, approval with
conditions, or denial of the application to the Council.
3. City Council: The Council shall hold a public hearing on the application. Prior to the
hearing, notice shall be provided as set forth in §15.1.04.040. After the public hearing, the
Council may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application.
(Ord. No. 14-16, Amended 09/20/2016)
15.3.08.060 Conditional Use Permits
A. Purpose: Certain uses have characteristics that may have a greater impact on the adjoining
properties, surrounding neighborhood, or community as a whole than do other permitted uses in
the specific zoning district. These uses require a more comprehensive review to determine
whether the proposed use at a specific location is appropriate, or whether the use can be made
compatible by placing certain conditions on its operation that mitigate or eliminate potential
detrimental impacts. The Commission is the Land Use Authority for Conditional Use Permits and
is empowered to approve, to approve with conditions, or to deny the Conditional Use Permit
application, subject to the findings and hearing requirements of this section.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 26/146
B. Application: Application is made by following the instructions on the electronic form provided by
the Community Development Department and submitting all required materials.
C. Findings: The DRC shall consider, and the Commission must make the following findings prior
to granting a Conditional Use Permit:
1. The proposed use is consistent with the policies of the City’s General Plan and the
purpose of the zoning district in which the site is located.
2. The proposed use will not be materially detrimental to the health, safety, or general
welfare of persons residing or working within the neighborhood of the proposed use,
when consideration is given to the character and size of the use and hours of operation.
3. The proposed site is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the intended use, and
that all requirements for the zoning district, including but not limited to: setbacks, walls,
landscaping and buffer yards are met.
4. The proposed site has adequate access to public streets to carry the type and quantity of
traffic which may be generated by the use, and that on-site circulation is adequate to
permit driveways, parking, pedestrian ways, and loading requirements in a manner which
is safe and efficient.
5. Adequate conditions or stipulations have been incorporated into the approval of the
Conditional Use Permit to ensure that any anticipated detrimental effects are minimized.
D. Review and Public Hearing Procedures:
1. Development Review Committee: Completed applications will be reviewed by the DRC
and evaluated in accordance with the criteria described in the above “Findings”. The DRC
shall forward a recommendation to the Planning Commission for approval, approval with
conditions, or denial based upon consideration and evaluation of the “Findings”.
2. Planning Commission: The Commission shall hold at least one (1) public hearing on the
application. Prior to the hearing, notice shall be provided as described in §15.1.04.040.
The Commission shall consider the recommendation of the DRC, together with
information provided by the applicant, and any statements made at the public hearing
both for and against the application. The Commission shall approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the application.
Conditions may be imposed on the use which is deemed necessary to mitigate potential
impacts and insure compatibility of the use with surrounding development and the City as
a whole. These conditions may include, but are not limited to:
a. Requirements for setbacks, open spaces, buffers, fences or walls, and
landscaping; the purpose of which is to mitigate conflicts from visual, noise,
lighting, and similar impacts associated with the use.
b. Dedication and/or improvements of street or other public rights-of-way, control
location of access points, and on-site circulation, to mitigate traffic impacts from
increased volumes or nature of traffic activity associated with the use.
c. Limitations on hours of operation, methods of operation, building height and size,
on-site lighting and on signage.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 27/146
E. Revocation: Failure to comply with the conditions or stipulations of a Conditional Use Permit is a
violation of this ordinance and will be enforced as such. Revocation procedures may be initiated
and processed by the Planning Commission as follows:
1. The City shall notify, by certified mail, the holder of the Conditional Use Permit of the
intention to conduct a hearing to consider the revocation of the Conditional Use Permit.
Notice shall be postmarked at least 15 days prior to the date of the scheduled hearing. At
the hearing the Planning Commission shall consider evidence from all interested parties,
and after consideration of all available information, may revoke the Conditional Use
Permit if it is determined that conditions or stipulations of the approved Permit have not
been met.
F. Transfer of Conditional Use Permit: A Conditional Use Permit granted in accordance with this
section shall run with the land and continue to be valid regardless of ownership of the site or
structure, as long as it operates within the conditions or stipulations of the Conditional Use Permit
approval.
(Ord. No. 04-14, Amended 04/01/2014)
15.3.12 Zoning Districts
15.3.12.010 Zoning Map
15.3.12.020 District Boundaries
15.3.12.030 Districts Established
15.3.12.010 Zoning Map
A. Boundaries of the zoning districts established in this Zoning Ordinance shall be shown on a map
titled “Official Zoning Map of Spanish Fork City”, which is incorporated and adopted as a part of
this ordinance.
B. Amendments to the Official Zoning Map shall be by ordinance as prescribed in this Title.
15.3.12.020 District Boundaries
When there is uncertainty with respect to the boundaries of any zoning district on the Official Zoning
Map, the following rules shall apply:
A. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following streets or highway rights-ofway,
the center line of such street or highway right-of-way shall be construed to be the boundary.
B. Where district boundaries approximately follow property lines, such lines shall be construed to be
the boundary.
C. Where district boundaries are approximately parallel to rights-of-way of streets or highways, such
boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto at such distance as specified by
ordinance, or, if no such distance is specified, as determined by the use of the scale of
measurement shown on the map; or
D. Where the application of the above rules does not clarify the zoning district boundary, the
Community Development Director shall interpret the map and determine the boundary location.
(Ord. No. 14-16, Amended 09/20/2016)
15.3.12.030 Districts Established
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 28/146
Uses of land which are not expressly permitted within the zoning districts as set forth in Part 3 of this
Title are prohibited. The City shall be divided into zoning districts as follows:
? A-E Exclusive Agriculture
? R-R Rural Residential
? R-1-80 Residential District
? R-1-60 Residential District
? R-1-40 Residential District
? R-1-20 Residential District
? R-1-15 Residential District
? R-1-12 Residential District
? R-1-9 Residential District
? R-1-8 Residential District
? R-1-6 Residential District
? R-3 Residential District
? R-4 Residential District
? R-5 Residential District
? R-O Residential Office
? C-O Commercial Office
? C-D Downtown Commercial
? C-1 Neighborhood Commercial
? C-2 General Commercial
? S-C Shopping Center
? C-UV Urban Village Commercial
? B-P Business Park
? I-1 Light Industrial
? I-2 Medium Industrial
? I-3 Heavy Industrial
? AIO Airport Impact Overlay
? FP Floodplain Hazard Overlay
? GH Geologic Hazards Overlay
? SM Surface Mining Overlay
? SS Self Storage Overlay
(Ord. No. 14-16, Amended 09/20/2016)
15.3.16 Zoning District Regulations
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 29/146
15.3.16.010 Agricultural And Rural Residential Districts
15.3.16.020 Residential Districts
15.3.16.030 R-3 Residential District
15.3.16.032 R-4 Residential District
15.3.16.033 R-5 Residential District
15.3.16.035 Infill Overlay Zone (I-F)
15.3.16.040 R-O Residential Office
15.3.16.050 C-O Commercial Office
15.3.16.060 C-D Downtown Commercial
15.3.16.070 C-1 Neighborhood Commercial
15.3.16.080 C-2 General Commercial
15.3.16.090 S-C Shopping Center
15.3.16.100 C-UV Urban Village Commercial
15.3.16.110 B-P Business Park
15.3.16.120 I-1 Light Industrial
15.3.16.130 I-2 Medium Industrial
15.3.16.140 I-3 Heavy Industrial
15.3.16.150 (Reserved)
15.3.16.160 Public Facilities (P-F)
15.3.16.010 Agricultural And Rural Residential Districts
A-E. Exclusive Agriculture. The purpose of this district is to promote agricultural production on lands
with high quality soil types. The lands will usually not be suited for other urban uses because of location
within a floodplain, or distance to other urban services.
R-R. Rural Residential. This district is similar in character with the A-E District, but parcel sizes are
generally somewhat smaller and the soil types may be lower quality. Many of these areas within the
Growth Management boundary will likely be rezoned and developed with higher density uses as utilities
are extended and adequate streets are developed and/or widened. Other lands outside the Growth
Management Boundary may eventually be converted to urban uses when a need is shown to expand
that boundary.
A. Permitted Uses:
1. Agriculture, including the production of food and fiber crops, and tree farms, grazing and
animal husbandry of livestock.
2. Commercial horse riding, training, and boarding stables. (A-E District only).
3. Living quarters for agricultural employees employed on the premises. (A-E District only).
4. Wholesale plant nurseries.
5. One (1) single residence dwelling per lot.
6. Veterinary offices including outdoor boarding of animals if animals are kept at least 200
feet from any neighboring house.
7. Churches.
8. Veterinary offices for large animals and/or outside boarding of any animals.
9. Municipal facilities required for local service.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 30/146
B. Uses Subject to Conditions:
1. Home Occupations (as described in §5.40.010 et seq.).
2. Manufactured Home (as described in §15.3.24.040 et seq.).
3. Residential facility for persons with a disability (As described in §15.3.24.010(A) et seq.).
4. Residential facility for elderly persons (As described in §15.3.24.010(B) et seq.).
5. Seasonal fruit, vegetable, and hay retail sales in structures of less than 500 square feet
when at least some of the products being sold are raised on the premises. Subject to
having access, parking, and any utility needs approved by the DRC.
C. Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit (see §15.3.08.060):
1. Wireless communication facilities on existing structures, with the intent to make them
“stealth” facilities, which are not noticeable to a degree greater than the structure to which
it is attached; or new stealth facilities which are camouflaged into its surroundings.
D. Accessory Buildings and Uses (see §15.3.24.090).
E. Development Standards (see Table 1).
F. Site Plan/Design Review (see §15.4.08.010 et seq.): Design review is required for uses subject
to Conditional Use Permit.
G. Landscaping, Buffering, Walls (see §15.4.16.130): Landscaping, buffering, and/or walls may be
required for uses subject to a Conditional Use Permit.
H. Signs (see §5.36.010 et seq.).
I. Parking (see §15.4.16.120).
(Ord. No. 12-09, Amended 08/04/2009)
(Ord. No. 04-14, Amended 04/01/2014)
(Ord. No. 21-18, Amended 12/11/2018)
15.3.16.020 Residential Districts
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 31/146
R-1-80, R-1-60, R-1-40, R-1-30: These districts provide a rural residential environment within Spanish
Fork that are characterized by large single-family lots conducive to animal rights as defined in
§15.3.24.090(H).
R-1-20, R-1-15, R-1-12: These districts provide low density single-family lots within Spanish Fork City. In
the event a Master Planned Development is constructed within any of these zones, townhomes,
condominiums, and twin homes are allowed, consistent with the requirements of the Master Planned
Development section of Title 15, found in §15.3.24.030.
R-1-9, R-1-8: These districts are to provide moderate density that is characterized by a variety of singlefamily
housing types and lot sizes. In the event a Master Planned Development is constructed within
either of these zones, townhomes, condominiums, and twin homes are allowed, consistent with the
requirements of the Master Planned Development section of Title 15, found in §15.3.24.030.
R-1-6: This district provides a residential environment that is medium density. In the event a Master
Planned Development is constructed within this zone, townhomes, condominiums, duplexes, and twin
homes are allowed, consistent with the requirements of the Master Planned Development section of Title
15, found in §15.3.24.030. Single-family homes on lots that are less than 6,000 square feet may also be
permitted if a project is approved for the Infill Overlay Zone.
A. Permitted Uses:
1. One (1) single residence dwelling per lot.
2. Municipal facilities required for local service.
3. Churches.
B. Uses Subject to Conditions:
1. Accessory Apartments (R-1-6 and R-3 districts only) must meet the conditions of
§15.3.24.090.
2. Home Occupations (as described in §5.40.010 et seq.).
3. Manufactured Homes (as described in §15.3.24.040 et seq.).
4. Master Planned Developments (as described in §15.3.24.030 et seq.).
5. Residential facility for elderly persons (as described in §15.3.24.010(B) et seq.).
6. Residential facility for persons with a disability (as described in §15.3.24.070(A) et seq.).
7. Subdivision Model Home Complexes (as described in §15.3.24.060 et seq.).
8. Temporary office or construction trailers (as described in §15.3.24.040 et seq.).
C. Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit (see §15.3.08.060):
1. Assisted living facility must meet the minimum conditions of §15.3.24.010.
2. Private schools (when located on a collector or arterial street).
3. Residential treatment centers must meet the conditions of §15.3.24.010.
4. Wireless communication facilities on existing structures, with the intent to make them
“stealth” facilities, which are not noticeable to a degree greater than the structure to which
it is attached; or new stealth facilities which are camouflaged into its surroundings.
D. Accessory Buildings and Uses (see §15.3.24.090).
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 32/146
E. Development Standards (see Table 1).
F. Site Plan/Design Review (see §15.4.08.010 et seq.).
G. Landscaping, Buffering, Walls (see §15.4.16.130).
H. Signs (see §5.36.010 et seq.).
I. Parking (see §15.4.16.120).
(Ord. No. 12-09, Amended 08/04/2009)
(Ord. No. 10-12, Amended 08/22/2012)
(Ord. No. 17-15, Amended 12/15/2015)
(Ord. No. 03-18, Amended 02/20/2018)
(Ord. No. 21-18, Amended 12/11/2018)
15.3.16.030 R-3 Residential District
This district is intended to promote high density residential uses. There will be a mix of dwelling types,
with a larger proportion of twin homes, duplexes, and multi-family dwellings than single residence
dwellings. Only individual lots for single-family homes will be approved as standard subdivisions. For a
project to include twin homes, duplexes, and multi-family dwellings, a project must be approved as a
Master Planned Development or with the Infill Overlay Zone.
A. Permitted Uses:
1. One (1) single residence dwelling per lot.
2. Municipal facilities required for local service.
3. Churches.
B. Uses Subject to Conditions:
1. Accessory or mother-in-law apartments (R-1-6 and R-3 district only) must meet the
conditions of §15.3.24.090.
2. Home Occupations (as described in §5.40.010 et seq.).
3. Manufactured Homes (as described in §15.3.24.010 et seq.).
4. Master Planned Developments (as described in §15.3.24.030 et seq.).
5. Residential facility for elderly persons (as described in §15.3.24.010(B) et seq.).
6. Residential facility for persons with a disability (as described in §15.3.24.070(A) et seq.).
7. Subdivision Model Home Complexes (as described in §15.3.24.060 et seq.).
8. Temporary office or construction trailers (as described in §15.3.24.040 et seq.).
C. Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit (see §15.3.08.060):
1. Assisted living facility must meet minimum conditions of §15.3.24.090.
2. Residential Treatment Center must meet minimum conditions of §15.3.24.090.
3. Wireless communication facilities on existing structures, with the intent to make them
“stealth” facilities, which are not noticeable to a degree greater than the structure to which
it is attached; or new stealth facilities which are camouflaged into its surroundings.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 33/146
D. Accessory Buildings and Uses (see §15.3.24.090).
E. Development Standards (see Table 1).
F. [Repealed]
G. (Ord. No. 13-08, Repealed 12/02/2008)
H. Landscaping, Buffering, Walls (see §15.4.16.130).
I. Signs (see §5.36.010 et seq.).
J. Parking (see §15.4.16.120).
(Ord. No. 12-09, Amended 08/04/2009)
(Ord. No. 17-15, Amended 12/15/2015)
(Ord. No. 03-18, Amended 02/20/2018)
(Ord. No. 21-18, Amended 12/11/2018)
15.3.16.032 R-4 Residential District
This district is intended to allow high density residential uses. There will be a mix of dwelling types in this
zone and it is anticipated that the majority of the dwellings in this zone will be in multi-unit structures
arranged in both townhome and stacked flat configurations.
A. Permitted Uses:
1. Single-family dwellings.
2. Twin homes.
3. Duplexes.
4. Townhomes.
5. Stacked flats.
6. Recreation and other support facilities connected to housing developments.
7. Municipal facilities required for local service.
8. Churches.
B. Uses Subject to Conditions:
1. Home Occupations (as described in §5.40.010 et seq.).
2. Master Planned Developments (as described in §15.3.24.030 et seq.).
3. Subdivision Model Home Complexes (as described in §15.3.24.060 et seq.).
4. Temporary office or construction trailers (as described in §15.3.24.040 et seq.).
C. Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit (see §15.3.08.060):
1. Wireless communication facilities on existing structures, with the intent to make them
stealth facilities, which are not noticeable to a degree greater than the structure to which it
is attached; or new stealth facilities which are camouflaged into its surroundings.
D. Accessory Buildings and Uses (see §15.3.24.090).
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 34/146
E. Development Standards.
1. Density shall not exceed 18 units per acre. For purposes of calculating allowed density,
sensitive lands, church sites, school sites, and sites for other non residential uses may
not be counted in the density calculations.
2. Minimum project size is 12 acres.
3. Minimum street frontage for a development is 80 feet.
4. Maximum impervious surface in the R-4 zone shall be 70% of the project area.
5. Minimum parking shall include two point five (2.5) spaces for each unit in the
development. Enclosed garages shall be provided for 80% of the units and zero point two
five (0.25) spaces for each unit shall be made available for guest parking.
6. Minimum finished living space shall be provided as follows:
a. Single-family residence, 1,000 square feet.
b. Twin home, 900 square feet, each unit.
c. Duplex, 900 square feet, each unit.
d. Townhome, 900 square feet, each unit.
e. Other multi-family units, 600 square feet for each studio unit, 800 square feet for
each one-bedroom unit, 1,080 square feet for each two-bedroom unit, 1,240
square feet for each unit with three or more bedrooms.
f. All projects must have an average dwelling unit size of 960 square feet or larger.
7. Curb, gutter, and sidewalk shall be provided in accordance with the City’s Development
Standards.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 35/146
F. Development Design.
1. Building Design: multi-family projects shall include design features that differentiate
adjoining units and create identity for each unit by meeting the following requirements:
a. Multi-family projects shall include a variety of unit sizes.
b. Multi-family projects shall include a variety of heights with a maximum height of 45
feet.
(1) Long, continuous rooflines and ridgelines greater than 50 feet shall not be
permitted.
(2) Where projects abut property that is zoned R-1 or R-3, the maximum
height shall be 35 feet within 100 feet of the property boundary line.
c. The front facade of multi-family structures shall exhibit visual relief through an
array of architectural features such as roof dormers, hips, gables, balconies,
porches, wall projections, and fenestration.
d. Multi-family projects shall include a variety of building colors and materials. A
minimum of three (3) colors per elevation is required. Multi-family project
proposals may be required to submit a sample board containing examples of all
exterior surfacing materials and colors.
e. Side-by-side multi-family dwelling units, that are attached horizontally, shall not
exceed six (6) attached units per building.
f. Exposed foundation walls shall not exceed four (4) feet above finished grade at
any point.
2. Project Design: multi-family projects shall meet the following requirements:
a. All exposed sides of multi-family structures shall have framed windows.
b. Side and rear elevations that are visible from public and private streets shall
match the architectural detailing of the front facade.
c. Building materials for multi-family structures shall consist of at least 50% brick,
stone, or synthetic stone on all sides of the structure.
d. Street oriented facades shall protrude beyond the garage door by at least five (5)
feet.
e. Shared entrances for multi-family structures shall be centrally located,
accentuated with architectural detailing, and well lit.
f. Utility and mechanical equipment extending from multi-family structures shall be
clustered and screened. When the project architecture contains pitched roofs, the
roof mounted utility equipment shall be situated on the back side of the roof pitch.
g. Carports and garages shall complement the project architecture in terms of
design, materials, and colors.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 36/146
3. Building Placement and Orientation: multi-family projects shall meet the following
requirements:
a. All multi-family structures shall front onto a right-of-way.
b. Where the R-4 zone abuts any R-1 or R-3 zone, the setback for primary buildings
adjacent to the R-1 or R-3 zoned properties shall match or exceed the building’s
height. Otherwise, setbacks shall be as follows for all primary buildings:
(1) Front yard, 20 feet from public right-of-way or shared driveway to living
space.
(2) Corner side yard, 15 feet to living space.
(3) Interior side yard, 10 feet, provided 15 feet exists between buildings.
(4) Rear yard, 15 feet.
(5) Accessory buildings, 5 feet to property lines and other structures.
(6) Garage doors, 20 feet from public right-of-way.
c. Interior fencing for multi-family projects shall be limited to encourage shared open
space, pedestrian access, and project integration into the surrounding
neighborhood. Private fencing (owned by an owner of an individual unit) shall only
be permitted when the fence extends directly from the unit to delineate between
common and private space. Fencing shall be uniform in design and construction.
d. Parking should generally be located behind multi-family structures. This includes
rear loaded garages, auto courtyards, and parking lots.
e. Required guest parking shall be evenly distributed throughout multi-family projects
and be easily accessible.
f. Landscaping strips in the middle of driveways (between parking spaces) should be
used to break up expanses of impervious surface.
g. Parking areas shall be broken into smaller parking clusters of 12 spaces or less.
4. Open Space: no less than 30% of the gross project area shall be open space. Applicants
shall submit landscape plans for all open space. Landscape plans shall include a plant
schedule, planting plan, irrigation plan, fencing plans, planting details, and plans for any
proposed structures or features. Required open space may include the following:
a. Open space areas shall be available to everyone residing in the boundaries of the
development.
b. Open space may include pathways and outdoor amenities.
c. Open space excludes private balconies, decks, patio areas, recreation buildings,
indoor amenities, vehicle parking, streets, and streetscape sidewalks.
d. Open space should be centrally located.
e. Open space should be clustered to create the most beneficial and efficient use of
space.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 37/146
5. Amenities: centrally located amenities shall be provided for multi-family projects.
a. Projects of fewer than 50 dwelling units shall provide an amenities package
appropriate for the project size and location. Projects of 50 units or greater shall
provide amenities as follows:
(1) Multi-family projects shall include at least one amenity per 50 units from
the following list:
(A) Community garden.
(B) Courtyard with benches.
(C) Other active or passive recreational areas that meet the intent of
this guideline.
(D) Picnic tables and BBQ area with shade structures.
(E) Sports courts (i.e., tennis, basketball, volleyball).
(F) Swimming pool (indoor or outdoor).
(G) Tot lot with play structure.
(2) Projects of 51 to 100 dwelling units shall include the following amenities in
addition to those required in subsection 15.3.16.032(F)(5)(a)(i).
(A) A minimum of one (1) inside, centrally located, fully functional social
area, no less than 1,000 square feet in size, or a minimum of one
(1) outside social function area, no less than 2,000 square feet in
size.
(3) Projects of 101 or more dwelling units shall include the following amenities
in addition to those required in subsection 15.3.16.032(F)(5)(a)(i) and (ii).
(A) A minimum of one (1) inside, centrally located, fully functional social
area, no less than 1,000 square feet in size.
(B) A minimum of one (1) outside social function area, no less than
2,000 square feet in size.
6. Access: street connectivity should be enhanced with an R-4 development and
connections to surrounding neighborhoods.
a. A traffic impact study may be required for multi-family projects.
b. The number of street connections and access points for a multi-family project shall
be proportional to the number of units.
c. Local streets shall not exceed 600 feet in length without an intersecting street.
d. Pedestrian pathways shall be provided between access points, entryways, public
gathering nodes, and parking areas. Pedestrian access points should be installed
between the project and the surrounding neighborhood.
e. All multi-family projects shall submit a photo-metric lighting plan.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 38/146
7. Development Agreements: In order to ensure conformity to approved plans and
conditions of approval, and to give assurance that any successor in interest is bound by
the same plans and conditions, the City may require applicants to enter into projectspecific
development agreements with covenants which run with the land. A notice of the
development agreement will be recorded against the land.
(Ord, No. 05-16, Enacted 04/05/2016)
15.3.16.033 R-5 Residential District
This district is intended to allow for the redevelopment of parcels located in the central part of the
community. It is anticipated that the majority of the dwellings in this zone will be in multi-unit structures
arranged primarily in a stacked configuration. The R-5 zone may only be utilized in the original plats of
the City between 300 West, 1000 North, 800 East and 400 South. The R-5 zone is only available where
properties have the Mixed Use, High Density Residential or Urban Density designations in the
Comprehensive General Plan.
A. Permitted Uses:
1. Single-family dwellings.
2. Twin homes.
3. Duplexes.
4. Townhomes.
5. Stacked flats.
6. Recreation and other support facilities connected to housing developments.
7. Municipal facilities required for local service.
8. Churches (when located on a collector or arterial street).
B. Uses Subject to Conditions:
1. Home Occupations (as described in 5.40.010 et seq.).
2. Master Planned Developments (as described in 15.3.24.030 et seq.).
3. Subdivision Model Homes (as described in 15.3.24.060 et seq.).
4. Temporary office or construction trailers (as described in 15.3.24.040 et seq.).
C. Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit (see 15.3.08.060):
1. Wireless communication facilities on existing structures, with the intent to make them
stealth facilities, which are not noticeable to a degree greater than the structure to which it
is attached; or new stealth facilities which are camouflaged into its surroundings.
D. Accessory Buildings and Uses (see 15.3.24.090).
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 39/146
E. Development Standards.
1. Density shall not exceed 18 units per acre. For purposes of calculating allowed density,
sensitive lands, church sites, school sites, and sites for other non residential uses may
not be counted in the density calculations.
2. Minimum project size is 2 acres.
3. Minimum street frontage for a development is 80 feet.
4. Maximum impervious surface in the R-5 zone shall be 75% of the project area.
5. Minimum parking shall include 2.25 spaces for each unit in the development. One
covered parking space shall be provided for each unit and enclosed garages shall be
provided for fifty percent 50% of the units.
6. Minimum finished living space shall be provided as follows:
a. Single-family residence, 1,000 square feet.
b. Twin home, 900 square feet, each unit.
c. Duplex, 900 square feet, each unit.
d. Townhome, 900 square feet, each unit.
e. Other multi-family units, 600 square feet for each studio unit, 800 square feet for
each one-bedroom unit, 1,080 square feet for each two-bedroom unit, 1,240
square feet for each unit with three or more bedrooms.
f. All projects must have an average dwelling unit size of 960 square feet or larger.
7. Curb, gutter, and sidewalk shall be provided in accordance with the City’s Development
Standards.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 40/146
F. Development Design.
1. Building Design: multi-family projects shall include design features that differentiate
adjoining units and create identity for each unit by meeting the following requirements:
a. Multi-family projects shall include a variety of unit sizes.
b. Multi-family projects shall include elements that engage public rights of-way and
common areas.
(1) Where possible, units shall have direct access to the public right-of-way.
(2) Balconies and porches shall be provided adjacent to public rights-of-way
and common areas.
c. Multi-family projects shall include a variety of heights with a maximum height of 40
feet.
d. Long, continuous rooflines and ridgelines greater than 40 feet shall not be
permitted.
e. The front facade of multi-family structures shall exhibit visual relief through an
array of architectural features such as roof dormers, hips, gables, porches, wall
projections and fenestration.
f. Multi-family projects shall include a variety of building colors and materials. A
minimum of three (3) colors per elevation is required. Multi-family project
proposals may be required to submit a sample board containing examples of all
exterior surfacing materials and colors.
g. Side-by-side multi-family dwelling units, that are attached horizontally, shall not
exceed six (6) attached units per building.
h. Exposed foundation walls shall not exceed four (4) feet above finished grade at
any point.
2. Project Design: multi-family projects shall meet the following requirements:
a. All exposed sides of multi-family structures shall have framed windows.
b. Side and rear elevations that are visible from public and private streets shall
match the architectural detailing of the front facade.
c. Building materials for multi-family structures shall consist of at least 50% brick,
stone, or synthetic stone on all sides of the structure.
d. Street oriented facades shall protrude beyond the garage door by at least five (5)
feet.
e. Shared entrances for multi-family structures shall be centrally located,
accentuated with architectural detailing, and well lit.
f. Utility and mechanical equipment extending from multi-family structures shall be
clustered and screened. When the project architecture contains pitched roofs, the
roof mounted utility equipment shall be situated on the back side of the roof pitch.
g. Carports and garages shall complement the project architecture in terms of
design, materials, and colors.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 41/146
3. Building Placement and Orientation: multi-family projects shall meet the following
requirements:
a. All multi-family structures shall front onto a public right-of-way.
b. Where the R-5 zone abuts any R-1 or R-3 zone, the setback for primary buildings
adjacent to the R-1 or R-3 zoned properties shall match or exceed the building’s
height. Otherwise, setbacks shall be as follows for all primary buildings:
(1) Front yard, 10 feet from public right-of-way or shared driveway to living
space.
(2) Corner side yard, 15 feet to living space.
(3) Interior side yard, 10 feet, provided 15 feet exists between buildings.
(4) Rear yard, 15 feet.
(5) Accessory buildings, five (5) feet to property lines and other structures.
(6) Garage doors, 20 feet from public rights-of-way.
c. Interior fencing for multi-family projects shall be limited to encourage shared open
space, pedestrian access, and project integration into the surrounding
neighborhood. Private fencing (owned by an owner of an individual unit) shall only
be permitted when the fence extends directly from the unit to delineate between
common and private space. Fencing shall be uniform in design and construction.
d. Parking should generally be located behind multi-family structures. This includes
rear loaded garages, auto courtyards, and parking lots.
e. Required guest parking shall be evenly distributed throughout multi-family projects
and be easily accessible.
f. Landscaping strips in the middle of driveways (between parking spaces) should be
used to break up expanses of impervious surface.
g. Parking areas shall be broken into smaller parking clusters of 12 spaces or less.
4. Open Space: no less than 20% of the gross project area shall be open space. Applicants
shall submit landscape plans for all open space. Landscape plans shall include a plant
schedule, planting plan, irrigation plan, fencing plans, planting details, and plans for any
proposed structures or features. Required open space may include the following:
a. Open space areas shall be available to everyone residing in the boundaries of the
development.
b. Open space may include pathways and outdoor amenities.
c. Open space excludes private balconies, decks, patio areas, recreation buildings,
indoor amenities, vehicle parking, streets, and streetscape sidewalks.
d. Open space should be clustered to create the most beneficial and efficient use of
space.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 42/146
5. Amenities: centrally located amenities shall be provided for multi-family projects.
a. Projects of fewer than 50 dwelling units shall provide an amenities package
appropriate for the project size and location.
(1) Multi-family projects shall include at least one amenity per 50 units from
the following list:
(A) Tot lot with play structure.
(B) Community garden.
(C) Courtyard with benches.
(D) Picnic tables and BBQ area with shade structures.
(E) Swimming pool (indoor or outdoor).
(F) Sports courts (i.e., tennis, basketball, volleyball).
(G) Other active or passive recreational areas that meet the intent of
this guideline.
(2) Projects of 51 to 100 dwelling units shall include the following amenities in
addition to those required in subsection (5)(a)(1) of this section.
(A) A minimum of one inside, centrally located, fully functional social
area, no less than 1,000 square feet in size, or a minimum of one
outside social function area, no less than 2,000 square feet in size.
(3) Projects of 101 or more dwelling units shall include the following amenities
in addition to those required in subsection (5)(a)(1) and (2) of this section.
(A) A minimum of one inside, centrally located, fully functional social
area, no less than 1,000 square feet in size.
(B) A minimum of one outside social function area, no less than 2,000
square feet in size.
6. Access: street connectivity should be enhanced with an R-5 development and
connections to surrounding neighborhoods.
a. A traffic impact study may be required for multi-family projects.
b. The number of street connections and access points for a multi-family project shall
be proportional to the number of units.
c. Pedestrian pathways shall be provided between access points, entryways, public
gathering nodes, and parking areas. Pedestrian access points should be installed
between the project and the surrounding neighborhood.
d. All multi-family projects shall submit a photo-metric lighting plan.
7. Development Agreements: In order to ensure conformity to approved plans and
conditions of approval, and to give assurance that any successor in interest is bound by
the same plans and conditions, the City may require applicants to enter into projectspecific
development agreements with covenants which run with the land. A notice of the
development agreement will be recorded against the land.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 43/146
(Ord, No. 25-17, Enacted 10/17/2017)
15.3.16.035 Infill Overlay Zone (I-F)
This district is intended to provide flexibility in development standards for small residential parcels,
consisting of two (2) acres or less, that are difficult to develop under standard residential requirements,
allowing them to be developed with modified standards, while maintaining high quality construction and
maintaining the general character of the underlying zone. This zone may only be applied as an overlay
zone in the R-1-6 and R-3 zones. Prior to approving the I-F Zone, the City Council shall determine that
the proposed development promotes the historic character of the neighborhood and conforms to the
physical characteristics of the adjoining properties including architectural style, materials and size.
A. Permitted Uses:
1. Single-Family Dwellings.
2. Twin Homes (R-3 zone only).
3. Duplexes (R-3 zone only).
4. Triplexes (R-3 zone only).
5. Fourplexes (R-3 zone only).
6. Townhomes, up to six (6) unites per building (R-3 zone only)
B. Accessory Buildings and Uses (see §15.3.24.090).
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 44/146
C. Development Standards. Development standards for projects in the I-F Zone shall be generated
on a project-by-project basis. It is expected that the development standards will provide for
project designs that will promote conformity to existing neighborhood characteristics while
allowing for innovation and creativity. Development standards shall also include design elements
that will provide appropriate screening and buffers between the project and the surrounding
properties. As appropriate, project designs should incorporate amenities for the use of the
project’s residents. In each case, standards created for elements including but not limited to
setbacks, lot size, building design, fencing and landscaping shall be presented to the Planning
Commission for recommendation and the City Council for approval.
Notwithstanding the potential flexibility in development standards for the I-F Zone, the following
standards must be maintained:
1. Building design shall incorporate architectural elements that reinforce architectural styles
found in other structures in the neighborhood and/or along the street. Architectural
considerations shall offer reasonable protection relative to the privacy of adjoining
properties. Architectural elements utilized to promote the purpose of the zone may include
the following:
a. Building articulation.
b. Building colors.
c. Building materials.
d. Building ornamentation.
e. Door and window placement and orientation.
f. Garage placement.
g. Roof pitch.
2. Variation in setbacks from the underlying zone may be considered on a case by case
basis.
3. No more than one unit for every 3,260 square feet of project area shall be permitted for
developments in the R-3 Zone. No more than one unit for every 4,420 square feet of
project area shall be permitted for developments in the R-1-6 Zone.
4. Minimum street frontage for a development is 80 feet except for duplexes where the
minimum frontage requirement is 60 feet.
5. Maximum impervious surface in the I-F zone shall be 70% of the project area.
6. Minimum parking shall include one (1) garage per dwelling unit and one point five (1.5)
additional spaces per unit within the development.
7. Minimum finished living space shall be provided as follows:
a. Single-family residence, 1,000 square feet.
b. Duplex, 900 square feet, each side.
c. Triplex, 900 square feet, each unit.
d. Other multi-family units, 900 square feet, each unit.
8. Curb, gutter, and sidewalk shall be provided in accordance with the City’s Development
Standards.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 45/146
D. Site Plan/Design Review (see §15.4.08.010 et seq.).
E. Landscaping, Buffering, Walls (see §15.4.16.130). An exception to the requirement to install a
masonry wall where a multi-family use abuts a single-family residential use or district may be
waived for projects that have four or fewer multi-family units where the City Council finds that a
different type of fence or wall is sufficient.
F. Detailed landscape plans shall be submitted with each application for I-F Zone approval.
Landscape plans shall be generally consistent with surrounding properties. Projects shall be
landscaped in a manner that is consistent with the approved plans. Landscape Plans shall
identify the following:
1. Details for any proposed structures or features.
2. Irrigation plan.
3. Parking (see §15.4.16.120).
4. Plant schedule.
5. Planting plan, including all ground cover.
6. Signs (see §5.36.010 et seq.).
7. Walls.
(Ord. No. 04-09, Amended 07/08/2009)
(Ord. No. 02-15, Amended 02/03/2015)
(Ord, No. 04-16, Amended 02/16/2016)
(Ord, No. 05-16, Amended 04/05/2016)
(Ord. No. 21-18, Amended 12/11/2018)
(Ord. No. 03-19, Amended 01/22/2019)
15.3.16.040 R-O Residential Office
This district is intended to allow low intensity professional office uses on a scale consistent with
residential areas. Strict architectural and Site Plan review will be required to ensure compatibility with
adjoining residential areas. This district serves as a transition between more intense commercial areas
and residential land uses, or is located along busier streets where limited office use is being introduced.
Residential and office use of the same structure is allowed. Some limited commercial use may also be
allowed in selective locations.
A. Permitted Uses:
1. Bed and Breakfast Inns.
2. Child Care Centers.
3. Churches.
4. Duplexes. The minimum lot size is 9,700 square feet; the minimum lot width is 60 feet and
the side setback 10 feet.
5. Funeral Homes.
6. Home Occupations.
7. Instructional Studio.
8. Municipal Facilities required for local service.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 46/146
9. Museums.
10. Offices.
11. Single Residence Dwellings.
The following uses will only be allowed on properties between 100 West and 100 East:
1. Art Galleries and Studios.
2. Financial Institutions with no drive-thru service.
3. Personal Service businesses.
4. Restaurants (no drive-thru or drive-in service).
5. Specialty retail uses including, but not limited to, Gift Shops, Bookstores, Florists,
Antiques, Crafts, Collectibles, Food and Beverages, Apparel, and other similar items.
B. Uses subject to Conditions (as described in §15.3.24.010 et seq.):
1. Manufactured Homes (as described in §15.3.24.040 et seq.).
2. Residential facility for elderly persons (as described in §15.3.24.010(B) et seq.).
3. Residential facility for persons with a disability (as described in §15.3.24.010(A) et seq.).
C. Accessory Buildings and Uses (see §15.3.24.090).
D. Development Standards (see Table 1).
E. Site Plan/Design Review (see §15.4.08.010 et seq.)
F. Landscaping, Buffering, Walls (see §15.4.16.130).
G. Signs (see §5.36.010 et seq.).
H. Parking (see §15.4.16.120): No parking will be allowed in front of the principal structure for nonresidential
uses.
I. Uses subject to Conditional Use Permit (see §15.3.08.060):
1. Assisted Living Facilities.
2. Financial Institutions not located between 100 West and 100 East.
3. Museums.
4. Nursing or Retirement Homes.
5. Residential Treatment Centers.
6. Shelter Care Facilities.
7. Supervisory Care Facilities.
8. Wireless Communication Facilities on existing structures, with the intent to make them
“stealth” facilities, which are not noticeable to a degree greater than the structure to which
it is attached; or new stealth facilities which are camouflaged into its surroundings.
(Ord. No. 12-09, Amended 08/04/2009)
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 47/146
Table 1 - Residential Development Standards
Distric
t
Base
Density
Per Acre
Minimum lot dimensions Minimum Setback
Max Building
Height5
Lot
Area Width Depth Front6 Rear7 Side Corner
Princip
al
Buildin
g
Access
ory
Building
1
A-E N/A 40
acres 400' 400' 50' 50' 50' 50' 35' 35'
R-R N/A 5 acres 200' 200' 50' 50' 25' 50' 35' 35'
R-1-
80
.4 units
(base)
80,000
sf 180' 200' 40' 80' 20' 30' 35' 20'
R-1-
60
.54 units
(base)
60,000
sf 160' 200' 40' 60' 20' 30' 35' 20'
R-1-
40
.81 units
(base)
40,000
sf 140' 200' 30' 40' 20' 30' 35' 20'
R-1-
30
1.07
units
(base)
30,000
sf 130' 150' 40' 40' 15' 25' 35' 15'
R-1-
20
1.61
units
(base)
20,000
sf 125' 125' 30' 30' 15' 25' 35' 15'
R-1-
15
2.15
units
(base)
15,000
sf 100' 100' 20-25'2 25' 10' 15-25'4 35' 15'
R-1-
12
2.69
units
(base)
12,000
sf 100' 90' 20-25'2 25' 10' 15-25'4 35' 15'
R-1-9
3.58
units
(base)
9,000
sf 85' 90' 15-25'2 25' 10' 15-25'4 35' 15'
R-1-8
4.03
units
(base)
8,000
sf 75' 90' 15-25'2 25' 10' 15-25'4 35' 15'
R-1-6
5.37
units
(base)9
6,000
sf 50' 90' 15-25'2 25' 5-10'3 15-25'4 35' 15'
R-3
12 units
(maximu
m)9
6,000
sf 50' 90' 15-25'2 25' 5-10'3 15-25'4 35' 15'
R-4
18 units
(maximu
m)
6,000
sf 50' 90' 15-25'2 25' 5'-10'3 15-25'4 45' 15'
R-5
18 units
(maximu
m)
6,000
sf 50' 90' 10-20'8 15' 15' 15' 40' 15'
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 48/146
R-O N/A 6,000
sf 50' 90' 15-25'2 25' 5-10'3 15-25'4 35' 15'
1. Refer to 15.3.24.090(A) for accessory buildings.
2. 15 feet to porches, 20 feet to living areas, 25 feet to garages or carports, and 20 feet to the
front of a side entry garage.
3. 5 feet on one side, 10 feet on the other side for single-family dwellings except for lots with 50
feet of lot width or less. When the lot width is 50 feet or less the minimum setback is five (5)
feet on each side. The setback is 10 feet for non-residential uses.
4. 15 feet to living area, 25 feet to garages or carports, and 20 feet to the front of a side entry
garage.
5. Flagpoles are limited to the height of principal buildings in a residential zone.
6. Maximum setback is 250 feet, with an all-weather driveway, capable of supporting a fire truck,
and with adequate turn around space for a fire truck at the end of the drive. Greater distances
may be allowed if a fire hydrant is installed within 250 feet of the principal building.
7. On corner lots, the setback is reduced by five (5) feet.
8. 10 feet minimum front setback, 20-foot maximum front setback.
9. Except as defined with the Infill Overlay Zone.
(Ord. No. 15-13, Amended 09/03/2013) (Ord. No. 13-14, Amended 08/19/2014) (Ord. No. 05-16,
Amended 04/05/2016) (Ord. No. 11-17, Amended 04/18/2017) (Ord. No. 25-17, Amended 10/17/2017)
(Ord. No. 20-18, Amended 11/20/2018) (Ord. No. 21-18, Amended 12/11/2018) (Ord. No. 03-19,
Amended 01/22/2019)
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 49/146
Table 2 - Commercial and Industrial Development Standards
Distric
t
Minimum
District Size
Minimum Setback1 Max Building Height
Front Rear Side Corner Principal
Building
Accessory
Building1
C-O N/A 15'4-25' 0-25' 0-10' 10'5-15' 30' 20'
C-UV 5 acres 25' 0-25' 0-20' 15' 35'-48'1 20'
C-D N/A 0' (10' max) 0-25' 0' 0' (10' max) 48' 20'
C-1 1 acres (5 acres
max) 25' 0-25' 0-20' 15' 30' 20'
C-2 N/A 15'4-25' 0-25' 0-20' 10'5-15' 35-48'2 20-25'2
S-C 5 acres 25' 0-25' 0-20' 15' 35-60'2 20'
B-P 10 acres 25' 0-25' 0-25' 15' 120' 20'
I-1 10 acres 25' 0-25' 0-25' 15' None None
I-2 20 acres 50' 50' 50' 50' None None
1. Where range is indicated, side or rear setbacks are when the adjacent parcel is a residential
use or district.
2. Lower heights shown are for buildings and structures within 50 feet of a residential district or
use.
Note: There is no minimum lot size, width, or lot frontage requirements. However, any new
building or development must have permanent access on a paved road or driveway. Other
improvements, such as curb and gutter, sidewalk, and additional pavement width or thickness
may be required depending upon the nature of the business. (Ord. No. 07-04. Amended
Industrial Zones Height Restrictions, 05/04/2004)
3. The setback for self-storage units in the I-2 Industrial Zone may be reduced by the Planning
Commission as noted in §15.3.16.130(E)(1).
4. 15 feet, provided there is 30 feet from the building to the back of curb, otherwise 25 feet.
5. 10 feet, provided there is 20 feet from the building to the back of curb, otherwise 15 feet.
(Ord. No. 10-09, Amended 06/17/2009) (Ord. No. 15-15, Amended 09/15/2015) (Ord. No. 14-16,
Amended 09/20/2016) (Ord. No. 03-17, Amended 02/07/2017) (Ord. No. 26-17, Amended 11/07/2017)
(Ord. No. 03-18, Amended 02/20/2018)
15.3.16.050 C-O Commercial Office
This district is intended to provide for general office development. It may serve as a transition between
commercial uses and residential areas, or it may be designed as a concentration of similar uses
intended as an employment center.
A. Permitted Uses:
1. Child Care Centers.
2. Emergency Medical Care Facilities.
3. Financial Institutions.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 50/146
4. Funeral Homes.
5. Instructional Studios.
6. Medical and Dental Clinics.
7. Medical and Dental Laboratories.
8. Municipal Facilities required for local service.
9. Nursing or Retirement Homes.
10. Offices.
11. Office Supply Stores.
12. Personal Service Businesses.
13. Pharmacies.
14. Retail Stores.
15. Supervisory Care Facilities.
16. Veterinary Offices for small animals with no outside boarding of animals.
B. Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit (see §15.3.08.060):
1. Any permitted use with a drive-thru.
2. Museums.
3. Restaurants.
4. Wireless Communication Facilities on existing structures, with the intent to make them
“stealth” facilities, which are not noticeable to a degree greater than the structure to which
it is attached; or new stealth facilities which are camouflaged into its surroundings.
C. Accessory Buildings and Uses (see §15.3.24.090).
D. Development Standards (see Table 2).
E. Site Plan/Design Review (see §15.4.08.010 et seq.).
F. Landscaping, Buffering, Walls (see §15.4.16.130).
G. Signs (see §5.36.010 et seq.).
H. Parking (see §15.4.16.120).
(Ord. No. 12-09, Amended 08/04/2009)
(Ord. No. 03-18, Amended 02/20/2018)
(Ord. No. 21-18, Amended 12/11/2018)
15.3.16.060 C-D Downtown Commercial
This district is intended to promote and maintain the character of a pedestrian oriented retail district
along Main Street. Building orientation should strongly encourage pedestrian use by having buildings
close to the street with frequent entrances to buildings, and significant amounts of glass. Drive-thru uses
should be strongly discouraged.
A. Permitted Uses: The following uses are permitted if operated from a permanent, enclosed
building, with no outside storage. The outside display of merchandise for sale is allowed between
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 51/146
the hours of 7:00 a.m. 9:00 p.m. if the merchandise remains off from the public right-of-way.
Merchandise is allowed on the public right-of-way during sidewalk sales, which are allowed every
weekend:
1. Art Galleries and Studios.
2. Entertainment Uses.
3. Financial Institutions with no drive-thru service.
4. Hotels, with all guest rooms above the first floor.
5. Instructional Studios.
6. Municipal Facilities required for local service.
7. Office Supply, Copying, Printing businesses.
8. Offices.
9. Personal Service businesses.
10. Residential uses when located above the first floor.
11. Restaurants.
12. Retail uses.
B. Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit (see §15.3.08.060):
1. Drive-thru facilities as part of a financial institution.
2. Lube Centers.
3. Parking structures.
4. Tire Centers.
5. Wireless Communication Facilities on existing structures, with the intent to make them
“stealth” facilities, which are not noticeable to a degree greater than the structure to which
it is attached; or new stealth facilities which are camouflaged into its surroundings.
(Ord. No. 12-09, Amended 08/04/2009)
(Ord. No. 18-10, Amended 09/23/2010)
(Ord. No. 06-11, Amended 04/20/2011)
(Ord. No. 12-12, Amended 09/28/2012)
(Ord. No. 21-18, Amended 12/11/2018)
15.3.16.070 C-1 Neighborhood Commercial
This district is intended to provide small scale retail, personal and business services, and office uses to
serve the immediate residential area. Individual businesses may not exceed 7,500 square feet to
discourage uses which draw from outside of the immediate neighborhood.
A. Permitted Uses: The following uses are permitted if operated from a permanent, enclosed
building with no outside storage or display of merchandise. The hours of operation are limited to
6:00 A.M. to 11:00 P.M.
1. Child Care Centers.
2. Convenience Store.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 52/146
3. Financial Institutions.
4. Instructional Studio.
5. Municipal Facilities required for local service.
6. Office Supply, Copying, Printing businesses.
7. Offices.
8. Personal Service businesses.
9. Restaurants.
10. Retail Uses.
B. Uses Subject to Conditions:
1. Seasonal Sales and Special Events (as described in §15.3.24.050 et seq.).
C. Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit (see §15.3.08.060):
1. Car wash (self or full service).
2. Wireless Communication Facilities on existing structures, with the intent to make them
“stealth” facilities, which are not noticeable to a degree greater than the structure to which
it is attached; or new stealth facilities which are camouflaged into its surroundings.
(Ord. No. 12-09, Amended 08/04/2009)
15.3.16.080 C-2 General Commercial
This district is intended to provide for a wide range of commercial uses designed to serve neighborhood,
community, and regional needs. Uses may be freestanding or integrated in a center.
A. Permitted Uses: The following uses are permitted if operated from a permanent, enclosed
building with no outside storage of merchandise:
1. Art Galleries and Studios.
2. Car Wash (full service).
3. Child Care Centers.
4. Convenience Stores.
5. Entertainment Uses.
6. Financial Institutions.
7. Hotels and Motels.
8. Instructional Studios.
9. Lube Centers.
10. Medical and Dental Laboratories.
11. Municipal Facilities required for local service.
12. Office Supply, Copying, Printing businesses.
13. Offices.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 53/146
14. Outdoor display area.
15. Personal Service businesses.
16. Private Clubs.
17. Public Utility Facilities required for local service.
18. Repair Services for small appliances, bicycles, jewelry, and similar items.
19. Restaurants.
20. Retail uses.
21. Tire Centers.
The following uses are permitted if operated from a permanent, enclosed building and may have
outside storage or display of merchandise which is customarily part of such:
1. New and Used Automobile, Motorcycle, Boat, Truck, Recreational Vehicle Sales and
Rental Facilities, and Repair Services associated with such facilities.
B. Uses Subject to Conditions:
1. Seasonal Sales and Special Events (as described in §15.3.24.050 et seq.).
C. Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit (see §15.3.08.060):
1. Outdoor display or storage of materials or merchandise in conjunction with any permitted
use.
2. Wireless Communication Facilities on existing structures, with the intent to make them
“stealth” facilities, which are not noticeable to a degree greater than the structure to which
it is attached; or new stealth facilities which are camouflaged into its surroundings.
D. Accessory Buildings and Uses (see §15.3.24.090):
1. Caretaker’s residence.
E. Development Standards (see Table 2).
F. Site Plan/Design Review (see §15.4.08.010 et seq.).
G. Landscaping, Buffering, Walls (see §15.4.16.130).
H. Signs (see §5.36.010 et seq.).
I. Parking (see §15.4.16.120).
(Ord. No. 12-09, Amended 08/04/2009)
(Ord. No. 02-10, Amended 02/16/2010)
(Ord. No. 21-18, Amended 12/11/2018)
15.3.16.090 S-C Shopping Center
This district is intended to provide retail uses, service-oriented businesses, offices, and restaurants in an
integrated center. Each center shares common architecture, access, parking, signage, and landscape
design. Centers will typically be five (5) acres in size and provide neighborhood or community level
destination shopping while incorporating a design which enhances pedestrian orientation within the
center.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 54/146
A. Permitted Uses: The following uses are permitted if operated from a permanent, enclosed
building with no outside storage of merchandise:
1. Art Galleries and Studios.
2. Car Wash (full service).
3. Child Care Centers.
4. Convenience Store.
5. Entertainment Uses.
6. Instructional Studios.
7. Lube Center.
8. Municipal Facilities required for local service.
9. Office Supply, Copying, and Printing businesses.
10. Personal Service businesses.
11. Restaurants.
12. Retail Uses.
13. Tire Center.
The following uses are permitted if operated from a permanent, enclosed building and may have
outside storage or display of merchandise which is customarily part of such business:
B. Uses Subject to Conditions:
1. Seasonal sales and special events (as described in §15.3.24.050 et seq.).
2. Offices. Buildings or portions of buildings occupied by office uses cannot exceed 3,000
square feet. No more than five (5) percent of any development’s gross building square
footage can be dedicated to office uses.
3. Outdoor display area. Areas are only allowed for the storage of materials and
merchandise in conjunction with a permitted use that has a permanent facility in the
center. Areas should be sufficiently screened and/or organized so as to maintain an
attractive and inviting atmosphere in the center. Areas shall not impede pedestrian or
vehicular traffic to, from, or within a center.
C. Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit (see §15.3.08.060):
1. Hotels and Motels.
2. New Automobile, Motorcycle, Boat, Truck, Recreational Vehicle Sales and Rental
Facilities, and Repair Services associated with such facilities.
3. Outdoor display or storage of materials or merchandise in conjunction with any permitted
use.
4. Wireless Communication Facilities on existing structures, with the intent to make them
“stealth” facilities, which are not noticeable to a degree greater than the structure to which
they are attached; or new stealth facilities which are camouflaged into its surroundings.
D. Accessory Buildings and Uses (see §15.3.24.090).
E. Development Standards (see Table 2).
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 55/146
(Ord. No. 12-09, Amended 08/04/2009)
(Ord. No. 15-15, Amended 09/15/2015)
15.3.16.100 C-UV Urban Village Commercial
This district is intended to provide controlled and compatible settings for a wide range of commercial and
residential uses in the same area, uses designed to serve neighborhood, community, and regional
needs. Uses may be freestanding or integrated in a center. Developments in this district will be designed
towards pedestrians in mind; designs will have the character of an urban village; with high quality
materials being used. The Planning Commission will review all Site Plans and subdivisions.
A. Permitted Uses:
1. Dental and Medical Offices.
2. Financial Institutions with no drive-thru services.
3. Health, Fitness, and Recreation Facilities.
4. Instructional Studios.
5. Laundry and Dry Cleaning.
6. Multi-family residential.
7. Museums.
8. Offices.
9. Personal Service businesses.
10. Private Schools, Professional and Vocational.
11. Restaurants.
12. Retail Uses.
B. Uses Subject to Conditions:
1. Seasonal sales and special events (as described in §15.3.24.050 et seq.).
C. Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit (see §15.3.08.060):
1. Child Care Centers.
2. Financial Institutions with drive-thru facilities.
3. Restaurants with drive-thru facilities.
D. Accessory Buildings and Uses (see §15.3.24.090).
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 56/146
E. Site Plan/Design Review/Performance Standards (see §15.4.08.010 et seq.): These standards
are intended to foster the creation of an urban environment that accommodates growth and is
compatible with the existing homes and uses in the area:
1. Outdoor Sales, Display and Storage. The outdoor permanent sales or display of
merchandise shall not encroach into areas of required parking, sidewalks, or landscaping.
2. Lighting. On-site lighting, including parking lot lighting and illuminated signs, shall be
located, directed or designed in a manner to prevent glare on adjacent properties and be
designed for pedestrians. All lighting should have the same design elements throughout
the development.
3. Location of Service Areas. All loading docks and other service activities shall be located
away from view of any public street. Exceptions to this requirement may be approved
through the Site Plan Process. If such activities are permitted adjacent to a public street,
a visual screening design approved by the Planning Department shall be required.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 57/146
4. Urban Design. Designs for this area should envision a “village character” relating to the
heritage of the early residents of the community. Safe and efficient pedestrian circulation
is a priority:
a. Architectural Character and Materials.
(1) A differentiated base will provide human scale through change, contrast,
and intricacy in facade form. Scaling elements such as insets and projects
serve to break up flat or monotonous facades along with color and a
change in materials.
(2) The climate in Spanish Fork City is such that in the summer months’ shade
is preferred, and in the winter months, protection from the snow and wind
is necessary. By providing the pedestrian with a sidewalk that is enjoyable
to use year-round, a pedestrian oriented development is encouraged.
Therefore, the following will be encouraged.
(3) Arcades, Awnings and/or marquees.
b. Entrance and Visual Access.
(1) The intent in this district is to encourage pedestrian activity between the
public street/sidewalk and buildings. Sidewalks shall provide continuous,
uninterrupted interest to the pedestrian by providing visual interest and/or
amenities. The environment will benefit with increased pedestrian activity,
this activity will only occur if opportunities are provided that make walking
to a destination a preferred and an enjoyable pursuit. The use of blank
building facade walls is discouraged. Therefore, all buildings in this district
are subject to the following standards:
(A) Minimum First Floor Glass. The first-floor elevation of a commercial
building facing a street shall not have less than 40% glass surfaces.
All first-floor glass shall be a non-reflective. Display windows that
are three (3) dimensional and are at least two (2) feet deep are
permitted and may be counted toward the 40% glass requirement.
(B) Provide at least one (1) operable building entrance per elevation
that faces a public street. Buildings that face multiple streets are
only required to have one door on either street, if the facades for
both streets meet the 40% glass requirement.
(C) The maximum length of any blank wall uninterrupted by windows,
doors, art or architectural detailing at the first-floor level shall be 40
feet.
(D) All building equipment and service areas, including on-grade and
roof mechanical equipment and transformers that are readily visible
from the public right-of-way, shall be screened from public view.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 58/146
c. Public Amenities and Public Art.
(1) Amenities and works of art enhance quality of life as well as visual interest.
Public amenities and art encourage pedestrian activity and contribute to
the “village” experience. A cohesive, unified lighting and amenity policy will
help give the district its own distinctive identity. Therefore, all projects will
be required to have public amenities and art that are subject to the
following standards:
(A) Sidewalks and street lamps installed in the public right of way shall
be of the type specified in the City’s construction and development
standards. All parking lot lights will be required to match the City’s
standards.
(B) Park benches will be required within the development.
(C) Public art (which may include artists’ work integrated into the
design of the building, and landscaping, sculpture, painting, murals,
glass, mixed media or work by artisans), that is accessible or
directly viewable to the general public shall be included in all
projects. The plan to incorporate public art shall be reviewed and
approved by the Spanish Fork Arts Council.
(D) All projects will be required to have a minimum of 20% open space
and developments with residential units will be required to have
35% open space.
5. Conditional Use Approval. A modification to the urban design/performance provisions of
this section may be granted as a conditional use, subject to conformance with the
standards and procedures.
F. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the following
meanings.
1. “Façade” means the front of a building, or any other “face” of a building on a street or
courtyard given special architectural treatment.
G. Landscaping, Buffering, Walls (see §15.4.16.130) Same as the S-C zone requirements.
H. Signs (see §5.36.101 et seq.). All individual developments (not a planned center) must follow the
requirements of the C-O zone.
I. Parking Standards (see §15.4.16.120).
1. Restrictions on Parking Lots. The following regulations shall apply to parking facilities.
a. All parking lots adjacent to a public street will be required to have a 25-foot
landscape setback and a minimum three (3) foot berm, with trees spaced every 30
feet.
J. Solid Waste Receptacle Areas (see §15.4.16.140).
K. Building Height. Same as the S-C zones requirements.
1. Height Exceptions: spires, towers, or decorative non-inhabitable elements shall have a
maximum height of 60 feet measured from the street grade.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 59/146
L. Development Standards.
1. Projects are allowed a density of five (5) to 12 residential units per acre.
2. Projects will be required to have public art integrated and 35% open space area.
3. Projects with a residential component will be required to have at least 30% of the project’s
total building square footage dedicated to commercial or office uses. The City will require
that this ratio be maintained with each phase of the development.
4. Residential units will be required to meet the High Density Residential (R-3) setbacks.
5. Residential units must be designed in a manner to blend with the urban village and not be
a separate element of the area.
(Ord. No. 10-09, Amended 06/17/2009)
(Ord. No. 12-09, Amended 08/04/2009)
(Ord. No. 17-09, Amended 09/15/2009)
15.3.16.110 B-P Business Park
A. Permitted Uses: The following uses are permitted if operated from a permanent, enclosed
building with no outside storage or display of merchandise:
1. Car Wash (full service).
2. Child Care Centers.
3. Convenience Stores.
4. Financial Institutions.
5. Health Clubs.
6. Hospitals.
7. Instructional Studios.
8. Lube Center.
9. Municipal Facilities required for local service.
10. Museums.
11. Office Supply, Copying, Printing businesses.
12. Offices.
13. Personal Service businesses.
14. Research, Development, and Testing services.
15. Restaurants.
16. Telecommunication Towers not taller than 60 feet.
17. Tire Center.
18. Trade or Business schools.
B. Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit (see §15.3.08.060):
1. Hotels and motels.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 60/146
C. Accessory Buildings and Uses (see §15.3.24.090).
D. Development Standards (see Table 2).
E. Performance Standards.
1. No use shall be conducted which may cause the dissemination of glare, vibration, smoke,
gas, dust, odor, or any other atmospheric pollutant outside the building in which the use is
conducted.
2. No use shall result in noise perceptible beyond the boundaries of the immediate site of
the use.
3. Outdoor storage is prohibited.
F. Site Plan/Design Review (see §15.4.08.010 et seq.).
G. Landscaping, Buffering, Walls (see §15.4.16.130).
H. Signs (see §5.36.010 et seq.).
I. Parking (see §15.4.16.120).
(Ord. No. 12-09, Amended 08/04/2009)
15.3.16.120 I-1 Light Industrial
This district is intended to provide for employment related uses including light manufacturing,
assembling, warehousing, and wholesale activities. Associated office and support commercial uses are
allowed. Uses that emit significant amount of air, water, or noise pollution will not be allowed. Residential
uses are not allowed.
A. Permitted Uses:
1. Agriculture, including the Production of Food and Fiber Crops, Tree Farms, Grazing, and
Animal Husbandry of Livestock.
2. Automotive Repair.
3. Automotive Service, Paint and Body Work, other consumer goods repair.
4. Car Wash (self or full service).
5. Contractor Warehouse and Storage Yards.
6. Financial Institutions.
7. Funeral Homes.
8. Indoor Manufacturing, Assembly and Storage of finished products.
9. Instructional Studios.
10. Lube Centers.
11. Lumber and Building Material Yards.
12. Municipal Facilities required for local service.
13. New and Used Automobile, Motorcycle, Boat, Truck, Recreational Vehicle Sales and
Rental Facilities, and Repair Services associated with such facilities.
14. Office Supply, Copying, Printing businesses.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 61/146
15. Offices.
16. Outdoor display areas.
17. Research, Development, and Testing services.
18. Restaurants.
19. Retail businesses.
20. Telecommunication Towers not taller than 60 feet.
21. Tire Care Centers.
22. Trade or Business schools.
23. Trucking and Warehousing.
24. Veterinary Offices for large animals and/or outside boarding of animals.
25. Wholesale Trade Businesses except explosives or automobile wrecking or salvage yards.
B. Uses Subject to Conditions:
1. Outdoor storage areas (see §15.3.24.090(I)).
2. Seasonal Sales and Special Events (as described in §15.3.24.050 et seq.).
3. Sexually Oriented businesses as defined in Chapter 5.28 of the Spanish Fork Municipal
Code.
C. Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit (see §15.3.08.060):
1. Commercial Kennels, Animal Shelters, and Veterinary Hospitals with outdoor boarding or
exercise facilities.
2. Drive-in Theaters.
3. Jails, for County and/or City.
4. Outdoor Commercial Recreation Facilities.
5. Publicly owned and operated compost facilities.
6. Publicly owned and operated recycling centers.
7. Rehabilitation Treatment Facilities.
8. Residential Treatment Centers (not owner occupied).
9. Shelter Care Facilities.
10. Telecommunication Towers taller than 60 feet.
(Ord. No. 12-09, Amended 08/04/2009)
(Ord. No. 02-10, Amended 02/16/2010)
15.3.16.130 I-2 Medium Industrial
This district is intended to provide for employment related uses including light manufacturing,
assembling, warehousing, and wholesale activities. Associated office and support commercial uses are
allowed. Uses that emit moderate amounts of air, water, or noise pollution may be considered as
conditional uses. Residential uses are not allowed.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 62/146
A. Permitted Uses:
1. Automotive Repair.
2. Car Wash (self or full service).
3. Contractor Warehouse and Storage Yards.
4. Financial Institutions.
5. Impound Yard.
6. Lube Centers.
7. Lumber and Building Material Yards.
8. Manufacturing and Assembly of finished products except animal fats and oils,
ammunition, and those manufacturing uses listed as conditional uses.
9. Municipal Facilities required for local service.
10. Office Supply, Copying, Printing businesses.
11. Offices.
12. Outdoor display areas.
13. Research, Development, and Testing services.
14. Restaurants.
15. Retail businesses.
16. Telecommunication Towers not taller 60 feet.
17. Tire Care Centers.
18. Trade or Business schools.
19. Trucking and Warehousing.
20. Wholesale Trade businesses except explosives or automobile wrecking or salvage yards.
B. Uses Subject to Conditions:
1. Outdoor Storage Areas (see §15.3.24.090(I)).
2. Seasonal Sales and Special Events (as described in §15.3.24.050 et seq.).
C. Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit (see §15.3.08.060):
1. Commercial Kennels, Animal Shelters, and Veterinary Hospitals with outdoor boarding or
exercise facilities.
2. Drive-in Theaters.
3. Manufacture of Concrete Products.
4. Self-storage Warehouses and/or Recreational Vehicle Storage.
5. Telecommunication Towers taller than 60 feet.
D. Accessory Buildings and Uses (see §15.3.24.090):
1. Caretaker’s residence.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 63/146
E. Development Standards (see Table 2):
1. The setback for self-storage units may be reduced to as little as 10 feet, at the discretion
of the Planning Commission, based on the creation of an adequate buffer between the
self-storage units and the adjacent property. The adequate buffer shall include
landscaping, architectural upgrades, and any other measures deemed necessary by the
Commission.
F. Site Plan/Design Review (see §15.4.08.010 et seq.).
G. Landscaping, Buffering, Walls (see §15.4.16.130).
H. Signs (see §5.36.010 et seq.).
I. Parking (see §15.4.16.120).
(Ord. No. 12-09, Amended 08/04/2009)
(Ord. No. 02-10, Amended 02/16/2010)
15.3.16.140 I-3 Heavy Industrial
This district is intended to provide for employment related uses including heavy manufacturing,
assembling, warehousing, and wholesale activities.
Residential uses are not allowed.
A. Permitted Uses:
1. Contractor Warehouse and Storage Yards.
2. Impound Yard.
3. Lumber and Building Material Yards.
4. Manufacture of Concrete Products.
5. Manufacturing and Assembly of finished products.
6. Municipal Facilities required for local service.
7. Offices Incidental to an industrial use.
8. Outdoor Storage area.
9. Research, Development, and Testing services.
10. Trucking and Warehousing.
11. Wholesale Trade businesses except explosives or automobile wrecking or salvage yards.
B. Uses Subject to Conditions:
1. Large Wind Energy Systems (§15.3.24.090(H)).
2. Rock Crushers with Surface Mining Overlay approval (see §15.4.20.040).
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 64/146
C. Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit (see §15.3.08.060):
1. Self-storage Warehouses and/or Recreational Vehicle Storage.
2. Telecommunication Towers taller than 60 feet.
3. Transfer Facilities.
(Ord. No. 07-06, Repealed 07/18/2006)
(Ord. No. 02-10, Enacted 02/16/2010)
15.3.16.150 (Reserved)
(Ord. No. 12-09, Repealed 08/04/2009)
15.3.16.160 Public Facilities (P-F)
This district is intended to provide for structures and uses that are owned, leased, or operated by a
governmental entity for the purpose of providing governmental services to the community. Allowed uses
will be necessary for the efficient function of the local community or may be desired services which
contribute to the community's cultural or educational enrichment. Other allowed uses will be ancillary to
a larger use that provides a direct governmental service to the community.
A. Permitted Uses:
1. Automotive Repair.
2. Campgrounds.
3. Car Wash (self or full service).
4. Cemeteries.
5. Child Care Centers.
6. Court Buildings and Related Facilities.
7. Golf Courses and Related Facilities.
8. Government Maintenance Shops and Related Facilities.
9. Government Owned Nurseries and Tree Farms.
10. Government Storage Buildings.
11. Government Storage Yards.
12. Gun Clubs and Firing Ranges.
13. Libraries.
14. Lube Centers.
15. Municipal Facilities required for local service.
16. Museums.
17. Offices.
18. Parking structures.
19. Public Art Galleries.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 65/146
20. Public Parks and Recreational Facilities.
21. Public Safety Facilities.
22. Publicly Owned Stadiums and Arenas.
23. Publicly Owned Zoos.
24. Temporary Office and Construction Trailers.
25. Theaters.
26. Transit Centers and Related Facilities.
27. Wireless Communication Facilities on light stanchions in public parks, playgrounds,
schools, golf courses and related facilities so long as the structure height does not exceed
20 feet above the existing structure and is a monopole.
B. Uses Subject to Conditions:
1. Outdoor Storage Areas (see §15.3.24.090(I)).
C. Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit (see §15.3.08.060):
1. Hospitals.
2. Restaurants.
3. Solid Waste Transfer Facilities, provided all operating aspects of the facility are fully
enclosed within a building and the grounds are completely fenced.
4. Wireless Communication Facilities on existing structures, with the intent to make them
“stealth” facilities, which are not noticeable to a degree greater than the structure to which
it is attached; or new stealth facilities which are camouflaged into its surroundings.
D. Accessory Buildings and Uses (see §15.3.24.090).
E. Development Standards.
1. The maximum height of any building or structure shall be limited to 65 feet.
2. Setbacks shall be as follows for all main buildings:
a. Front Yard, 20 feet.
b. Corner side yard, 20 feet.
c. Interior Side Yard, 10 feet.
d. Rear yard, 20 feet.
F. Site Plan/Design Review (see §15.4.08.010 et seq.).
G. Landscaping, Buffering, Walls (see §15.4.16.130).
H. Signs.
1. Signage shall be permitted in accordance with §5.36.010. Substitute or additional signage
shall be permitted if it is deemed essential to providing a government service.
I. Parking (see §15.4.16.120).
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 66/146
(Ord. No. 12-09, Amended 08/04/2009)
(Ord. No. 02-10, Amended 02/16/2010)
(Ord. No. 13-14, Amended 08/19/2014)
(Ord. No. 21-18, Amended 12/11/2018)
15.3.20 Overlay District Regulations
15.3.20.010 Airport Impact Overlay
15.3.20.020 Floodplain Hazard Overlay (Reserved)
15.3.20.030 Geologic Hazards Overlay (Reserved)
15.3.20.040 Surface Mining Overlay
15.3.20.050 Self Storage Overlay
15.3.20.060 Development Enhancement Overlay
15.3.20.010 Airport Impact Overlay
This district is intended to provide for the development of improvements at the airport that will enhance
the facility’s functionality and visual appeal. These standards are not intended to limit creativity but are
expected to facilitate development that creates a distinct sense of place that is recognizable by
aeronautical professionals and the community at large. The distinct sense of place will be created by
following basic provisions concerning building materials, building orientation, building color and signage.
Care shall be taken in this district to ensure compliance with FAA regulations.
A. Permitted Uses
1. Aircraft maintenance and repair facilities.
2. Indoor manufacturing, assembly, and storage of finished products for aeronautical uses.
3. Aeronautical related instructional studios.
4. Municipal facilities required for local service.
5. Aeronautical related offices.
6. Research, development, and testing services.
7. Restaurants.
8. Retail businesses which support aeronautical related uses.
9. Aeronautical related trade or business schools.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 67/146
B. Non-hanger Building Standards
1. Buildings should orient lobbies and other public areas to the street with windows and
building entries that provide visual interest and a connection to the street. The ground
level should make use of appropriate fenestration, texture and other architectural
elements to avoid creating blank walls.
2. The setback from Main Street shall be a minimum of 25 feet and a maximum of 75 feet.
Setbacks elsewhere shall be five (5) feet on side property lines and 25 feet on the front
and rear.
3. Massing changes, distinct colors, material changes or entrance canopies shall be used to
make building entrances recognizable and a focal part of the overall design.
4. The mass of structures fronting Main Street shall be designed so as to present an
articulated and interesting visual presence.
5. The exterior design of a building should reveal differences in its internal function as
expressions of height, massing, and the composition of their elevations.
6. The use of decorative elements and colors is recommended to provide accent and soften
buildings' mass.
7. Building height shall be limited to the lesser of 50 feet or FAA requirements.
8. Roofs shall be flat or have a very low pitch not to exceed 2:12.
9. All loading, receiving, and storage areas shall be effectively screened from public view by
architectural or landscape features. Loading areas shall not be permitted in the front of a
building. Service areas should be visually unobtrusive and integrated with each building’s
architecture and site design.
C. Hangar Standards
1. Hangars shall have minimum dimensions of 41 feet six (6) inches by 33 feet. In areas of
the Airport that have been approved for T-hangers, a clear area of the same dimensions
shall be provided.
2. Hangers shall have an exterior wall skin of pre-painted metal or painted concrete masonry
units. In the event that concrete masonry units are used, the owner shall re-coat as
needed to maintain an even-colored appearance. Hanger trim may be constructed of
stucco or masonry materials.
3. Hangers shall have a pre-painted metal door which provides a minimum height for Aircraft
Tail Clearance 11 feet. Bi-fold doors are recommended. Approved swing out, overhead,
or sliding doors may also be used.
4. Each stand-alone building shall have water service, fire extinguishers, and/or other
protection required by the Fire Code.
5. All hangars shall be connected to the Airport’s paved aircraft movement surfaces by a
paved surface, matching the grade of the aircraft movement surface and no less than 25
feet wide and of constructed in accordance with Spanish Fork City Standards.
D. Accessory Buildings and Uses (see §15.3.24.090):
E. Development Standards (see Table 2):
F. Site Plan/Design Review (see §15.4.08.010 et seq.).
G. Landscaping, Buffering, Walls (see §15.4.16.130).
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 68/146
H. Signs (see §5.36.010 et seq.).
I. Parking (see §15.4.16.120).
(Ordinance 16-17; Created June 20, 2017)
15.3.20.020 Floodplain Hazard Overlay (Reserved)
15.3.20.030 Geologic Hazards Overlay (Reserved)
15.3.20.040 Surface Mining Overlay
This district is intended to provide for the extraction of earth products using surface mining methods
while protecting the rights of neighboring properties and while protecting public facilities, such as roads,
from unusual wear or damage. This is an interim use of the land, with the ultimate intent being to
rehabilitate the site and convert the property to a use or uses compatible with the surrounding area. This
district shall overlay other zoning district(s) where it is applied.
A. Permitted Uses:
1. Extraction of sand, gravel, clay, topsoil, rock, or other minerals by an open pit method.
2. Offices and related buildings and structures necessary to the surface mining operation.
B. Application: Applications to establish a Surface Mining Overlay shall be processed in the same
manner as that for other zoning amendments. The application shall be accompanied by a
Development Plan including the following information:
1. An area map showing adjacent property owners and locations of all buildings and existing
uses within 600 feet of the property.
2. Description of any environmental impacts of the proposed use, including air pollution,
noise, or impacts on the public infrastructure in the surrounding area.
3. Legal description of the property.
4. Narrative and site plan description of the proposed operation including phasing plans,
proposed buildings or structures, landscaping, lighting, and other site improvements.
5. Proposed circulation system showing access to and along public streets and highways to
potential users of the resource material.
6. Proposed duration of the operation prior to site rehabilitation.
7. Proposed hours of operation.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 69/146
C. Performance Standards: All surface mining operations must comply with the following standards.
The City Council may also impose additional conditions on an operation if necessary to minimize
potential detrimental effects on adjoining properties.
1. The operable portion of the pit or site of extraction shall be an area no larger than 10
acres at any one time. The pit, or portions of it, shall be closed, rehabilitated, and
approved by the City Engineer as meeting the standards of this ordinance before further
areas are excavated.
2. Dust generated in the extraction and processing of the earth products shall be contained
on site by paving main roads in the pit, wetting extractions areas and loaded trucks,
chemical treatment, placing landscaped berms, and other similar measures.
3. All cuts and fills shall be set back from the property boundary or approved extraction site
a distance of at least five (5) feet.
4. The operation shall be in compliance with all State and Federal regulations.
5. The Rehabilitation Plan must show that the site will be smoothed and evenly contoured
with no slope steeper than 25 degrees, nor with any undrained hole, bowl, depression,
pond, or intermittent lake of the floor of the rehabilitated site.
D. Findings: The following findings must be made before granting any Surface Mining Overlay
District:
1. That the proposed use will not disrupt the development character of the adjacent
properties.
2. That the proposed use will not be materially detrimental to the health, safety, or general
welfare of persons residing or working within the neighborhood of the proposed use,
when consideration is given to the character and size of the use, noise, dust, and hours of
operation.
3. That the proposed site is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the intended use,
and that all requirements for the zoning district, including but not limited to: setbacks,
walls, landscaping and buffer yards are met.
4. That the proposed site has adequate access to public streets to carry the type and
quantity of traffic which may be generated by the use.
5. That adequate conditions or stipulations have been incorporated into the approval of the
operation to ensure that any anticipated detrimental effects can be minimized.
E. Bond:
1. A cash or surety bond in the amount set by City Council, but not less than $2,500 per
acre shall be posted by the applicant to guarantee compliance with the performance
standards and any other conditions imposed by the City Council.
2. The bond shall be forfeited if rehabilitation has not been completed within one (1) year of
cessation of operation in the pit.
(Ord. No. 12-09, Amended 08/04/2009)
15.3.20.050 Self Storage Overlay
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 70/146
This district is intended to provide for the development of new Self Storage Warehouses and/or
Recreational Vehicle Storage while protecting the City’s potential for economic growth by preserving
sites that could potentially support retail, professional office, or manufacturing uses. This district shall
overlay the Light Industrial I-1 zoning district where it is applied.
A. Permitted Uses:
1. Self-Storage warehouses and/or Recreational Vehicle Storage.
B. Application: Applications to establish a Self-Storage Overlay District shall be processed in the
same manner as that for other zoning amendments. The application shall be accompanied by a
development plan including the following information:
1. Legal description of the property.
2. An area map showing adjacent property owners and locations of all buildings and existing
uses within 600 feet of the property.
3. Narrative and Site Plan for the proposed facility including phasing plans, proposed
buildings or structures, landscaping, lighting, and other site improvements.
C. Performance Standards: The Self-Storage Overlay District may only be approved in the Light
Industrial I-1 zoning district and may not be approved within 1,000 feet of the 2700
North/Interstate 15 overpass, nor within 250 feet of Main Street or Interstate 15.
D. Findings: The following findings must be made by the Council before approving any Self Storage
Overlay District:
1. There is no recognizable potential for retail uses on the subject property.
2. That access and/or visibility to the subject property is limited to some degree which limits
its development potential for retail, office, or manufacturing uses.
3. The site’s configuration makes the site ill-suited for another use.
4. The subject property is small enough that it will not support manufacturing or other uses
that would create employment opportunities.
5. The proposed site has adequate access to public streets to carry the type and quantity of
traffic which may be generated by the use.
6. That adequate conditions or stipulations have been incorporated into the approval of the
operation to ensure that any anticipated detrimental effects can be minimized.
7. The Site Plan adequately describes screening and other improvements that make the
development an attractive addition to the City.
(Ord. No. 17-15, Enacted 12/15/2015)
15.3.20.060 Development Enhancement Overlay
This district is intended to provide an ability to develop properties within the C-O Commercial Office
Zone, the C-2 General Commercial Zone, the C-UV Urban Village Commercial Zone, Industrial 1 Zone,
and the B-P Business Park Zone which otherwise have a difficult time meeting the standards for those
zones for any number of reasons, including, but not limited to, parking standards, landscaping
standards, etc.
A. Permitted Uses: Uses permitted in the underlying zone are allowed with the Development
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 71/146
Enhancement Overlay Zone.
B. Performance Standards: In those situations, when it has been found that a development cannot
meet the requirements of development in the allowed zones, the Development Enhancement
Overlay Zone may be requested and approved. The application will be analyzed on a case by
case basis, paying particular attention to the provisions of the underlying zone which the
Developer cannot meet.
The City Council has the discretion to impose conditions with the Development Enhancement
Overlay Zone to mitigate negative impacts incurred by not meeting the standard requirements,
which may include architectural requirements, color requirements, more intense landscaping,
shared parking with adjacent uses, height requirements, signage requirements, lighting
requirements, or others deemed appropriate in the specific circumstances to compensate for any
deficiencies in the standard requirements. If the City Community Development Director deems it
helpful, an appropriate study may be required of the Developer addressing the deficiency in the
standards, why a more lenient standard works for the specific intended use, and how to
compensate for the deficiency.
C. Application: In order to have the Development Enhancement Overlay Zone approved, a
developer must submit an application, on a form provided by the City, spelling out the
requirements which cannot be met in the particular zone, why the requirements cannot be met,
why the developer believes the requirements do not need to be met in this specific instance, how
the deficiency will not adversely impact neighboring properties, and proposing conditions which
will provide a solution.
D. City Findings: The City Council may approve an application for the Development Enhancement
Overlay Zone, with conditions as outlined in subparagraph B, upon making the following findings:
1. That the proposed use is an appropriate use on the specific parcel as compared with
other possible uses;
2. That granting the Development Enhancement Overlay Zone with modified restrictions will
not cause a detriment to prospective patrons, to adjacent property owners, nor to traffic
flows on the adjacent public streets;
3. That adequate conditions have been incorporated into the Zone which will offset the
easing of usual requirements;
4. If a study has been submitted by the Developer, the Council accepts the study as
accurate as far as addressing the more lenient standards and the impact it will have on
adjacent property owners and the City.
(Ord. No. 08-17, Enacted 03/07/2017)
(Ord. No. 24-17, Amend 10/17/2017)
15.3.24 General Development Standards
15.3.24.010 Treatment Facilities
15.3.24.020 Billboards
15.3.24.030 Master Planned Development (PUD)
15.3.24.040 Manufactured Homes
15.3.24.050 Seasonal Sales And Special Events
15.3.24.060 Subdivision Model Home
15.3.24.070 Temporary Office Or Construction Trailers
15.3.24.080 Sexually Oriented Businesses
15.3.24.090 Supplementary Regulations
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 72/146
15.3.24.010 Treatment Facilities
A. Residential Facility for Persons with a Disability. The following conditions must be met:
1. A valid Spanish Fork City Business License shall be obtained.
2. The facility must comply with the development standards of the zoning district.
3. The building character and landscaping shall be of the same general character of those of
other residences and yards in the neighborhood.
4. No facility shall be made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a
direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or result in substantial physical
damage to the property.
5. Prior to the occupancy of any facility, the person or entity licensed or certified by the
Department of Human Services or the Department of Health to establish and operate the
facility shall:
a. Provide a copy of such license or certification to the City.
b. Be classified as Level 1 or Level 2 as set forth in the Small Health Care Facility
Rules as promulgated by the State of Utah, Department of Health Care Licensing.
(1) Persons placed in a Level 2 facility shall be deemed non-violent or nonthreatening
and shall be permitted with no further requirements.
(2) Individuals placed in a Level 1 facility shall produce, through the operator
of the facility, a certificate issued by the appropriate medical or other
licensed mental health professional ie: LCSW, D.O., PhD. or M.D., M.F.T.,
MSW, and based upon professional evaluations such as, but not limited to,
the ICAP, MMPI, DSM, and/or such other resources, including a potential
patient’s behavioral history, as may be available to the medical or other
mental health professional, which certificate shall indicate that the person
is not violent, nor a direct threat to the safety of the property or any other
person at the time of placement. Production of the certificate required by
this section shall be a prerequisite to the obtaining of the business license
required by this chapter. Each new resident shall also provide said
certificate in order for the facility to be eligible to renew its business
license.
6. The facility shall comply with all health and safety codes applicable to that type of building
and use.
7. The operator of any facility shall be required to provide supervision in accordance with the
rules and regulations of the State of Utah Department of Social Services or Department of
Health, which care shall be on a 24 hour basis if so required by the aforementioned rules
and regulations.
8. Off-street parking shall be provided to accommodate staff and one (1) visitor space for
every three (3) residents.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 73/146
9. No facility licensed for the housing of more than eight (8) disabled persons, shall be
established or maintained within 660 feet measured in a straight line between the closest
property lines of the lots or parcels, of the following facilities:
a. Another residential facility for persons with a disability licensed for the housing of
more than eight (8) persons.
b. A residential facility for the elderly with more than eight (8) elderly persons in
residence.
c. Any of the following facilities: shelter care facility, assisted living center, and
residential treatment center.
10. The use permitted by this section is non-transferrable and shall be terminated if:
a. The facility is devoted to a use other than a residential facility for persons with a
disability.
b. The license or certification issued has been terminated or revoked, or the facility
fails to comply with these conditions.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 74/146
B. Residential Facility for Elderly Persons. The following conditions must be met:
1. A valid Spanish Fork City Business license shall be obtained.
2. The facility must comply with the development standards of the zoning district.
3. The building character and landscaping shall be of the same general character of those of
other residences and yards in the neighborhood.
4. No facility shall be made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a
direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or result in substantial physical
damage to the property.
5. Prior to the occupancy of any facility, the person or entity licensed or certified by the
Department of Human Services or the Department of Health to establish and operate the
facility shall:
a. Provide a copy of such license or certification to the City.
b. Certify in a sworn affidavit to the City that no person will reside or remain in the
facility whose tenancy would likely:
(1) Constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals.
(2) Result in substantial physical damage to the property of others.
6. The facility shall comply with all health and safety codes applicable to that type of building
and use.
7. No facility licensed for the housing of more than eight (8) elderly persons, shall be
established or maintained within 660 feet measured in a straight line between the closest
property lines of the lots or parcels, of the following similar facilities:
a. Another residential facility for elderly persons licensed for the housing of more
than eight (8) persons.
b. A residential facility for the disabled with more than eight (8) persons in residence.
c. Any of the following facilities: shelter care facility, assisted living facility and
residential treatment center.
8. The use permitted by this section is non-transferrable and shall be terminated if:
a. The facility is devoted to a use other than a residential facility for elderly persons.
b. The license or certification issued has been terminated or revoked.
c. The facility fails to comply with these conditions.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 75/146
C. Assisted Living Facility. The following conditions must be met:
1. A valid Spanish Fork City Business License shall be obtained.
2. The facility must comply with the development standards of the zoning district.
3. Lot Size:
a. 20 beds or less - 1,000 square feet per bed (ratio 10 beds = 10,000 square feet).
b. More than 20 beds - one (1) acre minimum plus 1,000 square feet per bed over
the 20.
4. The building character and landscaping shall be of the same general character of those of
other residences and yards in the neighborhood.
5. Off-street parking shall be provided to accommodate staff and one (1) visitor space for
every three (3) residents for facilities larger than 15 beds.
6. No facility shall be made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a
direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or result in substantial physical
damage to the property.
7. Prior to the occupancy of any facility, the person or entity licensed or certified by the
Department of Human Services or the Department of Health to establish and operate the
facility shall:
a. Provide a copy of such license or certification to the City.
b. Certify in a sworn affidavit to the City that no person will reside or remain in the
facility whose tenancy would likely:
(1) Constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals.
(2) Result in substantial physical damage to the property of others.
8. The Assisted Living Facility shall comply with all health and safety codes applicable to
that type of building and use.
9. No Assisted Living Facility licensed for the housing of more than eight (8) persons, shall
be established or maintained within 660 feet measured in a straight line between the
closest property lines of the lots or parcels, of the following similar facilities:
a. Another assisted living facility for more than eight (8) persons.
b. A residential facility for the disabled with more than eight (8) persons in residence.
c. Any of the following facilities: shelter care facility and residential treatment center.
10. The use permitted by this section is non-transferrable and shall be terminate if:
a. The facility is devoted to a use other than an assisted living facility.
b. The license or certification issued has been terminated or revoked.
c. The facility fails to comply with these conditions.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 76/146
D. Residential Treatment Center. The following conditions must be met:
1. A valid Spanish Fork City Business License shall be obtained.
2. The facility must comply with the development standards of the zoning district.
3. The facility must be located on at least a two (2) acre parcel or larger:
a. 20 beds or more - two (2) acre parcel minimum plus 1,000 square feet per bed
over the 20 to a maximum of 40 beds.
4. The building character and landscaping shall be of the same general character of those of
other residences/structures and landscaping in the area of the facility.
5. Off-street parking shall be provided to accommodate staff and one (1) visitor space for
every three (3) residents or met the requirement of the zoning district.
6. No facility shall be made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a
direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals in the facility or result in substantial
physical damage to the property.
7. Prior to the occupancy of any facility, the person or entity licensed or certified by the
Department of Human Services or the Department of Health to establish and operate the
facility shall:
a. Provide a copy of such license or certification to the City and the facility shall be
classified as Level 1 or Level 2 as set forth in the Small Health Care Facility Rules
as promulgated by the State of Utah, Department of Health Care Licensing.
(1) Persons placed in a Level 2 facility shall be deemed non-violent or nonthreatening
and shall be permitted with no further requirements.
(2) Individuals placed in a Level 1 facility shall produce, through the operator
of the facility, a certificate issued by the appropriate medical or other
licensed mental health professional ie: LCSW, D.O., PhD. or M.D., M.F.T.,
M.S.W., and based upon professional evaluations such as the ICAP,
MMPI, DSM, and/or such other resources, including a potential patient’s
behavioral history, as may be available to the medical or other mental
health professional, which certificate shall indicate that the person is not
violent, nor a direct threat to the safety of the property of any other person
at the time of placement. Production of the certificate required by this
section shall be a prerequisite to the obtaining of the business license
required by this chapter. Each new resident shall also provide said
certificate in order for the facility to be eligible to renew its business
license.
8. The facility shall comply with all health and safety codes applicable to that type of building
and use.
9. Must meet the Design and Separation requirements in paragraph E of this section if
located in a residential zone.
10. Any Residential Treatment Facility located in a residential zone must be supervised 24
hours a day seven (7) days a week which shall include, but not necessarily be limited to,
house parents who are on site 24 hours a day, and video monitoring in all common areas,
including entrances and exits. Other surveillance measures may be included which are
designed to protect the health and safety of residents therein.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 77/146
11. The use permitted by this section is non-transferrable and shall be terminated if:
a. The facility is devoted to a use other than a Residential Treatment Center.
b. The license or certification issued has been terminated or revoked.
c. The facility fails to comply with these conditions.
12. Any Residential Treatment Facility shall be 660 feet from any public or private school or
church measured from the shortest point from structure to structure.
13. The conditions will be reviewed annually by the DRC to assure conformance.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 78/146
E. Design and Separation
1. All Residential Facilities for Persons with a Disability, Residential Treatment Center, and
Supervisory Care Facility must meet these requirements.
a. Any new or remodeled facility shall comply with the following design standards:
(1) The design, exterior materials and colors of the facility shall match the
principal structures in the neighborhood (area).
(2) The facility shall be constructed in a manner as to blend in and not draw
attention.
(3) A facility located in a residential zone is required to have a two-car garage
facing the street or a side entry garage. Any additional parking will be
paved and located behind the facility.
(4) The facility shall not exceed the square footage of the average of the 20
nearest residential homes.
(5) The facility shall meet all zoning requirements of the zone in which it is
proposed.
(6) The facility shall have a fully fenced rear yard enclosed by either a Wall or
solid Fence six (6) feet in height.
2. No facility listed in subsection 1 may be located within 660 feet from another.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 79/146
3. An existing building which has been vacant for over one year may be converted to a
residential treatment facility, if it meets all other criteria of §15.3.24.010(D) and (E), but
shall be exempt from the criteria found in subsection (E)(2) and shall, in lieu thereof, meet
the following criteria:
a. Provide a report from a licensed structural engineer indicating the building is safe,
or can be made safe, for its intended use. The City Building Official and Fire
Inspector will have the final say on what must be done to meet current codes.
b. Veneer finishes to the exterior of the building may be required, depending on the
exterior material of the building and the other buildings in the neighborhood, to
match the type and color of existing materials on other residences within the
neighborhood.
c. Bring the building up to current standards on all codes (building, fire, safety,
energy, etc.).
d. Provide a landscaping plan prepared by a landscape architect which shows a
minimum of 50% of the entire site to be green landscaped, unless the size of the
vacant building makes it impossible or very difficult, then a landscape plan shall be
approved by the Planning Commission.
e. Provide off-street parking for all staff members on duty at the highest shift, plus
one (1) additional stall for each three (3) residents.
f. At the discretion of the Electric Division, remove any overhead electric lines and
place them underground.
g. The facility shall have a fully fenced rear yard enclosed by either a Wall or solid
Fence six (6) feet in height.
h. The only signage shall conform to that permitted for a home occupation
§5.40.040.
i. Security lighting shall be adjusted such that no overflow light falls onto adjoining
properties.
j. Windows shall be non-reflective.
(Ord. No. 04-12, Enacted 04/17/2012)
(Ord. No. 04-17, Amended 02/07/2017)
15.3.24.020 Billboards
A. Billboards are permitted in the following locations and subject to the following restrictions:
1. Billboards are permitted:
a. Along Interstate 15 from 3100 North to 1600 North and mile post number 259 to
mile post number 258 (heading south) these billboards must be at least 500 feet
from any other billboard on the same side of the interstate highway and located in
an industrial zone.
b. Along Highway 6 from the junction with Highway 89 southeasterly for 0.84 miles.
These billboards must be at least 750 feet from any other billboard on the same
side of the highway and must be located in an industrial zone.
2. Must be within 100 feet of Interstate 15 or US Highway 6.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 80/146
3. Must be at least 400 feet from any residential zoning district.
4. Cannot exceed a height of 50 feet, or 25 feet above roadway grade level, whichever is
less.
5. May be double-faced or back-to-back if the separation of panels does not exceed five (5)
feet.
6. Each side may have a sign area not to exceed 675 square feet.
7. Footing and structure details must be furnished to the City Building Official prior to
issuance of a building permit.
8. Must be monopole.
9. The Utah Department of Transportation must issue a permit for the proposed location
prior to commencing construction, or prior to the City conducting any inspections pursuant
to its permit.
(Ord. No. 10-12, Amended 08/22/2012)
(Ord. No. 04-14, Amended 04/01/2014)
(Ord. No. 14-16, Amended 09/20/2016)
15.3.24.030 Master Planned Development (PUD)
A. Purpose: The purpose of the Master Planned Development concept is to:
1. Allow for designs that provide for more efficient utilization of public infrastructure than
what is achieved in a standard subdivision.
2. Allow for deviations from typical zoning standards in order to permit uniquely configured
or situated properties to be developed in a functional manner that enhances the City.
3. Allow developments to include a total number of units that matches the base density
found in the underlying zone as identified in Table 1 - Residential Development Standards
of Title 15.
4. Establish residential neighborhoods with a distinct character and convey a sense of unity.
B. Permitted Uses:
1. All uses listed in R 1 and R-3 Districts, subject to the same restrictions or limitations of the
use.
2. Multi-family dwellings with more than four (4) attached units.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 81/146
C. Subdivision Design:
1. For purposes of calculating base density, sensitive lands shall be excluded from the
calculation.
2. The minimum size of a Master Planned Development is five (5) contiguous acres, except
in R-1-6 and R-3 zones, where two (2) contiguous acres are required. School and church
sites are to be excluded from the acreage calculation.
3. Density Calculations - Church sites, school sites, and sites for other non-residential uses
may not be counted in the density calculations.
4. Street Design - Local streets shall not exceed 600 feet in length without an intersecting
street.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 82/146
D. Architecture:
1. Minimum House Sizes; finished area (square feet). For the purposes of calculating
required finished area, square footage in basements shall not qualify. For split level
homes, finished area on floors that are at least 50% below the finished grade of the lot
shall not count towards the required finished area.
Minimum House Sizes - Finished Area
Minimum Lot Size and
Multi-family One Story Multi-Level
80,000 sq. ft. 1,600 sq. ft. 2,400 sq. ft.
60,000 sq. ft. 1,600 sq. ft. 2,400 sq. ft.
40,000 sq. ft. 1,600 sq. ft. 2,400 sq. ft.
30,000 sq. ft. 1,500 sq. ft. 2,200 sq. ft.
20,000 sq. ft. 1,500 sq. ft. 2,200 sq. ft.
15,000 sq. ft. 1,500 sq. ft. 2,200 sq. ft.
12,000 sq. ft. 1,400 sq. ft. 2,000 sq. ft.
9,000 sq. ft. 1,300 sq. ft. 1,600 sq. ft.
8,000 sq. ft. 1,200 sq. ft. 1,500 sq. ft.
6,000 sq. ft. 1,100 sq. ft. 1,400 sq. ft.
Multi-family 1,000 sq. ft. (one level) 1,200 sq. ft. (multi-level)
2. Distinct Designs - Master Planned Developments shall provide a variety of home styles to
ensure a diverse and interesting streetscape. Neighborhoods that have repetitive homes
constructed along the same street are not allowed. In order to ensure that the
neighborhood is non-repetitive, the same street facing elevation shall not be built on
adjacent lots on the same street or on lots directly or diagonally across the street from
one another. Different elevations shall be characterized by elements such as, but not
limited to, distinct footprints, rooflines, cladding materials or architectural features which
contribute to home designs that are easily distinguishable from other home designs along
the same street. The City Council may waive this requirement for developments which
include multi-family housing that present specific architectural designs for the multi-family
portion of the development at the time of project approval.
3. Parking - Master Planned Developments shall provide at least a two (2) car garage for
each single-family residence. Townhomes and multi-family units must have one (1)
attached or detached garage (minimum 12 feet x 20 feet) per unit. Developments shall
include no less than zero-point five (0.5) guest parking spaces per dwelling unit.
Developments that include, with each dwelling unit, a two (2) car garage and driveway
space for two (2) vehicles shall not be required to provide additional guest parking. When
required, at least one (1) space for guest parking shall be located within 200 feet of each
dwelling unit.
4. Roofing - Homes in the development shall have at least a 6/12 pitched roof on the main
portion of the roof unless it is determined by the Community Development Department
that a lesser pitch roof is essential to maintain the integrity of a particular architectural
style and that the style is a substantial improvement to what would be built in a standard
subdivision.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 83/146
5. Exterior Materials - Homes in Master Planned Developments shall be clad in masonry, or
masonry-based materials or a chemically-treated, wood-based, nail-on, lap siding that
has at least a 50-year warranty. The City Council may grant a waiver of this requirement
based upon superior architectural design plans which involve other materials.
E. (Ord. No. 01-17, Repealed 01/03/2017)
F. Application. Applications to establish a Master Planned Development shall be processed as a
subdivision if any new lots are to be created. If no new lots are proposed, such as for an
apartment project, an application will be processed according to the Site Plan procedures. All
applications must include the following information in addition to normal filing requirements for a
subdivision or Site Plan project:
1. Complete description of the intended nature and character of the development.
2. Description of all proposed private or public open space areas, including improvements,
ownership, and maintenance provisions.
3. Proposed project phasing.
4. Plans representing proposed landscaping, fences, walls, entry treatments, signage and
lighting.
5. Preliminary conditions, covenants, and restrictions (CC&R’s).
6. Any variations from the non-Master Planned Development standards.
7. Any proposed amended development standards, including such things as variations in
setbacks, heights, and lot sizes.
8. Proposed street cross sections, and proposed ownership and maintenance provisions, if
the streets are proposed to be private.
9. A data table which includes total acreage, acreage of sensitive lands, total number of
dwelling units, and units by type, dwelling units per acre, acreage of open space, percent
of acreage in open space.
G. Phases. All residential subdivisions shall include a phasing plan that specifies the timing of public
improvements and residential construction. This plan must be submitted at the submission of the
Preliminary Plat. If the sequence of construction of various portions of the development is to
occur in stages then the bonus density amenities shall be developed, or committed thereto, in
proportion to the number of dwelling units intended to be developed during any given stage of
construction.
H. Findings. Prior to granting approval of a Master Planned Development, the applicable reviewing
body shall make findings identifying why the applicant’s proposal justifies approval. Those
findings should include the following:
1. The proposed development will provide a more pleasant and attractive living environment
than a conventional residential development established under the strict application of the
provisions of the underlying zone.
2. The proposed development will not be materially detrimental to the health, safety, or
general welfare of persons residing or working within the neighborhood.
3. Any variation allowed from the development standards of the underlying district will not
create increased hazards to the health, safety, or general welfare of the residents of the
development of adjacent areas.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 84/146
(Ord. No. 07-06, Amended 07/18/2006) (Ord. No. 08-09, Enacted 05/19/2009) (Ord. No. 11-13,
Amended 07/16/2013) (Ord. No. 15-13, Repealed; Re-enacted 09/03/2013) (Ord. No. 04-14, Amended
04/01/2013) (Ord. No. 15-15, Amended 09/15/2015) (Ord. No. 01-17, Repealed 01/03/2017) (Ord. No.
03-19, Amended 01/22/2019)
15.3.24.040 Manufactured Homes
A. Are permitted subject to the following:
1. The minimum width of the home shall be 20 feet and the minimum length shall be 40 feet,
exclusive of any garage, porch or awning area.
2. Transportable sections shall be at least 10 feet wide, unless transportable in three (3) or
more sections, in which case only one (1) section must be 10 feet wide.
3. At least 60% of the roof of the dwelling must be pitched at a 4/12 pitch or greater at the
time of installation.
4. The dwelling shall be permanently connected to all required utilities.
5. The dwelling shall be taxed as real property and appropriate affidavit filed with the Utah
State Tax Commission.
(Ord. 07-06, Amended 07/18/2006)
15.3.24.050 Seasonal Sales And Special Events
Temporary sales or display of goods or special events are allowed only if they are related to a particular
seasonal, cultural, traditional, or community activity or event for a period not to exceed 60 calendar days,
as determined by the City Planner. In making a determination, the City Planner shall consider the
following criteria:
A. The nature, location, and manner of operation of the activity or event does not constitute a health
or safety hazard to the public;
B. The goods or services displayed are customarily and traditionally related to a widely celebrated
or observed seasonal activity, event, or holiday;
C. The activity or event is consistent with other uses permitted in the zoning district;
D. The use does not interfere with pedestrian access ways, fire lanes, driveways, or traffic visibility;
E. Parking on the property is adequate to serve any existing permanent uses and the seasonal sale
or special event use.
The sale or special event possesses a valid City Business License.
15.3.24.060 Subdivision Model Home
A. A model home may be provided in conjunction with residential subdivisions subject to the
following:
1. The model is used only to market homes being built in the subdivision or Master Planned
Development in which it is located. No off-site sales are allowed.
2. A model home plan is required, which shows the lot(s) to be used, parking areas, fencing,
lighting, and signage. The Community Development Director shall review and approve the
plan prior to the issuance of building permits for models.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 85/146
3. Prior to occupancy as a residential unit, all model homes must conform to all provisions of
this ordinance, and any temporary parking, office, lighting, fencing, signage, and similar
improvements shall be removed.
(Ord. No. 14-16, Amended 09/20/2016)
15.3.24.070 Temporary Office Or Construction Trailers
A. Temporary office trailers are allowed in conjunction with new development projects subject to the
following:
1. The office trailer is allowed only after building permits have been issued for the
permanent building(s) to occupy the site.
2. May be authorized for use exclusively as a temporary office or construction shed
incidental to a construction project for a period of 12 months. The Community
Development Director may authorize extensions of additional six (6) month increments
where construction within the project site is proceeding in a timely manner.
3. May be authorized for use as a home sales office subject to submitting a home complex
plan which shows the parking areas, fencing, lighting, and signage.
(Ord. No. 14-16, Amended 09/20/2016)
15.3.24.080 Sexually Oriented Businesses
Sexually oriented businesses are permitted only in the I-1 Light Industrial Zone north of 1600 North and
west of Interstate 15, with the following restrictions:
A. They may not be located within 200 feet of Main Street or any other road that provides a major
entry or gateway into the City.
B. They may not be located within 1000 feet of an establishment that is licensed to sell alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises (measured from property line to property line).
C. They may not be located within 1000 feet of a church, school, library, park, or residence
(measured from property line to property line).
D. They may not be located within 1000 feet of another sexually oriented business (measured from
property line to property line).
E. Their hours of operation are limited to 8:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m. the following morning, provided
that they may not operate on Sundays.
For purposes of this section, “park” means public land within the City which has been designated for
park or recreational activities, including but not limited to, a park, playground, nature trail, swimming
pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis court, open space, wilderness areas, or similar public
land and related facilities such as parking lots, playgrounds, and ball fields, which are under the control,
operation, or management of the City or other governmental authorities.
15.3.24.090 Supplementary Regulations
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 86/146
Accessory Buildings, Structures, or Satellite Earth Stations.
Swimming Pools
Yard/Garage Sales
Irregular Lots
Accessory (basement, mother-in-law) Apartments
Awnings, Carports or Covered Decks
Animals
Wind Turbines (WT)
Outdoor Storage Areas
Public Rights-of-Way
A. Accessory Structures:
1. All accessory structures must meet the following requirements:
a. All accessory structures are required to obtain a building permit. Permits for
structures that are less than 200 square feet or are otherwise exempt from the
adopted Building Code, as set forth in §14.04.010, are free of charge.
b. All detached accessory structures must be located behind the front wall plane of
the principal structure.
c. Where property abuts against Interstate 15 or U.S. Highway 6, accessory
structures have no required set back from the Interstate 15 or Highway 6 right-ofways.
d. The combined square footage of all detached accessory structures shall not
exceed 15% of the total lot area if the structure is entirely within the setbacks for
the principal structure, or 10% of the total lot area if the structure is located
elsewhere on the lot.
e. If any accessory structure must be removed, relocated, or otherwise modified in
any manner in order to access public utilities, the property owner shall bear the full
expense of such removal, relocation or modification, together with all costs of
restoration.
f. Accessory structures located on a corner lot shall meet the same front, rear, and
side setbacks as required for accessory structures on an interior lot. Accessory
structures located behind the front plane of the house and within 20 feet a public
right-of-way shall be architecturally compatible with the primary structure on the
lot. The second clear vision area as addressed in §15.4.16.150 needs to be
maintained at all times.
g. The minimum front setback for detached accessory structures shall conform to the
minimum front setback for the existing principal structure and shall be set at least
five (5) feet, measured from eave to eave, from all structures on the property.
h. Accessory structures that meet the setback requirement for the principal building
may be allowed to meet the maximum height allowed in that zone.
i. The maximum height for detached accessory structures shall be 20 feet to the
peak of the roof measured from the finish grade (measured 5-feet from the
proposed structure). Any structures taller than 15 feet shall have a roof pitch of no
less than 2/12.
j. Properties over one-half acre in size can increase the maximum height to 24 feet
by having the rear and side setbacks the same as the building height.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 87/146
k. Where a property’s side yard abuts another property’s rear yard, no setback is
required for structures that are open on at least two (2) sides so long as though
the structure is attached to the principle structure and is constructed of materials
that are aesthetically consistent with the principle structure.
l. The structure must be constructed so all water runoff from the accessory structure
does not flow onto adjoining properties.
2. Structures that are 200 square feet and less in area and are less than five (5) feet from
the property line must meet the following additional requirements:
a. Structures with a wall height of eight (8) feet or less and a maximum peak height
of 12 feet may be constructed with no side or rear setback from property lines. In
no case may any portion of a structure extend beyond the property line.
3. Structures larger than 200 square feet in area must meet the following additional
requirements:
a. Meet all adopted Building Code regulations as set forth in §14.04.010.
b. Must maintain a minimum setback of five (5) feet to the side or rear property line
with a maximum one (1) foot overhanging eave.
c. Be anchored to concrete footings as outlined in the adopted Building Code as set
forth in §14.04.010.
d. Accessory structures over 200 square feet in size that are located between the
front and back planes of the house must be architecturally compatible with the
principal structure.
B. Swimming Pools:
1. Swimming Pools and Jacuzzis shall comply with the following setbacks:
a. Minimum setback to a front property line is thirty (30) feet; however, they shall also
be located behind the front wall plane of the principal structure.
b. Minimum setbacks to interior side or rear property lines are five (5) feet.
c. Minimum setback to a corner property line is ten (10) feet.
2. Enclosures or coverings shall comply with accessory structure regulations.
3. Swimming Pools shall not be located in municipal or public utility easements. Setback
requirements from property lines must still be met.
4. Swimming Pools shall comply with applicable Building Code safety regulations.
C. Yard/Garage Sales:
1. Yard sales are permitted for no more than three (3) events of 48 hours or less within a 12-
month period at the same residence or street address. No signage related to such events
shall be placed in the public right-of-way (e.g. no placement of signs on telephone and
light poles).
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 88/146
D. Irregular Lots:
1. All dwelling structures and other main buildings located on an irregular lot shall be set
back an average of 25 feet from the rear property line provided that no portion of the
building is closer than 15 feet to the property line.
E. Accessory Apartments:
1. This subsection is established to provide regulations for Accessory Apartments within
single-family dwellings in the R-1-6 and R-3 zoning districts.
2. Requirements for Approval. A building permit may only be issued for Accessory
Apartments provided that the following requirements are met:
a. Only one apartment shall be created within a single-family dwelling.
b. Accessory apartments are only permitted in dwellings on lots 10,000 square feet
or larger.
c. The apartment must have a minimum of two off street parking spaces.
d. The accessory apartment must be registered with the City utility office.
e. The accessory apartment shall meet all applicable building and fire codes.
f. All applicable impact fees must be paid for the additional unit.
g. Separate electric meters are installed for each unit.
F. Awnings, Carports or Covered Decks:
1. Awnings or structures that are open on three (3) sides on the rear portion of a home may
extend within 15 feet of the rear property line.
2. Awnings or other structures that are open on three (3) sides must be setback at least five
(5) feet from the side property line.
3. A building permit must be obtained for all awnings.
G. Animals:
1. Animals are allowed in the A-E, R-R, I-1, and I-2 zoning districts with no restrictions on
the maximum number. Animals are allowed in all other zoning districts subject to the
following regulations:
a. The portion of the property on which the animals, except for household pets, are
kept must be at least one-half (1/2) acre in size. The chart following this section
sets forth the maximum number of animals which may be kept per each half acre
of property. The numbers are not cumulative. A maximum of one species
precludes any other species. For example, on a half-acre (1/2) parcel, two (2)
horses may be kept, or four (4) sheep, or one (1) horse and two (2) sheep, but two
(2) horses and four (4) sheep are not allowed.
b. All requirements set forth in Title 6, Animals, must be met. The keeping of
chickens and potbellied pigs in any zone other than the A-E, R-R, I-1, or I-2 is
governed by Title 6.
c. No animal shall be kept in a residential zone for purpose of commercial
production.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 89/146
H. Wind Turbines (WT):
1. It is the purpose of this section to promote the safe, effective, and efficient use of large
wind energy systems installed to provide electricity to utilities and to promote the adoption
of renewable energy resources to reduce dependence on fossil fuel power generation.
a. Requirements:
(1) Minimum parcel size: A large wind energy system consisting of one (1)
tower must be located on a parcel that is a minimum of five (5) acres in
size. An additional acre of property is required for each additional tower.
(2) Onsite structures may be located up to the foundation of the tower.
(3) Setback from a residential zone or use: The tower base must be setback a
minimum of 500 feet from residential zoning districts.
(4) Distance from rights-of-way and property lines: None; but all tower bases
must be located on leased or owned property. The blade sweep cannot
encroach upon adjoining properties or rights-of-way without easements
providing for their encroachment. The easement must be a recorded
document.
(5) Height: Tower height is not to exceed 270 feet. Provided that, in all cases,
the system shall comply with all applicable Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA) requirements.
(6) Height of Blade (tip at low point of blade sweep from ground): No closer
than 50 feet.
(7) Braking Device: All WT devices shall have braking systems when winds
reach speeds in excess of 65 miles per hour.
(8) Sign: One project identification warning sign is permitted containing a
telephone number for emergency calls, no larger than 16 square feet in
size.
(9) Color/Finish: white or other non-reflective color.
(10) Interference with Broadcast Signals: The system shall not create
electromagnetic interference and shall be filtered and/or shielded to
prevent interference with broadcast signals.
(11) Compliance with International Building Code (IBC): Building Permit
applications for large wind energy systems shall be accompanied by
standard drawings of the WT structure, including the tower, base, and
footings. An engineering analysis of the tower and WT showing compliance
with the Building Code and certified by a professional engineer licensed in
the state of Utah shall also be submitted.
(12) Compliance with FAA Regulations: Large wind energy systems must
comply with applicable FAA regulations, including any necessary approvals
for installations close to airports.
(13) Utility Notification: A letter shall be provided from any interconnecting utility
companies confirming approval for any interconnection.
(14) Zoning Districts: Large wind energy systems are permitted only in the I-3
Heavy Industrial zoning district.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 90/146
(15) Wind Study: A wind or feasibility study must be conducted and recommend
a specific location for the WT. The study must also recommend an optimal
height for the WT and if the location is feasible for a WT.
(16) The tower shall not be climbable from the exterior.
I. Outdoor Storage Areas. The following conditions must be met:
1. The storage area must be paved with asphalt or concrete or be covered with gravel. In
situations where gravel is utilized, no less than four inches of: inch untreated base course
shall be installed. Additional improvements may be required by the City Engineer in
accordance with the findings of a site-specific geotechnical report. Where a paving
material other than asphalt or concrete is utilized, a drive apron shall be installed at all
points of vehicular access. The drive apron shall be 26 feet wide and no less than 60 feet
long.
2. The outdoor storage area must be screened from surrounding properties with a six (6)
foot tall Wall except where the adjoining property is a railroad right-of-way, Interstate 15
or SR-6. adjacent to industrial zones. Where the outdoor storage area abuts a public
street, a 10-foot-wide landscaped planter shall be installed between the Wall and the
sidewalk or right-of-way. Landscaping shall be installed and maintained in accordance to
the requirements found in §15.4.16.130.
3. Lighting shall be provided in outdoor storage areas. A photometric lighting plan shall be
submitted with the Site Plan application. The lighting plan shall demonstrate the capacity
of the proposed lighting to uniformly illuminate the storage area without creating undue
spillover onto surrounding properties.
4. Material kept in an outdoor storage area cannot be stacked or piled to a height that
exceeds 12 feet.
J. Public Rights-of-Way:
1. It is not permitted to store or display merchandise or any other material, excepting those
signs permitted in §5.36.050(9), within any public right-of-way. In certain locations
designated by Spanish Fork City, outdoor seating may be permitted in accordance with
restrictions provided in the City’s Development Standards.
(Ord. No. 08-05, Enacted 06/07/2005)
(Ord. No. 02-10, Amended 02/16/2010)
(Ord. No. 23-10, Amended 11/16/2010)
(Ord. No. 06-11, Enacted 04/19/2011)
(Ord. No. 05-12, Amended 04/17/2012)
(Ord. No. 10-12, Amended 08/21/2012)
(Ord. No. 11-13, Amended 07/16/2013)
(Ord. No. 04-14, Amended 04/01/2014)
(Ord. No. 02-15, Amended 02/03/2015)
(Ord. No. 11-15, Amended 06/16/2015)
(Ord. No. 15-15, Amended 09/15/2015)
(Ord. No. 17-15, Amended 12/15/2015)
(Ord. No. 04-17, Amended 02/07/2017)
(Ord. No. 04-17, Amended 02/07/2017)
(Ord. No. 06-19, Amended 04/16/2019)
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 91/146
PART 4 DEVELOPMENT
15.4.04 Subdivisions
15.4.08 Site Plans
15.4.12 Impact Fees
15.4.16 Design And Development Standards
15.4.20 Flood Damage Prevention
15.4.04 Subdivisions
15.4.04.010 Sale Of Plats Or Parcels Prior To Approval And Recordation Prohibited
15.4.04.020 Approval Required
15.4.04.030 Endangering Health Or Property Prohibited
15.4.04.040 Amended Plats
15.4.04.050 Exceptions To Avoid Hardship
15.4.04.060 Filing Of Preliminary Plats
15.4.04.070 Form And Content Of Preliminary Plats
15.4.04.080 Approval Or Disapproval - Procedure
15.4.04.090 Duration Of Preliminary Approval
15.4.04.100 Filing Of Final Plats - When
15.4.04.110 Form And Contents Of Final Plats
15.4.04.120 Review And Approval Procedure Of Final Plats
15.4.04.130 Recordation - Copy To Be Supplied To City Engineer
15.4.04.140 Commencement/Completion Time Frame
15.4.04.150 Amendments To Final Plat
15.4.04.160 Building Permits
15.4.04.170 Appeals
15.4.04.180 Filing Of Minor Subdivision Plat
15.4.04.190 Form And Contents Of Minor Final Plats
15.4.04.200 Review And Approval Procedure Of Minor Final Plats
15.4.04.210 Recordation Of Minor Final Plats
15.4.04.220 Commencement/Completion Time Frame For Minor Final Plats
15.4.04.230 Amendments To Minor Final Plats
15.4.04.240 Building Permits For Minor Final Plats
15.4.04.010 Sale Of Plats Or Parcels Prior To Approval And Recordation Prohibited
No person shall subdivide any tract of land which is located wholly or in part within the corporate limits of
the City, nor shall any person sell, exchange, offer for sale, purchase, or offer to purchase any parcel of
land which is any part of a subdivision of a larger tract of land as hereinafter described, nor shall any
person offer for recording any deed conveying such parcel of land or any interest therein unless there is
first recorded a plat of such land which has been prepared and recorded in compliance with the
requirements of this Title, or a waiver granted in accordance with Utah Code Ann. §10-9a-605.
15.4.04.020 Approval Required
A. Subdividing Land. It shall be unlawful for any person to create a subdivision or subdivide for the
purpose of transferring, selling, conveying, or assigning any tract or parcel of land, which is
located wholly or in part in the City except in compliance with this Title.
B. Subdivisions. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or exchange or to offer to sell or
exchange any parcel of land which is part of a subdivision of land, or recorded in the office of the
Utah County Recorder as a subdivision unless the subdivision has been approved by the City
and complies with the provisions of this Title.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 92/146
C. Building Permit Conditions. No building permit shall be issued until the final subdivision plat
has been recorded by the City at the office of the Utah County Recorder and the following
improvements are installed and accepted by the City:
1. All essential improvements to meet the building and fire codes
2. Six (6) inches of compacted road base in all areas where asphalt will be placed.
The City Engineer or his/her designee is hereby designated as the responsible official to accept
the improvements. Once acceptance has been granted, a building permit may be issued.
(Ord. No. 29-17, Amended 12/12/2017)
15.4.04.030 Endangering Health Or Property Prohibited
No subdivision shall be developed in the City which, in the opinion of the City Council, is incompatible to
the health or well-being of the citizens of Spanish Fork and the future lot owners when the subdivision is
completed.
15.4.04.040 Amended Plats
In all subdivisions which have been recorded and in which changes have been made which changed the
subdivision materially, an Amended Plat must be filed and recorded in accordance with the provisions of
this Title. In situations where modifications are limited to the adjustment of lot lines and all affected
property owners consent to the modifications, an applicant shall apply to have a Minor Plat Amendment
approved. The information required with an application for Minor Plat Amendment approval shall match
those found with Final Plat applications. The fee for Minor Plat Amendment approval shall be set forth by
the City Council in the City’s budget. The DRC may waive individual submittal requirements as the DRC
finds appropriate. Upon finding that all applicable standards have been met, the DRC shall approve the
Minor Plat Amendment. Once all requirements have been met and any required bonds have been
posted, the Plat will be submitted to the Utah County Recorder’s Office for recordation.
(Ord. No. 04-14, Amended 04/01/2014)
15.4.04.050 Exceptions To Avoid Hardship
Whenever the tract to be subdivided is, in the opinion of the City Council, of such unusual shape or size
or is surrounded by such development or unusual conditions that the strict application of the
requirements contained herein would result in real difficulties and substantial hardships or injustices, the
City Council may vary or modify such requirements so that the subdivider is allowed to develop his or
her property in a reasonable manner but so, at the same time, the public welfare and interests of the City
and surrounding area are protected and the general intent and spirit of this Title is preserved.
15.4.04.060 Filing Of Preliminary Plats
A. Prior to filing a Preliminary Plat, the developer should review conceptual plans with the
Community Development Department. To apply for a Preliminary Plat approval, applicants must
follow instructions on the electronic form provided by the Community Development Department
and submit all required materials. Plans submitted for Preliminary Plat approval shall be provided
in this format:
1. A pdf and computer aided design (CAD) file of the plat in a dwg or dxf format. The CAD
file of the subdivision must be in the 1927 North American Datum (NAD27) or 1983 North
American Datum (NAD83) State Plane.
2. All fees for the Preliminary Plat are due upon filing the application.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 93/146
B. The City will review the submission and notify the developer of any changes that must be made.
The developer shall have a written response to all redlines corrected. Once these changes are
made, a Portable Document Format (PDF) file of the plat must be submitted to the Community
Development Department. Ten bound subdivision packets must also be submitted for master
planned developments.
C. All drawings, CAD files, and packets must be updated and re-submitted to the City with any
changes made that were required by the DRC, Planning Commission, or City Council after each
meeting.
D. In the event a pending ordinance, which has been formally initiated, would prohibit the Plat
approval, the application need not be accepted, unless the pending ordinance has not been
adopted within 180 days of its formal initiation. A subdivision application shall meet the
requirements in place at the time of submittal, or the requirements of any ordinance which has
been formally initiated at the time of submittal.
(Ord. No. 04-14, Amended 04/01/2014)
(Ord. No. 14-16, Amended 09/20/2016)
15.4.04.070 Form And Content Of Preliminary Plats
A. Each Preliminary Plat shall be accompanied by a filing fee in the amount established by the City
Council in the annual budget. Each Preliminary Plat of a subdivision shall contain the following
information:
1. The proposed name of the subdivision.
2. The names and addresses of the Developer and the Civil Engineer of the subdivision.
3. The names of all adjacent subdivisions and property owners.
4. The location of the subdivision as a part of some larger subdivision or tract of land
referred to in the records of the County Recorder. In such case, a sketch of the
prospective street system of the un-platted parts of the subdivider's land shall be
submitted and the street system of the part submitted shall be considered in light of
existing master street plans or other commission street studies.
5. A tie to a section corner. All horizontal data shall be based on the 1927 North American
Datum (NAD27) or 1983 North American Datum (NAD83) State Plane Coordinate
System, Utah Central Zone, US Foot. Horizontal datum shall be clearly written on all plat
drawings.
6. A contour map with vertical intervals not to exceed two feet. Contours shall be clearly
labeled. All vertical data shall be based on the 1929 North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD29) or 1988 North American Vertical Datum (NAVD88). Vertical datum shall be
written on plat.
7. Show all existing and proposed streets, alleys, easements, watercourses including flood
zone areas, irrigation ditches, fence lines, utilities, buildings, public areas and any other
important features within 200 feet of the tract to be subdivided.
8. Phasing plan showing how proposed development will function until the subdivision is
completed.
9. A table including: total acreage of area proposed for development, acreage of individual
phases, total acreage in lots, total acreage in open space, percent of open space, total
number of lots, and density in lots per acre, and total acreage in flood zone.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 94/146
10. The date of preparation, a standard engineering scale of not more than 100 feet to the
inch, a north arrow, and a vicinity map.
11. A stamp and signature of a Civil Engineer licensed in the state of Utah.
B. The following documents must accompany the Preliminary Plat:
1. Soils Report. The developer must provide a detailed soils report addressing the following
issues for the subdivision: hill stabilization, road design including CBR or existing soils,
foundation design, groundwater impacts, and general soil stability. The report must be
stamped and signed by a Civil Engineer licensed in the state of Utah.
The report shall include a minimum groundwater height factor for a peak month in a wet
year for the lowest buildable floor elevation. The lowest buildable floor elevation shall be a
minimum of three (3) feet above the highest groundwater level in a wet year. Foundation
drains shall be required as outlined in §15.4.16.070.
2. Storm Water Plan. The developer must provide a detailed storm water plan for the
subdivision according to the Storm Water Drainage Design Manual. This plan shall
include all calculations showing that it meets all the requirements of the Construction
Standards and the Drainage Design Manual. Plans and calculations must be stamped
and signed by a civil engineer licensed in the state of Utah.
3. Traffic Impact Study. The developer must submit a traffic impact study performed by a
professional engineer licensed in the state of Utah, unless waived by the City Engineer.
4. Wetland Delineation Study. If the City Engineer or designee determines that there are
potential wetlands in a development the Developer shall submit a wetlands delineation by
a qualified wetlands scientist. This delineation will be reviewed by a qualified wetlands
scientist hired by the city. All costs for the delineation and review shall be borne by the
developer.
5. Title Report. The developer shall provide the City with a title report showing clear title for
all of the properties in the proposed development.
6. Other Jurisdictional Approvals. The developer shall acquire approvals from any agency or
company having affected properties or utilities.
7. In addition to the above, a MPD subdivision packet shall include a project overview, plat
drawings, product elevations, landscape plan, description and design of amenities,
CC&R's, and soil reports. The description and design of amenities shall include detailed
drawings and pictures of proposed playgrounds, open space, trails, streetscapes,
architectural variety, fencing, and any other items deemed necessary by the City Planner.
(Ord. No. 14-12, Amended 09/28/2012)
(Ord. No. 04-14, Amended 04/01/2014)
(Ord. No. 16-17; Amended 06/20/2017)
15.4.04.080 Approval Or Disapproval - Procedure
A. Each plat submitted to the City shall be referred to the DRC for review to insure conformity to the
present ordinances and standards and for adequacy and availability of public facilities. The
applicant must hold a meeting, for residential subdivisions, prior to a meeting with the DRC,
inviting all property owners within 500 feet of the proposed project. The notice, names of those
invited, those who attended, conceptual drawings, presentations, and minutes from the meeting
must be submitted to the Community Development Department prior to the DRC meeting.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 95/146
B. Approval of a preliminary subdivision plat shall not be granted until such time as the applicant
has provided information, to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, to establish that adequate
public facilities exist in the areas affected by the development to accommodate the development.
C. The public facilities to which the preceding paragraph applies shall include the following:
1. The City culinary water system, including quantity, quality, treatment, storage capacity,
transmission capacity, and distribution capacity.
2. The City sanitary sewer system, including treatment, overall capacity, outfall lines,
laterals, and collector lines.
3. The City electric power system, including generation, transformation, transmission, and
distribution.
4. The storm water system, including drainage and flood control facilities.
5. Streets and roads, including arterial and collector roads, sidewalks, curb and gutter, and
related transportation facilities.
6. City pressurized irrigation system, including transmission and distribution capacity.
D. The adequacy of public facilities shall be determined in accordance with the Spanish Fork City
development standards, the various master plans and the comprehensive general plan of the
City, and at the discretion of the City Engineer. In the event that the City Engineer determines
that adequate public facilities are not available and will not be available by the time of final plat
approval, so as to assure that adequate public services are available at the time of occupancy,
the following alternatives may be elected, at the discretion of the City Council:
1. Allowing the developer to voluntarily construct those public facilities which are necessary
to service the proposed development and provide adequate facilities as determined by
the City Engineer and by entering into an appropriate form of connector's or development
agreement, which may include, as deemed appropriate by the City Engineer, provisions
for recoupment of any expenses incurred above and beyond those reasonably necessary
for or related to the need created by or the benefit conferred upon the proposed
development, and the method and conditions upon which recoupment is to be obtained.
Any connector’s agreement authorized by this paragraph must be requested within 120
days of the completion and acceptance by City of the improvements. The City Public
Works Director may extend the deadline for up to an additional term upon good cause
show. A request for a connector’s agreement shall be made on forms provided by the
City. An application fee in an amount to cover the City’s expenses in preparing the
connector’s agreement shall be included. The amount of the fee shall be established by
the City Council in the annual budget or by resolution.
2. Requiring the timing, sequencing, and phasing of the proposed development consistent
with the availability of adequate public facilities.
3. Deferring Final Plat approval and the issuance of building permits until all necessary
public facilities are adequate and available.
4. Denying plat approval and allowing the applicant to reapply when adequate public
facilities are available.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 96/146
E. The applicant shall follow the procedures set forth in Utah Code Ann. §73-1-15.5, as it may be
amended from time to time, in contacting any applicable irrigation company whose facilities will
be affected by the development. The applicant is to follow the requirements of said section in
piping, improving, or relocating any irrigation facilities. Construction plans, in compliance with
said section, shall be submitted with the application. The applicant is to provide a certificate of
compliance that satisfies the City Engineer that it is compliant with the law.
F. If the plat is not in conformity with the Design and Development Standards of this Title, the DRC
shall refer it back to the subdivider or developer with a list of items necessary to bring the plat
into compliance. If the plat is in conformity, it will be submitted to the Planning Commission with
suggestions and comments noted thereon. The Commission may continue the matter to further
study the issues presented. The Commission may approve, deny or approve with conditions the
proposed Preliminary Plat. If any conditions are attached, the Preliminary Plat shall be corrected
to reflect such changes and an accurate Preliminary Plat shall be submitted to the City. Changes
made in the Preliminary Plat by the DRC, Commission, or Council must be made before
proceeding to the next step. One 24x36 inch copy, one 11x17 inch copy and a CAD file of the
revised plat must be submitted to the Planning Department.
Receipt of this accurate copy shall be authorization for the developer to proceed with the
preparation of plans and specifications for the minimum improvements hereinafter required by
this Title and with the preparation of the Final Plat. Original Preliminary Plats are subject to the
standards, policies, and regulations that are in effect at the time of approval for each of the Final
Plats.
(Ord. No. 11-13, Amended 07/13/2013)
(Ord. No. 15-14, Amended 10/07/2014)
(Ord. No. 03-18, Amended 02/20/2018)
(Ord. No. 20-18, Amended 11/20/2018)
(Ord. No. 03-18, Amended 02/20/2018)
15.4.04.090 Duration Of Preliminary Approval
A Preliminary Plat application expires if it is not approved by the City within 24 months from the time its
application is submitted and accepted.
Approval of the Preliminary Plat by the City shall be valid for a period of 24 months after approval. A
Preliminary Plat remains active if a Final Plat is recorded at least every 24 months. If a Final Plat has not
been recorded within the 24-month period, the Preliminary Plat must again be submitted to the City for
re-approval.
Preliminary approval of a large tract shall not be voided if the Final Plat of the first section thereof
recorded within 24 and no more than 24 months have expired between the recording of each
consecutive Final Plat or an extension of time is granted as to the remainder thereof.
(Ord. No. 03-18, Amended 02/20/2018)
15.4.04.100 Filing Of Final Plats - When
Within two (2) years after approval of the Preliminary Plat or within the time for which an extension to
make such filing has been granted, the applicant must make application for Final Plat approval, receive
Final Plat approval and have a plat recorded. Application is made by following instructions on the
electronic form provided by the Community Development Department and submit all required materials
with the following:
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 97/146
A. A Computer Aided Design (CAD) file in a dwg or dxf format and a Portable Document Format
(PDF) file of the plat. The CAD file of the subdivision must be in the 1927 North American Datum
(NAD27) or 1983 North American Datum (NAD83) State Plane Coordinate System, Utah Central
Zone, US Foot, with a tie to a section corner.
B. All fees for the Final Plat application are due upon filing the application.
The City will review the submission and notify the developer of any changes that must be made. The
developer shall have a written response to all redlines corrected. Once these changes are made, a
Portable Document Format (PDF) file of the plat must be. submitted to the Community Development
Department.
Each Final Plat shall be accompanied by a filing fee established by the City Council in its annual budget,
together with any impact, inspection, testing, connection, or other fees which are due before recording.
(Ord. No. 04-14, Amended 04/01/2014)
(Ord. No. 14-16, Amended 09/20/2016)
(Ord. No. 03-18, Amended 02/20/2018)
15.4.04.110 Form And Contents Of Final Plats
A. The developer must submit a mylar of the Final Plat to the City in a format approved by the City
and County. The Final Plat of a subdivision shall contain the following:
1. A tie to a section corner and the state plane coordinates of each point. All horizontal data
shall be based on the 1927 North American Datum (NAD27) or 1983 North American
Datum (NAD83) State Plane Coordinate System, Utah Central Zone, US Foot. Horizontal
datum shall be clearly written on the plat.
2. Accurate dimensions for all lines, angles and curves used to describe boundaries, streets,
alleys, easements, areas to be reserved for public use, and other important features; the
lines, angles, dimensions, state plane coordinates, bearings, areas and numbers of all
lots, blocks and parts reserved for any reason within the subdivision. All dimensions shall
be determined by an accurate field survey which shall balance and close as required by
the county.
3. All lots and blocks are to be numbered, addressed, and named in accordance with the
street numbering and naming system assigned by the City Engineer.
4. A statement that “All drinking water and pressurized irrigation lines up to and including the
meter, all sanitary sewer mains, all electric meters, and all electric and SFCN
communication service lines up to the mast on overhead installations and to the top of the
meter base for underground installations are dedicated to Spanish Fork City”.
5. Plats and signatures shall be in waterproof ink on a 24x36 inch mylar sheet. There shall
be an unencumbered margin of one and one-half (1 1/2) inches on the left-hand side of
the sheet and not less than a half (1/2) inch margin around the outer three (3) sides of the
sheets. The scale shall be a standard engineering scale of no more than 100 feet to the
inch.
6. A stamp and signature of a surveyor licensed in the state of Utah.
7. A statement that “All municipal utility easements platted hereon are in perpetuity for
installation, maintenance, repair, and replacement of public utilities, public walls, fences,
sidewalks, trails, and appurtenant parts thereof and the right to reasonable access to
grantor’s easement shall run with the real property and shall be binding upon the grantor
and the grantor’s successors, heirs and assigns”.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 98/146
8. All building permits for the subdivision shall comply with the Development Soils Report
and Mass Grading Plan. Elevation certificates shall be reviewed and approved by the City
Engineer or his/her designee as required.
9. The date of preparation, a standard engineering scale of not more than 100 feet to the
inch, a north arrow, and a vicinity map.
10. All offsite easements required to provide services or utilities to the project shall be
recorded with the Utah County Recorder’s office prior or in conjunction with the Final Plat
recordation.
B. The following documents must accompany the Final Plat:
1. Construction Plans. A complete set of construction plans must accompany the Final Plat.
Construction plans must meet the requirements of this Title as well as the standards
found in Chapter 39.20 Improvement and Design Requirements of the Construction
Standards.
2. Soils Reports. A Final Plat Soils Report shall provide a detail of lot by lot summary
addressing finished floor elevation including basements. The report shall include a
minimum groundwater height factor for peak month in a wet year, and also address all
Hillside Development Standards. The basement finished floor shall be a minimum
elevation of three (3) feet above the highest groundwater level in a wet year.
3. Storm Water Plan. The developer shall provide a final drainage plan and report according
to the Storm Water Drainage Design Manual.
4. Mass Grading Plan. The developer shall provide a final subdivision grading plan showing
each individual property. The site shall be designed to eliminate flooding or standing
water on any private property.
(Ord. No. 14-12, Amended 09/18/2012)
(Ord. No. 29-17, Amended 12/12/2017)
(Ord. No. 20-18, Amended 11/20/2018)
15.4.04.120 Review And Approval Procedure Of Final Plats
Final plat and construction drawings shall be submitted to the City for review to insure conformity to the
present ordinances and standards and for the adequacy and availability of public facilities. If the Final
Plat or construction drawings are not in conformity, the City shall refer it back to the subdivider or
developer with a list of items necessary to bring the Final Plat or construction drawings into compliance.
If the Final Plat and construction drawings are in conformity, the plat or complete drawings will be
submitted to the DRC with suggestions and comments noted thereon. The DRC shall act as the land use
authority for Final Plat approval.
After considering the recommendation of the City Engineer, the DRC may table the matter, approve, or
grant approval upon conditions stated. If approved, the City Manager, Community Development Director,
and City Engineer shall sign the Final Plat. If any conditions are attached, the Final Plat or construction
drawings shall be amended to reflect such changes and an accurate Final Plat shall be submitted to the
City, prior to signing.
Original and Preliminary Plats are subject to the standards, policies, and regulations that are in effect at
the time of approval for each of the Final Plats.
(Ord. No. 14-16, Amended 09/20/2016)
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 99/146
15.4.04.130 Recordation - Copy To Be Supplied To City Engineer
Following acceptance by the DRC, the Final Plat, bearing all official approvals, shall be deposited in the
office of the Utah County Recorder for recording by the City. Only the City may record Final Plats. The
Final Plat must be recorded within one (1) year after approval by the DRC. Approval expires and the plat
must be resubmitted if the Final Plat is not recorded within one (1) year of the plat’s approval.
All inspection, testing and/or connection fees required by ordinance shall be paid and permits required
shall be obtained prior to the recording of the Final Plat.
(Ord. No. 15-14, Amended 10/07/2014)
15.4.04.140 Commencement/Completion Time Frame
A. Prior to the construction of any improvements required by this Title, the subdivider shall furnish to
the City Engineer the following:
1. Approved sets of construction plans.
2. Full security deposit (bond) required by this Title (§15.4.16.110).
3. Inspection fee deposit.
4. Subdivision Bond Agreement for Improvements.
5. Hold a preconstruction meeting.
6. Meet all conditions for approval as established by the Council.
B. All improvements within subdivisions must be completed within one year from the date of
recording of the final plat. If improvements are not completed within the time limitation imposed
herein, the City may forfeit any bond or surety, which has been posted by the owner or
subdivider.
C. The one-year warranty period begins when all of the infrastructure and landscaping required by
this Title or the Development Standards is inspected and accepted by the City, including all
punch list items. Additional punch list items may be added if further inspections reveal that the
approval requirements have not been met.
(Ord. No. 20-18, Amended 11/20/2018)
15.4.04.150 Amendments To Final Plat
The City Engineer may approve minor amendments to approved Final Plats before the Final Plat is
recorded, if he/she finds that the proposed amendments do not jeopardize the interest of the City or
adjoining property owners. The types of minor amendments contemplated by this section may include,
but not be limited to, legal description mistakes, minor boundary changes, and items that should have
been included on the original Final Plats. Major amendments to unrecorded approved Final Plats shall
go back through the approval process. Amendments to record the Final Plat shall be in accordance with
State law and any policies or procedures adopted by the City.
15.4.04.160 Building Permits
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 100/146
The City may issue a building permit upon application and compliance with the requirements of law and
once the final plat is recorded and all improvements which are necessary to meet the building and fire
codes are installed, accepted by the City Engineer or designees, and in service for the entire plat. In the
event asphalt pavements is not installed, building permits may be issued if there is six (6) inches of
compacted road base in all areas to be paved.
(Ord. No. 24-17, Amended 10/17/2017)
(Ord. No. 29-17, Amended 12/12/2017)
15.4.04.170 Appeals
Any decision of the DRC approving a Final Plat may be appealed to the Appeal Authority. Any appeal
must be taken within 15 days of the final decision of the DRC. Appeals must follow the procedures set
forth in §15.1.04.050. Any decision by the Appeal Authority concerning a Final Plat shall be final and
non-appealable.
15.4.04.180 Filing Of Minor Subdivision Plat
Minor Subdivision Plats may be approved for subdivisions of five (5) or fewer lots where those lots
conform to applicable zoning standards and where all required infrastructure is adjacent to the subject
property. Application for Minor Subdivision Plat approval can be made by completing an application form
and submitting the following materials to the Community Development Department:
Seven (7) 24x36 inch copies of the Minor Subdivision Plat and construction drawings;
Two (2) 11x17 inch copies of the Final Plat and construction drawings;
A Computer Aided Design (CAD) file and a Portable Document Format (PDF) file of the plat must be
submitted on a CD or by e-mail in a dwg or dgn format. The CAD file of the subdivision must be in
the 1927 North American Datum (NAD27) or 1983 North American Datum (NAD83) State Plane
Coordinate System, Utah Central Zone, US Foot, with a tie to a section corner.
The City will review the submission and notify the applicant of any changes that must be made. Once
these changes are made, a Portable Document Format (PDF) file of the plat must be submitted to the
Community Development Department. Once approved by the DRC, four (4) 24x36 inch copies, one (1)
clearly legible 11x17 inch copy, and a CAD file of the plat must be submitted to the Community
Development Department. Two (2) 24x36 inch copies will be retained by the City, the other two (2)
24x36 inch copies will be signed and stamped by the City and returned to the Developer. The applicant
must insure that a copy of the signed and approved construction plans is on site at all times during
construction. Each Minor Subdivision Plat shall be accompanied by a filing fee established by the City
Council in its annual budget, together with any impact, inspection, testing, connection or other fees
which are due before recording.
15.4.04.190 Form And Contents Of Minor Final Plats
A. The developer must submit a mylar of the Minor Subdivision Plat to the City in a format approved
by the City and County. The Minor Subdivision Plat shall contain the following:
1. A tie to a section corner and the state plane coordinates of each point. All horizontal data
shall be based on the 1927 North American Datum (NAD27) or 1983 North American
Datum (NAD83) State Plane Coordinate System, Utah Central Zone, US Foot. Horizontal
datum shall be clearly written on the plat.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 101/146
2. Accurate dimensions for all lines, angles and curves used to describe boundaries, streets,
alleys, easements, areas to be reserved for public use, and other important features; the
lines, angles, dimensions, state plane coordinates, bearings, areas and numbers of all
lots, blocks and parts reserved for any reason within the subdivision. All dimensions shall
be determined by an accurate field survey which shall balance and close as required by
Utah County.
3. All lots and blocks are to be numbered, addressed and named in accordance with the
street numbering and naming system assigned by the City Engineer.
4. A statement that “All drinking water and pressurized irrigation lines up to and including the
meter, all sanitary sewer mains, all electric meters, and all electric and SFCN
communication service lines up to the mast on overhead installations and to the top of the
meter base for underground installations are dedicated to Spanish Fork City”.
5. Plats and signatures shall be in waterproof ink on a 24x36 inch mylar sheet. There shall
be an unencumbered margin of one and one-half (1 1/2) inches on the left-hand side of
the sheet and not less than a half (1/2) inch margin around the outer three (3) sides of the
sheets. The scale shall be a standard engineering scale of no more than 100 feet to the
inch.
6. A stamp and signature of a surveyor licensed in the state of Utah.
7. A statement that “All public utility easements platted hereon are in perpetuity for
installation, maintenance, repair, and replacement of public utilities, public walls, fences,
sidewalks, trails, and appurtenant parts thereof and the right to reasonable access to
grantor’s easement shall run with the real property and shall be binding upon the grantor
and the grantor’s successors, heirs and assigns”.
8. All Building Permits for the subdivision shall comply with the Development Soils Report
and Mass Grading Plan. Elevation certificates shall be reviewed and approved by the City
Engineer or his/her designee as required.
9. The date of preparation, a standard engineering scale of not more than 100 feet to the
inch, a north arrow, and a vicinity map.
10. All offsite easements required to provide services or utilities to the project shall be
recorded with the Utah County Recorder’s office prior to or in conjunction with the Minor
Subdivision Plat recordation.
B. The following documents must accompany the Minor Subdivision Plat:
1. Construction Plans. A complete set of construction plans must accompany the Minor
Subdivision Plat. Construction plans must meet the requirements of this Title as well as
the standards found in Chapter 39.20 Improvement and Design Requirements of the
Construction Standards.
2. Soils Reports. A soils report shall provide a detail of lot by lot summary addressing
finished floor elevation including basements. The report shall include a minimum height
factor for peak month in a wet year, and also address all Hillside Development Standards.
3. Storm Water Plan. The developer shall provide a final drainage plan and report according
to the Storm Water Drainage Design Manual.
4. Mass Grading Plan. The developer shall provide a final subdivision grading plan showing
each individual property. The site shall be designed to eliminate flooding or standing
water on any private property.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 102/146
(Ord. No. 29-17, Amended 12/12/2017)
15.4.04.200 Review And Approval Procedure Of Minor Final Plats
Minor Subdivision Plat and construction drawings shall be submitted to the City for review to insure
conformity to the present ordinances and standards and for the adequacy and availability of public
facilities. If the Minor Subdivision Plat or construction drawings are not in conformity, the City shall refer
it back to the subdivider or developer with a list of items necessary to bring the Minor Subdivision Plat or
construction drawings into compliance. If the Minor Subdivision Plat and construction drawings are in
conformity, the plat or complete drawings will be submitted to the DRC with suggestions and comments
noted thereon. The DRC shall act as the Land Use Authority for Minor Subdivision Plat approval. If
approved, the City Manager, Community Development Director and City Engineer shall sign the Minor
Subdivision Plat. If any conditions are attached, the Minor Subdivision Plat or construction drawings
shall be amended to reflect such changes and an accurate Minor Subdivision Plat shall be submitted to
the City, prior to signing.
15.4.04.210 Recordation Of Minor Final Plats
Following acceptance by the DRC, the Minor Subdivision Plat bearing all official approvals shall be
deposited in the office of the County Recorder for recording by the City. Only the City may record Minor
Subdivision Plats. The Minor Subdivision Plat must be recorded with Utah County within 120 days after
approval by the DRC. Approval expires and the plat must be resubmitted if the Minor Subdivision Plat is
not recorded within 120 days. All inspection, testing and/or connection fees required by ordinance shall
be paid and permits required shall be obtained prior to the recordation of the Minor Subdivision Plat.
15.4.04.220 Commencement/Completion Time Frame For Minor Final Plats
A. Prior to the construction of any improvements required by this Title, the subdivider shall furnish to
the City Engineer the following:
1. Approved sets of construction plans.
2. Full security deposit (bond) required by this Title (§15.4.16.110).
3. Inspection fee deposit.
4. Subdivision Development Agreement.
5. Hold a preconstruction meeting.
6. Meet all conditions for approval as established by the Council.
B. All improvements within subdivisions must be completed within one (1) year of the date of
recordation. If improvements are not completed within the time limitation imposed herein, the City
may forfeit any bond or surety, which shall have been posted by the owner or subdivider.
15.4.04.230 Amendments To Minor Final Plats
The City Engineer may approve minor amendments to approved Minor Subdivision Plat before the Minor
Subdivision Plat is recorded, if he/she finds that the proposed amendments do not jeopardize the
interest of the City or adjoining property owners. The types of minor amendments contemplated by this
section may include, but not be limited to, legal description mistakes, minor boundary changes and items
that should have been included on the original Minor Subdivision Plat. Major amendments to unrecorded
approved Minor Subdivision Plat shall go back through the approval process.
15.4.04.240 Building Permits For Minor Final Plats
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 103/146
The City may issue a Building Permit upon application and compliance with the requirements of law and
once the final plat is recorded and all improvements which are necessary to meet the building and fire
codes are installed, accepted by the City Engineer, and in service for the entire plat. In the event asphalt
pavement is not installed, Building Permits may be issued if there is six (6) inches of compacted road
base in all areas to be paved.
(Ord. No. 04-14, Amended 04/01/2014)
(Ord. No. 29-17, Amended 12/12/2017)
15.4.08 Site Plans
15.4.08.010 Purpose
15.4.08.020 Site Plan Required
15.4.08.030 Application And Review Process
15.4.08.040 Approval Or Disapproval - Procedure
15.4.08.050 Duration Of Approval
15.4.08.060 Amendments To Site Plan
15.4.08.070 Appeals
15.4.08.010 Purpose
The Site Plan review process is established in order to assure that development proposed for Spanish
Fork City will comply with all zoning and development standards. The general appearance of
developments shall contribute to an orderly, sustainable, and harmonious appearance and a safe and
efficient development.
It is not the purpose of this Chapter that design should be so rigidly controlled so as to stifle creativity or
individual expression, or that substantial additional expense be incurred; rather, it is the intent of this
Chapter that any control exercised be the minimum necessary to achieve the objectives as stated
above.
15.4.08.020 Site Plan Required
A. Requirement. Site Plan review shall be required for the following:
1. All proposed new commercial or industrial developments.
2. All additions to commercial or industrial structures.
3. Any change of use of an existing commercial or industrial site or structure.
4. All Conditional Use Permits or Uses Subject to Conditions.
5. Some projects such as minor additions to non-residential structures may not need a
complete review.
6. The Community Development Director may waive full Site Plan review, including fees, if it
is determined that such review will not further the purpose of the City’s development
standards.
15.4.08.030 Application And Review Process
A. A Site Plan shall go through the following process. Pre-application conference with the
Community Development Director and City Engineer, staff review, and then to the DRC.
1. Pre-application conference for Site Plan Review. Persons intending to undertake
development need to arrange with the City Planner for a pre-application meeting. The
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 104/146
purpose of this meeting is to acquaint the applicant with the requirements of the code; to
provide for an exchange of information regarding to applicable elements of the General
Plan and development requirements, to arrange such technical and design assistance as
will aid the applicant, and to otherwise identify policies and regulations that create
opportunities or pose significant constraints for the proposed development.
2. Staff Review.
a. An application provided by the City shall be filled out in completeness and
submitted to the Community Development Department together the following:
(1) Seven (7) 24x36 copies folded to a 9x12 size so that the name of the plan
is visible.
(2) Two (2) clearly legible11x17 copies of the site plan.
(3) A computer aided design (CAD) file of the plans on a CD, or by an e-mail
in a dwg or dxf format. The CAD file of the subdivision must be in the 1927
North American Datum (NAD27) or 1983 North American Datum (NAD83)
State Plane Coordinate System, Utah Central Zone, US Foot, with a tie to
a section corner.
If anything is submitted by e-mail, the Community Development
Department must be contacted for the proper e-mail address and for
confirmation the e-mail was received.
B. Each Site Plan shall be accompanied by a filing fee in the amount established by the City Council
in the annual budget.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 105/146
C. Information required for Staff Review including the following:
1. Proposed name of Site Plan at lower right hand corner.
2. Name and address of developer on the lower right hand corner.
3. Name and address of engineer/architect/surveyor at the lower right hand corner.
4. Date of preparation.
5. Statement that “All drinking water and pressurized irrigation lines up to and including the
meter, all sanitary sewer mains, all electrical meters, and all electric and SFCN
communication service lines up to the mast on overhead installations and to the top of the
meter base for underground installations are dedicated to Spanish Fork City”.
6. Licensed Land Surveyor/Engineer Stamp and Signature.
7. Title block with name and location.
8. Vicinity map and north arrow.
9. Standard engineered scale B 1" = 100' or less.
10. Description of boundary of development.
11. Section tie/bearing of section line based on NAD27 or NAD83 State Plane Coordinates.
Horizontal datum shall be clearly marked on all plat drawings.
12. Adjacent property owners names and buildings within 200 feet of proposed development.
13. Existing and proposed fences.
14. Existing and proposed streets with names and widths within 200 feet of site.
15. Existing and proposed water courses, culverts, and irrigation ditches.
16. Flood zones or wetlands as per NWI wetland map.
17. Existing and proposed power lines (labeled), gas lines, water mains, fire hydrants and
valves with pipe size.
18. Existing and proposed sewer mains and manholes with pipe sizes.
19. Existing and proposed storm drains.
20. Existing and proposed public utility easements.
21. Minimum of two (2) foot contours of existing elevations, with note that all vertical data is
based on NAVD29 or NAVD88. Vertical datum shall be written on the plan.
22. Typical street cross section.
23. Building setbacks dimensioned on the Site Plan.
24. Parking stalls (9'x18') and calculations identifying the required number of handicapped
and non-handicapped parking spaces in the development.
25. Photometric lighting plan.
26. Dumpster location, height and materials used.
27. Location and screening plan for mechanical equipment.
28. Note on Site Plan if building is to be sprinkled.
29. Finish floor elevation.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 106/146
30. Type of building and occupancy per International Building Code.
31. Project phasing (if applicable).
32. Table with the following:
a. Total acreage of area proposed for development.
b. Total area and percent of site in landscaping (open space).
c. Total building area and dimensions - separate areas for different uses (office,
warehouse, shop, etc.).
d. Total developed and undeveloped area.
e. Total number of parking spaces required and proposed (including ADA parking
stalls).
f. Total impervious area.
33. Landscaped plan prepared by a licensed landscape architect:
a. Planting schedule showing plant material and sizes.
b. Planting plan.
c. Irrigation plan.
34. Off-street parking plan showing circulation and number and size of spaces.
35. Vehicular and pedestrian circulation ingress, egress, and internal movement.
36. Location and function of any loading and servicing facilities.
37. Scale drawings of exterior building elevations and an indication of building materials to be
used. Architectural drawings shall be drawn to a scale of no smaller than 1/8" = 1-foot.
38. Elevations and/or architectural renderings of building facades facing public right-of-way.
Said elevations or renderings must be sufficiently complete to show building heights and
roof lines, the location and height of any walls, signs, light standards, openings in the
facade, and the general architectural character of the building.
39. All existing and proposed signs for the development.
40. Grading plan with detailed elevations showing the drainage of the property. Sites shall be
designed to eliminate drainage of water to adjacent properties. Site Grading Plan shall
address soil types of material on the project site to ensure it is suitable for growth of
landscaping and adequate percolation rates which are applicable to the design.
41. Construction plans which conform to the standards found in section 39.20 Improvement
and Design Requirements of the Spanish Fork City Construction Standards.
42. Soils report addressing the following issues for the site: hill stabilization, road design,
foundation design, groundwater impacts, and general soil stability. Report must be
stamped and signed by a civil engineer licensed in the state of Utah.
The report shall include a minimum groundwater height factor for a peak month in wet
year for the lowest buildable floor elevation. The lowest buildable floor elevation shall be a
minimum of three (3) feet above the highest groundwater level in a wet year. Foundation
drains shall be required as outlined in §15.4.16.070.
43. Public Utility Easement documents and/or deeds for all utilities or public facilities required
by the City.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 107/146
44. Detailed storm water plan for the site according to the Storm Water Drainage Design
Manual. This plan shall include all calculations showing that it meets the requirements of
the Construction Standards and the Drainage Design Manual. Plans and calculations
required by of Chapter 39.20 of the Construction Standards must be stamped and signed
by a civil engineer licensed in the state of Utah.
45. Approvals from any agency or company having affected properties or utilities.
46. Other data or plans or reports deemed necessary by the Planning, Public Works, or Fire
and Police Departments. In the event that a traffic study, environmental study or other
technical study is required, the applicant may be required to pay additional review fees.
The additional review fees will be utilized to prepare studies deemed necessary by the
City Engineering Department or to perform a peer review of work submitted on behalf of
the applicant.
D. The City will review the submission and notify the developer of any changes that must be made.
The developer shall have a written response to all redlines corrected.
Once these changes are made, a Portable Document Format (PDF) file of the plat must be
submitted to the Community Development Department.
E. Once accepted by the DRC, four (4) 24x36 inch copies, one (1) clearly legible 11x17 inch copy,
and a CAD file of the plat must be submitted to the Engineering Department. Two (2) 24x36 inch
copies will be retained by the City, the other two (2) 24x36 inch copies will be signed and
stamped by the City and returned to the Developer. The Developer must insure that a copy of the
signed and approved construction plans is on site at all times during construction.
(Ord. No.14-12, Amended 10/18/2012)
(Ord. No. 14-16, Amended 09/20/2016)
(Ord. No. 16-17; Amended 06/20/2017)
15.4.08.040 Approval Or Disapproval - Procedure
Each Site Plan submitted to the City shall be referred to the DRC, for review to insure conformity to the
present ordinances and standards and for adequacy and availability of public facilities. The DRC may
table the matter to further study the issues presented. The DRC may approve, reject, or grant approval
upon the conditions stated. If approved, the DRC shall express its approval with whatever conditions are
attached. If any conditions are attached, the Site Plan shall be amended to reflect such changes and an
accurate Site Plan shall be submitted to the City. Receipt of this accurate copy shall be authorization for
the developer to proceed with the preparation of plans and specifications for the minimum improvements
hereinafter required by this Title. Original Site Plans are subject to the standards, policies, and
regulations that are in constraints for the proposed development.
A. Staff Review.
1. Application for Site Plan approval can be made by following instructions on the electronic
form provided by the Community Development Department and by submitting a in a
computer aided design (CAD) file of the plans on a CD, or by an e-mail in a dwg or dxf
format. The CAD file of the subdivision must be in the 1927 North American Datum
(NAD27) or 1983 North American Datum (NAD83) State Plane Coordinate System, Utah
Central Zone, US Foot, with a tie to a section corner.
If anything is submitted by e-mail, the Community Development Department must be contacted for the
proper e-mail address and for confirmation the e-mail was received.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 108/146
(Ord. No. 04-14, Amended 04/01/2014)
15.4.08.050 Duration Of Approval
A Site Plan application expires if it is not approved by the DRC within 12 months from the time a
complete application is submitted and accepted. Approval of the Site Plan by the DRC shall be valid for
a period of 12 months after approval unless, upon application by the developer, the DRC grants an
extension or a Building Permit is issued and maintained for the project. An extension may not exceed six
(6) months.
All City improvements required for a Site Plan approval must be completed within one (1) year of the
date of approval by the DRC. Improvements which are not completed within the time limitation imposed
herein may result in the forfeiture of any bond or surety which shall have been posted by the owner or
subdivider.
(Ord. No. 14-12, Amended 09/18/2012)
(Ord. No. 03-18, Amended 02/20/2018)
15.4.08.060 Amendments To Site Plan
The Community Development Director may approve minor amendments do not jeopardize the interest of
the City or adjoining property owners. The types of minor amendments contemplated by this section may
include, but not be limited to, legal description mistakes, minor boundary changes, and items that should
have been included on the original Site Plan. Major amendments to the final Site Plan shall go back
through the approval process.
(Ord. No. 14-16, Amended 09/20/2016)
15.4.08.070 Appeals
Any decision of the DRC approving a Site Plan may be appealed to the Appeal Authority. Any appeal
must be taken within 15 days of the final decision of the DRC. Appeals must follow the procedures set
forth in §15.1.04.050. Any decision by the Appeal Authority concerning a Site Plan shall be final and
non-appealable.
15.4.12 Impact Fees
15.4.12.010 Impact Fees, Authorization
15.4.12.020 Purpose Of Impact Fees, Limitations
15.4.12.030 Determination
15.4.12.040 Method Of Assessing
15.4.12.050 Special Exceptions
15.4.12.060 Existing Structures
15.4.12.070 Reimbursable Projects
15.4.12.010 Impact Fees, Authorization
Spanish Fork City is hereby authorized to establish and collect impact fees as a condition of granting
subdivision plat approval and/or as a condition of the issuance of a building permit.
15.4.12.020 Purpose Of Impact Fees, Limitations
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 109/146
The purpose of impact fees is to provide necessary funding for capital improvements to public facilities
incurred due to new development. Impact fees may be assessed for water, sewer, pressurized irrigation,
electric power, storm drainage, streets and roads, recreation, and public safety.
(Ord. No. 07-11, Amended 05/17/2011)
15.4.12.030 Determination
The Council may set impact fees based on studies and analyses of the anticipated costs to provide
adequate public facilities to new developments. The amount of the impact fee shall not exceed the
anticipated cost of providing adequate public facilities which become necessary as a result of the
development. In setting the amount of the fee, the Council shall take into consideration the following
factors:
A. The cost of existing capital facilities.
B. The manner of financing existing facilities.
C. The relative extent to which newly developed property and other properties within the City have
already contributed to the costs of existing capital facilities.
D. The relative extent to which newly developed properties and other properties within the City will
contribute to the cost of existing capital facilities in the future.
E. The relative extent to which newly developed properties are entitled to a credit because the City
may be requiring owners or developers to provide common facilities that have historically been
provided by the City and financed through general taxation or other charges in other parts of the
City.
F. The extraordinary costs, if any, in servicing newly developed properties.
G. The time-price deferential inherent in fair comparison of amounts paid at different times.
15.4.12.040 Method Of Assessing
The Council may establish and assess impact fees by an impact fee enactment and by complying with
the notice and hearing provisions of State law.
(Ord. No. 14-16, Amended 09/20/2016)
15.4.12.050 Special Exceptions
A. The Council retains the authority to adjust any impact fee imposed in order to respond to unusual
circumstances in specific cases and to ensure that impact fees are fairly imposed. Economic
hardship shall not be considered an unusual circumstance justifying an adjustment to the impact
fee.
B. The Council may, at its sole discretion, adjust any impact fee, on the basis of justice and equity,
based upon studies and data submitted by the developer.
C. The Council may, at its sole discretion, waive any impact fee for governmental development or
other development activities with broad public purposes. Any development undertaken to gain a
profit, whether or not a profit is realized, does not qualify as a broad public purpose.
D. The Council may, at its sole discretion, allow a full or partial credit against impact fees for any
system improvements provided by the developer that are required as a condition of approval of
the development activity.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 110/146
15.4.12.060 Existing Structures
Where the following conditions are met, credit will be given towards the impact fees for replacement
structures:
A. The subject property was located within Spanish Fork City limits on July 1, 1995.
B. A dwelling or business was located on the subject property on July 1, 1995.
C. Municipal services such as water, sewer, or power were being provided to the subject property
on July 1, 1995.
Credit towards impact fees will be limited to the services provided to the property for the existing service
size.
(Ord. No. 04-14, Enacted 04/01/2014)
15.4.12.070 Reimbursable Projects
Growth related infrastructure that does not have local connections shall be eligible for 100%
reimbursement through impact fees. If there are local connections, the difference between the regional
and local infrastructure cost shall be eligible for reimbursement from impact fees. 600 amp and larger
electric lines are fully reimbursable from impact fees. Street lights are included in the cost of the street
cross-section.
Eligible projects become reimbursable once they are added to the Impact Fee Facilities Plan (IFFP). The
City Public Works Director will determine when projects will be added to the IFFP.
(Ord. No. 14-16, Enacted 09/20/2016)
(Ord. No. 22-17, Enacted 09/19/2017)
15.4.16 Design And Development Standards
15.4.16.010 Availability Of Adequate Public Facilities
15.4.16.020 Unavailability Of Adequate Public Facilities
15.4.16.030 Improvement Installations
15.4.16.040 Fees
15.4.16.050 Utility Connection
15.4.16.060 Sewage Facilities
15.4.16.070 Foundation Drains
15.4.16.080 Water Transfer
15.4.16.085 Street Improvements
15.4.16.090 Time Limitation For Completion
15.4.16.100 Conflict Of Interest
15.4.16.110 Security For Improvements Required
15.4.16.120 Off Street Parking
15.4.16.130 Landscaping, Buffering Walls, And Fences
15.4.16.140 Solid Waste Receptacle Areas
15.4.16.150 Clear Vision Area
15.4.16.160 Site Reclamation
15.4.16.170 Hillside Development
15.4.16.180 Neighborhood Mailboxes
15.4.16.010 Availability Of Adequate Public Facilities
A. Approval of a Preliminary Plat or Site Plan shall not be granted until such time as the applicant
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 111/146
has provided information, to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, to establish that adequate
public facilities exist in the areas affected by the development to accommodate the development.
B. The public facilities to which the preceding paragraph applies shall include the following:
1. The City Culinary Water System, including quantity, quality, treatment, storage capacity,
transmission capacity, and distribution capacity.
2. The City Sanitary Sewer System, including treatment, overall capacity, outfall lines,
laterals, and collector lines.
3. The City Electric Power System, including generation, transformation, transmission, and
distribution.
4. The Storm Water System, including drainage and flood control facilities.
5. Streets and Roads, including arterial and collector roads, sidewalks, curb and gutter, and
related transportation facilities.
6. Recreational Facilities, including ballparks, playgrounds, and trails.
7. Secondary Irrigation, including transmission and distribution capacity.
C. The adequacy of public facilities shall be determined in accordance with the Spanish Fork City
Design and Development Standards, the various master plans and the Comprehensive General
Plan of the City, and at the discretion of the City Engineer.
15.4.16.020 Unavailability Of Adequate Public Facilities
A. In the event that the City Engineer determines that adequate public facilities are not available
and will not be available by the time of approval, so as to assure that adequate public services
are available at the time of occupancy, the following alternatives may be elected, at the discretion
of the City Council:
1. Allowing the developer to voluntarily construct those public facilities which are necessary
to service the proposed development and provide adequate facilities as determined by
the City Engineer and by entering into an appropriate form of connector's, or developers
agreement, which may include, as deemed appropriate by the City Engineer, provisions
for recoupment of any expenses incurred above and beyond those reasonably necessary
for or related to the need created by or the benefit conferred upon the proposed
development, and the method and conditions upon which recoupment is to be obtained.
Any connector’s agreement authorized by this paragraph must be requested within 120
days of the completion and acceptance by the City of the improvements. The City Public
Works Director may extend the deadline for up to one additional term upon good cause
show.
2. Requiring the timing, sequencing, and phasing of the proposed development consistent
with the availability of adequate public facilities.
3. Deferring approval and the issuance of building permits until all necessary public facilities
are adequate and available.
4. Denying approval and allowing the applicant to reapply when adequate public facilities
are available.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 112/146
B. In the event the City installs infrastructure improvements which benefits specific properties, it
may also recover reimbursement on a pro-rata basis from the benefitted properties when they
develop, on the same basis as a developer would recover reimbursement with a connector’s
agreement as set forth in paragraph A.
C. When a connector’s agreement is granted, or the City installs infrastructure for which it will be
reimbursed, the City will record a notice against the benefitted properties so that a future
owner/developer will be on notice of development costs associated with that parcel. The notice is
not a lien on the property. The City Engineer is designated to sign, on behalf of the City, the
Notice of Development Obligations.
(Ord. No. 9-13, Amended 06/18/2013)
(Ord. No. 20-18, Amended 11/20/2018)
15.4.16.030 Improvement Installations
A. No improvements may be installed until the Final Plat is recorded. Thereafter, all improvements
shall be installed in accordance with the Design and Development Standards unless waived by
the City Engineer for unique conditions. A waiver is intended to be extremely difficult to obtain
and is to be based on rare and unusual circumstances. Any waiver, variation, or substitution from
the standards must be authorized in writing by the City Engineer or his/her designee. The
expense of all such improvements and installations, including but not limited to expenses for all
of the foregoing items and for area-wide topographical drainage, engineering, ecological or other
work or study, shall be borne by the owner or subdivider or developer subject to such terms and
conditions as may be required by the City Council by way of ordinance, resolution, contract, or
otherwise. The failure of any owner or subdivider to comply with the terms of this provision or
his/her failure to complete the installation of all of the foregoing installations, fixtures or
improvements or such others as may be required by the City Council from time to time, shall
result in the forfeiture pro tanto of the bond or other security posted. Any developer or subdivider
forfeiting a bond may jeopardize his/her/its ability to do future projects in the City, following a
hearing before the City Council. Any subdivision not in full compliance with this section shall not
be connected to or receive any of its municipal services, including but not limited to water, sewer,
irrigation, electricity, or refuse removal services.
B. The developer or subdivider shall be responsible for the protection of any existing improvements
on public or private property at the start of work or placed there during the progress of the work.
Existing improvements shall include but are not limited to permanent surfacing, curbs, ditches,
driveways, culverts, fences, walls and landscaping. Any surface improvements damaged as a
result of construction shall be restored or replaced to an equal or better condition than before.
This shall be accomplished in a timely manner.
C. The developer or subdivider shall be responsible for maintaining existing road surfaces suitable
for travel by the public. The developer or subdivider shall be responsible for all dust and mud
control and all claims and damages resulting from failure to maintain the construction area.
D. New residential developments shall not be designed to allow direct access from individual lots or
dwelling units to arterial streets or major collector streets. Masonry walls shall be provided along
the sides of residential developments, which have reverse or side frontage to arterial streets,
major collector streets, or interstates as outlined in the Construction Standards. The Council may
waive the requirement in those instances where the height of the interstate, arterial street, or
major collector street is significantly higher than the top of the wall. The Council may also waive
the requirement for a masonry wall if a park or open space area is adjacent to such streets. The
Council may waive all fencing requirements or impose non-sight obscuring fencing, at their sole
discretion.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 113/146
(Ord. 14-05, Amended 11/15/2005)
(Ord. 04-17, Amended 02/07/2017)
(Ord. No. 29-17, Amended 12/12/2017)
15.4.16.040 Fees
Fees may be charged by the City for the purpose of defraying expenses of all work performed by the
City or its agents in connection with processing or approving the application for a subdivision, reviewing
a Preliminary Plat and a Final Plat or for inspecting or installing a fixture or apparatus in any subdivision.
Such fees shall in no case be less than the fee charged for similar services provided by the City to
persons who are not subdividers.
15.4.16.050 Utility Connection
It shall be the responsibility of the developer to connect to all available utilities or improvements
wherever they are located and extend those improvements to and through the development to obtain
approval of said subdivision. The requirement to extend utilities through a development may be waived if
it is determined unnecessary by the DRC. The developer or subdivider shall provide easements for all
utility extensions through private property. The developer or subdivider shall also provide a ten-foot
public utility easement along public rights-of-way or streets and along all other property lines. If setbacks
are less than ten feet then public utility easements shall be the full extent of the setback.
(Ord. 14-05, Amended 11/15/2005)
(Ord. No. 29-17, Amended 12/12/2017)
15.4.16.060 Sewage Facilities
A. Five (5) acre parcels or larger may be approved with a septic system sanitary sewer, at the
discretion of the Council, when the following minimum requirements are met:
1. The owner signs a recordable instrument waiving the right to protest or otherwise object
to the creation of a special improvement district to be created for the purpose of providing
the City sanitary sewer system.
2. Including a requirement that the City sanitary sewer system be connected to each
residence at the owner’s expense at such time that the City sanitary sewer system is
within 500 feet of the lot line.
3. The septic system sanitary sewer meets all requirements of Federal, State, County or
municipal law and regulations at the time of installation.
4. No more than one building containing a septic system sanitary sewer may be constructed
on each lot.
15.4.16.070 Foundation Drains
All geo-technical studies shall include a recommendation on foundation drains. If a foundation drain is
recommended, a storm drain system with laterals to each foundation drain shall be installed. If the geotechnical
study does not recommend foundation drains for projects with Group 2, 3, and 4 soils, a review
of the report by a geo-technical engineer hired by the City shall take place. The cost of the review shall
be borne by the developer. If the reviewing engineer recommends foundation drains, they shall be
required. When required, the foundation drain system shall be placed around concrete or masonry
foundations that retain earth and enclose habitable or usable spaces located below grade.
(Ord. No. 16-17; Amended 06/20/2017)
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 114/146
15.4.16.080 Water Transfer
Each developer of a subdivision shall transfer to the City the quantity and type of water rights as
determined and established from time to time by resolution of the City Council. The purpose of the
section is to assure the City has an adequate water supply to provide water to the development, or to
replace water which is provided to the development. Water is accepted when it is delivered to the City
accompanied with a change application signed by all necessary parties, except for Strawberry Water,
which requires a water dedication agreement executed by the owner rather than a change application.
The amount of acre feet of water available per share is based on an 80% precipitation year.
(Ord. No. 17-18; Amended 08/07/2018)
(Ord. No. 20-18, Amended 11/20/2018)
15.4.16.085 Street Improvements
A. General. The developer or subdivider shall dedicate to the City and construct all improvements
shown in the street cross-sections in the Construction Standards, together with such other
infrastructure improvements required for the development as specified by the Council in
accordance with the City Construction Standards and/or other policies adopted by the City. The
design and all street work shall be done as directed and under the supervision of the City
Engineer or his/her designee.
B. Cul-de-sacs. The maximum length of a cul-de-sac is 400 feet measured from the nearest rightof-
way line of the adjoining street to the center of the cul-de-sac, and the minimum radius of the
cul-de-sac is 62 feet at the property line.
C. Curbs, Gutters, and Sidewalks. Curbs, gutters, and sidewalks shall be built along all public
streets according to the Construction Standards. All curbs, gutters, and sidewalks shall connect
to existing curbs, gutters, and sidewalks within a reasonable area as determined by the City
Engineer or his/her designee.
D. Partial-Streets Widths. In certain conditions, and when special approval is given, partial road
widths may be allowed. A partial road width shall include half the road plus 10 feet. The road
shall also include a three (3) foot shoulder along the unfinished portion of the street with a
minimum two (2) percent slope away from the edge of pavement. A cut or fill beyond the
shoulder shall have a maximum slope of 3H:1V. In the appropriate asphalt taper. All City
improvements must be made in dedicated City right-of-way or public utility easements. “No
Parking” signs shall be installed on the opposite side of the road from the development.
E. Turn-arounds. Temporary turn-arounds are to be provided on all streets which extend more
than one (1) lot from an intersection. These are to be recorded as easements. These easements
may be abandoned when a permanent street is extended and dedicated. They shall be 96 feet in
diameter and consist of a minimum of eight (8) inches of compacted road base. If a temporary
turnaround is located along the frontage of a subdivided lot, the roadway including asphalt, curb,
and gutter and sidewalk shall be improved.
F. Grades. The maximum grade allowed for any City street is eight (8) percent unless otherwise
approved by the City Public Works Director. In no case shall grades greater than 12% be
allowed. The minimum grade allowed for any City street is zero-point forty-five (0.45) percent.
The City Engineer or his/her designee may allow a minimum grade of zero-point thirty-five (0.35)
percent if the roadway has incorporated Low Impact Development (LID) systems. The maximum
grade allowed for any private driveway is 12%.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 115/146
G. Pedestrian Connections. Pedestrian connections may be required in situations where the DRC
finds that the design creates an impediment for pedestrian travel within a development or
neighborhood. Particular attention will be paid to providing pedestrian access to public spaces
such as schools and parks. Pedestrian access corridors will be 12 feet in width or wider.
Sidewalks may be required on non-residential sites to connect buildings with sidewalks in public
streets, to connect one site with adjacent sites or to provide a connection between two public
streets.
H. Two Points of Access. A maximum of 35 units shall be allowed with a permanent single access
street. A maximum of 50 units shall be allowed with a temporary single access if there are
provisions to provide a secondary access at a future date. All secondary access roads shall be
paved according to the Construction Standards.
I. Local Street Connections. Where parallel or nearly parallel streets are 600 feet or longer, a
local street connection between those two (2) streets shall be required, unless this requirement is
expressly waived by the DRC.
(Ord. No. 14-05, Amended 11/15/2005)
(Ord. No. 14-12, Amended 09/18/2012)
(Ord. No. 04-14, Amended 04/01/2014)
(Ord. No. 29-17, Amended 12/12/2017)
15.4.16.090 Time Limitation For Completion
A. All improvements listed in the Chapter must be completed within one (1) year from the date of
recordation, unless the City Engineer requires an earlier completion date. An extension for
completion of improvements may be granted by the City Council for up to an additional one (1)
year. A request for an extension must be submitted to the City Council, in writing, explaining the
reasons for the requested extension.
B. The City Engineer may require certain of the improvements to be completed prior to the one (1)
year period. The City Engineer shall have the discretion to designate what improvements shall be
completed and within what time frame. 10 days after written notice of the failure to complete
improvements is given, the City may proceed to have the improvements completed and may
execute upon the security posted in order to pay for the same.
(Ord. No. 15-14, Amended 10/07/2014)
15.4.16.100 Conflict Of Interest
No employee or agent of the City shall work for or be employed by any contractor or subdivider for the
purpose of installing any plumbing or sewer fixture, pipes or connections, or for the purpose of installing
or supervising the installation of any curb, gutter, street or sidewalk, or for the purpose of surveying any
portion of the subdivision or proposed subdivision, or for the purpose of installing or supervising the
installation of any electrical wiring, connections, apparatus or fixture, provided that this section shall not
apply to independent engineering contractors employed by the City.
15.4.16.110 Security For Improvements Required
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 116/146
The owners and/or developers of property shall deposit security with the City to guarantee proper
installation of all required improvements in accordance with the plans, specifications, time limitations,
and conditions relating thereto as meets with the approval of the Council or such personnel as the
Council shall designate. A “Subdivision Bond Agreement for Improvements” shall be executed by the
parties in a standard form provided by the City. The Public Works Director is authorized to sign the
agreement on behalf of the City. The amount of the security shall be 110% of the City’s estimated costs
of the improvements. Security shall be in form of cash in the minimum amount of 10% of the City’s bond
amount. The balance of the security shall be in the form of cash, an irrevocable letter of credit or an
escrow bond.
Irrevocable letters of credit or escrow bonds shall be executed by financial institutions acceptable to the
City and authorized to conduct business in the State of Utah, and must be in the form approved by the
City. The bond or letter of credit, as required by this section, must be posted prior to recording of the
plat. Upon completion, inspection, approval, and acceptance of the improvements, the security, less ten
percent (10%), shall be released to the developer. Ten percent (10%) of the security amount shall be
held for a period of one year following final inspection and acceptance to warrant improvements for this
time period.
The ten percent (10%) retained for the warranty period shall be in cash. The cash amount may be
released one year after installation, final inspection, and acceptance by City, including any punch list
items, if no repairs or replacement are required to the infrastructure installed. If any repairs or
replacement are required, the entire ten percent (10%) amount retained for the warranty shall continue
to be retained until all items have been replaced and repaired and a one-year item on the replaced or
repaired items has elapsed.
(Ord. No. 09-13, Amended 06/18/2013)
(Ord. No. 04-14, Amended 04/01/2014)
(Ord. No. 20-18, Amended 11/20/2018)
15.4.16.120 Off Street Parking
A. Purpose: To provide adequate, but not excessive, parking to meet the needs of residents,
employees, and business patrons, in a manner this is functional, safe, and aesthetically pleasing.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 117/146
B. General Requirements:
1. Off-street parking is not required for permitted uses in the Downtown Commercial (C-D)
district, except for residential uses, which must meet the requirements that are otherwise
prescribed in subparagraph C.
2. Each parking space shall be at least nine (9) feet wide and 18 feet deep (See parking
design standards in the Construction and Development Standards for details on aisle
widths, maneuvering areas, and fire lanes).
3. Tandem parking (front to rear) shall not be permitted.
4. All parking spaces and driveway areas serving such parking spaces shall be surfaced
with concrete, asphalt, or paving blocks except that portions of driveway areas located
farther than 200 feet from a public road and which service a single residence dwelling in
the R-R or A-E zoning districts may be constructed and surfaced to an all-weather
standard as approved by the City Engineer. Such surfacing may include gravel, slag, or
similar materials.
5. Required parking shall be provided on-site or on contiguous lots.
6. Backing and maneuvering areas shall be provided on-site for all uses other than singlefamily,
twin homes, and duplexes.
7. For the purpose of identifying required parking, square feet shall mean the gross floor
area of the building.
8. No part of any vehicle may overhang onto a public sidewalk or within five (5) feet of a
street curb where no sidewalk exists.
9. All parked vehicles must comply with the City’s clear vision area requirements.
10. Parking of commercial vehicles in residential districts is limited to one (1) commercial
vehicle with a one-ton chassis, having a capacity of not more than 10,000 pounds’ gross
vehicle weight rating (GVWR).
11. Landscaping and screening of parking lots shall be in accordance with the requirements
of §15.4.16.130, Landscaping, Buffering, Walls, and Fences.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 118/146
C. Parking Requirements by Use:
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 119/146
USE MINIMUM # OF SPACES
Auditorium, Stadium, Public Assembly,
Private Clubs, Health Clubs, Theaters 1:100 sq. ft. or 1:5 seats
Auto Repair 1:100 sq. ft.
Automobile Service Station 1:200 sq. ft.
Banks, Financial Institutions 1:250 sq. ft.
Barber Shop or Beauty Shop 1:100 sq. ft.
Churches 1:5 seats or 90 lineal inches per pew
Child Care Center 1:employee, plus 1:10 children
Home Furnishings, Major Appliances 1:500 sq. ft.
Hospitals 1:bed
Lube and Tire Centers 1:300 sq. ft.
Manufacturing/Assembly/
Wholesale/Warehouse 1:employee on the highest shift
Mixed Uses or Unlisted Uses To be determined by Community Development
Director
Motels/Hotels
Restaurants
Banquet/Meeting Rooms
1:room
1:200 sq. ft.
1:200 sq. ft.
Office:
General/Professional
Medical/Dental
1:300 sq. ft.
1:200 sq. ft.
Indoor Recreation Facility:
Amusement Center/Arcades
Bowling Alley
1:100 sq. ft.
4:lane
Outdoor Recreation Facility:
Golf Course
Miniature Golf Course
Batting Cages
Water Park, Theme Parks
6:hole
2:hole
1:cage
To be determined by Planning Director
Residential Single-family
A garage with space for at least one vehicle
and additional space so that a minimum of two
parking spaces per unit are provided.
Residential Multi-family
A garage with space for at least one vehicle
and additional space so that a minimum of two
parking spaces per unit are provided.
In addition, one guest parking space is
required for every three dwelling units.
Restaurant – freestanding
Restaurant – associated with another use
(Motel/Hotel, School, Recreation Facility or
similar)
1:100 sq. ft.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 120/146
Retail/Shopping Center (including up to 10%
restaurant, health club, beauty shops;
additional percentages calculated at rate for
each use)
1:250 sq. ft.
Retirement/Senior Housing/Nursing Home 1:employee on highest shift plus
0.4:unit
Schools:
Elementary
Middle or Junior High
High School
College
Vocational/Technical
2:classroom
3:classroom
7:classroom
10:classroom
1:2 students
Storage Building/Space 0.5 per 1,000 sq. ft. of storage space
(Ord. No. 04-14, Amended 04/01/2014)
(Ord. No. 11-15, Amended 06/16/2015)
(Ord. No. 14-16, Amended 09/20/2016)
(Ord. No. 16-17; Amended 06/20/2017)
15.4.16.130 Landscaping, Buffering Walls, And Fences
A. Purpose: The purpose of these requirements is to enhance, conserve, and stabilize property
values by encouraging pleasant and attractive surroundings and to provide proper separations
between uses. Landscaping should also contribute to the reduction of heat and glare through the
proper placement of plants and trees.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 121/146
B. Residential Uses:
1. Multi-family Uses:
a. Minimum of 25% on-site landscaping as a percentage of total site area, except in
the R-5 Zone where 20% on-site landscaping is required.
b. Parking lots shall include planter areas within the parking lot, with a minimum of
108 square feet of planter area for every 10 parking spaces. Required planter
areas shall be individual islands of landscaping and shall be at least six (6) feet
wide. Required planter areas shall include Shade Trees, as identified on the City’s
approved list of Shade Trees, with a maximum spacing of 30 feet.
c. Minimum of 15-foot-wide planter area adjacent to all public streets, which shall
include trees with a maximum spacing of 30 feet. The planter area may be
partially or completely within the street right-of-way area. The specific trees used
shall be selected from the City’s approved Shade Tree list. On streets included in
the Shade Tree Master Plan, the trees selected shall include the mix of trees as
prescribed by the Plan. Shade trees must be planted within 30 feet of the public
street curb; wherever possible, 50% of the required Shade Trees must be planted
in the park strip.
d. Minimum of 10-foot-wide planter area and six (6) foot high decorative block wall,
where any multi-family use abuts a single-family residential use or district. The
planter area shall include trees with a maximum spacing of 30 feet.
e. The total number of required trees and shrubs for every 1,000 square feet of
required landscaping shall equal two (2) trees and 10 shrubs.
f. In cases where it is determined that utilizing tree species found in the approved
Shad Tree List would adversely impact utility lines, the use of substitute tree
species can be approved by the Community Development Director.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 122/146
2. Single-Family and Twin Home Uses:
a. All single-family residential lots shall have the front yard, side-street yards for
corner lots and park strips landscaped within one (1) year of receiving a certificate
of occupancy. Interior side and back yards must be landscaped within two (2)
years of receiving a certificate of occupancy.
b. Required landscaping shall be comprised of live turf grass with a sprinkler
(irrigation) system, xeriscape improvements, other manicured vegetative
groundcover or a combination of them all.
c. All portions of a lot that are not improved with impervious materials must be
landscaped within the above described timelines. Weeds do not qualify as
required landscaping.
d. No more than 70% of a lot shall be surfaced with impervious materials. No more
than 80% of the front and side-street setback areas can be improved with
impervious surfaces.
e. In order to ensure landscaping requirements are met, Spanish Fork City shall
require applicants to provide a deposit with the construction of new homes. The
deposit amount shall be determined in the City budget and will be returned to the
property owner when the required front and side-street yard landscaping has been
installed. In the event that the required landscaping has not been installed within
four (4) years after the certificate of occupancy has been issued, the deposit will
be forfeited to the City.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 123/146
C. Professional Office and Non-residential or Non-commercial Uses:
1. Minimum of 20% on-site landscaping as a percentage of total site area.
2. Parking lots shall include planter areas within the parking lot, with a minimum of 108
square feet of planter area for every 10 parking spaces. Required planter areas shall be
individual islands of landscaping and shall be at least six (6) feet wide. Required planter
areas shall include Shade Trees, as identified on the City’s approved list of Shade Trees,
with a maximum spacing of 30 feet.
3. Minimum of 15-foot-wide planter area adjacent to all public streets, which shall include
trees with a maximum spacing of 30 feet. The planter area may be partially or completely
within the street right-of-way area. The specific trees used shall be selected from the
City’s approved Shade Tree list. On streets included in the Shade Tree Master Plan, the
trees selected shall include the mix of trees as prescribed by the Plan. Shade Trees must
be planted within 30 feet of the public street curb; wherever possible, 50% of the required
Shade Trees must be planted in the park strip.
4. Minimum of 10-foot-wide planter area where the site abuts a residential use or district.
The planter area shall include trees with a maximum spacing of 30 feet. A six (6) foot Wall
shall be constructed where the site abuts a residential district. Where the use of the
adjacent property is residential but zoned Commercial Office, Commercial 1, Commercial
2, Commercial Downtown, Urban Village Commercial, Business Park or Shopping Center,
a solid Fence (not chain link with slats or similar) may be constructed in place of the wall.
5. The total number of required trees and shrubs for every 1,000 square feet of required
landscaping shall equal two (2) trees and 10 shrubs.
6. In cases where it is determined that utilizing tree species found in the approved Shade
Tree List would adversely impact utility lines, the use of substitute tree species can be
approved by the Community Development Director.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 124/146
D. Commercial Uses:
1. Minimum of 15% on-site landscaping as a percentage of total site area.
2. Parking lots shall include planter areas within the parking lot, with a minimum of 108
square feet of planter area for every 10 parking spaces. Required planter areas shall be
individual islands of landscaping and shall be at least six (6) feet wide. Required planter
areas shall include Shade Trees, as identified on the City’s approved list of Shade Trees,
with a maximum spacing of 30 feet.
3. Minimum of 15-foot-wide planter area adjacent to all public streets, which shall include
one Shade Tree for each 30 feet of frontage along all public streets. The specific trees
used shall be selected from the City’s approved Shade Tree list. On streets included in
the Shade Tree Master Plan, the trees selected shall include the mix of trees as
prescribed by the Plan. Shade Trees must be planted within 30 feet of the public street
curb; wherever possible, 50% of the required Shade Trees must be planted in the park
strip.
4. Minimum of 10-foot-wide planter area where the site abuts a residential use or district.
The planter area shall include trees with a maximum spacing of 30 feet. A six (6) foot high
Wall shall be constructed where the site abuts a residential district. Where the use of the
adjacent property is residential but zoned Commercial Office, Commercial 1, Commercial
2, Commercial Downtown, Urban Village Commercial, Business Park or Shopping Center,
a solid Fence (not chain link with slats or similar) may be constructed in place of the Wall.
5. The total number of required trees and shrubs for every 1,000 square feet of required
landscaping shall equal three (3) trees and 20 shrubs.
6. In cases where it is determined that utilizing tree species found in the approved Shade
Tree List would adversely impact utility lines, the use of substitute tree species can be
approved by the Community Development Director.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 125/146
E. Industrial Uses:
1. Minimum of 10% on-site landscaping as a percentage of total site area.
2. Parking lots shall include planter areas within the parking lot, with a minimum of 108
square feet of planter area for every 10 parking spaces. Required planter areas shall be
individual islands of landscaping and shall be at least six (6) feet wide. Required planter
areas shall include Shade Trees, as identified on the City’s approved list of Shade Trees,
with a maximum spacing of 30 feet. The planter area may be partially or completely within
the street right-of-way area.
3. Minimum of 15-foot-wide planter area adjacent to all public streets, which shall include
trees with a maximum spacing of 30 feet. The specific trees used shall be selected from
the City’s approved Shade Tree list. On streets included in the Shade Tree Master Plan,
the trees selected shall include the mix of trees as prescribed by the Plan. Shade Trees
must be planted within 30 feet of the public street curb; wherever possible, 50% of the
required Shade Trees must be planted in the park strip.
4. Minimum of 10-foot-wide planter area and six (6) foot high Wall where the site abuts a
residential use or district. The planter area shall include trees with a maximum spacing of
30 feet.
5. All other landscaped areas shall include at least one (1) Shade Tree and 10 shrubs for
each 1,000 square feet of landscaped areas. Natural vegetation may be included if
materials are appropriate for the setting and location. The total number of required trees
and shrubs for each 1,000 square feet of required landscaping shall equal one (1) Shade
Tree and 1) shrubs; and
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 126/146
6. In cases where it is determined that utilizing tree species found in the approved Shade
Tree List would adversely impact utility lines, the use of substitute tree species can be
approved by the Community Development Director.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 127/146
Spanish Fork City Shade Tree List
Common Name Botanical Name
Hedge Maple Acer campestre
Hedge Maple Acer campestre 'Metro Gold'
Hedge Maple Acer campestre 'Queen Elizabeth'
State Street Maple Acer miyabei 'State Street''
Norway Maple Acer platanoides 'Crimson King'
Norway Maple Acer platanoides 'Crimson Sentry'
Norway Maple Acer platanoides 'Emerald Queen'
Horsechestnut Aescules hippocastanum
Ohio Buckeye Aesculeus glabra
Hornbeam Carpinus betulus 'Emerald Avenue'
Hornbeam Carpinus betulus 'Fastigiata'
Hornbeam Carpinus betulus 'Frans Fontaine'
Catalpa Catalpa speciosa
Common Hackberry Celtis occidentalis
Eastern Redbud Cercis canadensis
Yellow Wood Cladrastis kentukea (lutea)
Washington Hawthorn Crataegus phaenopyrum
European Beach Fagus sylvatica
Tricolor Beech Fagus sylvatica 'Tricolor'
Ginko or Maindenhair Tree Ginko biloba
Skyline Honeylocust Gleditsia triacanthos var. inermis ‘Skyline’
Imperial Honeylocust Gleditsia triacanthos var. inermis 'Imperial'
Shademaster Honeylocust Gleditsia triacanthos var. inermis
'Shademaster'
Kentucky Coffeetree Gymnocladus dioicus
Sweetgum Liquidambar styraciflua
Tuliptree Liriodendron tulipifera
Sycamore Platanus occidentalis
London Planetree Platanus x acerfolia 'Bloodgood'
Chokecherry Prunus virginiana 'Canada Red'
Chanticleer Pear Pyrus calleryana 'Chanticleer' 'Select',
'Cleveland Select'
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 128/146
Swamp White Oak Quercus bicolor
Bur Oak Quercus macrocarpa
Oak, Chinkapin Quercus muehlenbergii
English Oak Quercus robur 'Fastigiata'
Bald Cypress Taxodium distichum
American Linden Tilia americana
Linden Tilia americana 'Redmond'
Little Leaf Linden Corinthian Tilia cordata 'Corinthian'
Little Leaf Linden Tilia cordata 'Greenspire'
Silver Linden Tilia tomentosa
Silver Linden Tilia tomentosa 'Sterling Silver'
Crimean Linden Tilia x euchlora
Frontier Elm Ulmus 'Frontier'
Lacebark or Chinese Elm Ulmus parvifolia
Prospector Elm Ulmus wilsoniana 'Prospector'
Accolade Elm Ulmus x 'Accolade'
Triumph Elm Ulmus x 'Triumph'
Green Vase Zelkova Zelkova serrata 'Green Vase'
Musashino Zelkova Zelkova serrata 'Musashino'
Village Green Zelkova Zelkova serrata 'Village Green'
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 129/146
F. Standards and Maintenance:
1. All deciduous trees shall have a minimum of two (2) inch caliper trunk. All evergreen trees
shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in height. Newly planted trees shall be tagged for
species identification. The tags must remain on the trees until the site has been inspected
and the improvements approved by the City.
2. All shrubs shall be a minimum of one (1) gallon size.
3. Planting areas shall be separated from parking areas and driveways by a six (6) inch
concrete curb.
4. Landscaped areas shall be maintained with an automatic sprinkler system.
5. Landscaped areas shall be maintained in a neat, clean, and orderly condition. This in
meant to include proper pruning, lawn mowing, weeding, removing of litter, fertilizing,
replacing of dead plants, and regular watering of all landscaped areas.
6. The Community Development Director may waive, at their discretion, the size
requirements for required landscaping provided that the developer provides financial
assurance that the landscaping will survive or be replaced after the first two growing
seasons. Trees and bushes shall be replaced after the first two (2) growing seasons if
they die or fail to reach the minimum required size by October 15 of the second year after
the landscaping was installed and inspected by the City.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 130/146
G. General Fencing Requirements:
1. The maximum height of a fence is six (6) feet in all zoning districts; fence pillars are not to
exceed six and one-half (6 1/2) feet in height. The Council may waive the height
requirement at its sole discretion.
2. The maximum height of a solid fence within the front yard setback area is three (3) feet.
Substantially open fences such as chain link, or wrought iron may be four (4) feet high.
a. A residential lot with over two hundred (200) feet of frontage and that is a
minimum of twenty thousand (20,000) square fee in areas, may obtain permission
from the Community Development Director to locate a solid six (6) foot tall fence
within a front yard. The fence must maintain a minimum setback of ten (10) feet
from the front property line.
(1) A fence located within the front yard setback shall not be located in front of
the residence, but must be to the sides of the residence. Clear vision
requirements shall still apply.
(2) No more than fifty (50) percent of the lot frontage shall have said fencing
within the front yard setback.
(3) The area between said fencing and the property line shall be landscaped
within one (1) year of installing said fencing.
3. Barbed wire fencing is allowed in A-E, R-R, I-1 and I-2 districts.
4. Razor wire and other similar type fencing are allowed in C-2, I-1 and I-2 districts when
located above a height of six (6) feet, subject to DRC approval. Additional screening of
any such fence with plant materials may be required.
5. Fences must be built with a minimum setback of three (3) feet around the following
utilities: fire hydrants, water meters (culinary and irrigation), telephone pedestals, power
boxes and cable boxes.
6. A clear vision area is required at each driveway as set forth in §15.4.16.150.
7. A building permit is required for all fences that are taller than three (3) feet. No fee is
charged for fence permits unless the permit is required by the adopted Building Code set
forth in §14.04.010.
8. Corner lots must maintain the clear vision area as set forth in §15.4.16.150.
(Ord. No. 23-10, Amended 11/16/2010)
(Ord. No. 10-14, Amended 05/20/2014)
(Ord. No. 15-15, Amended 09/15/2015)
(Ord. No. 05-16, Amended 04/05/2016)
(Ord. No. 14-16, Amended 09/20/2016)
(Ord. No. 04-17, Amended 02/07/2017)
(Ord. No. 01-17, Amended 01/03/2017)
(Ord. No. 25-17, Amended 10/17/2017)
(Ord. No. 03-18, Amended 02/20/2018)
(Ord. No. 06-19, Amended 04/16/2019)
15.4.16.140 Solid Waste Receptacle Areas
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 131/146
Multi-family dwellings, and non-residential uses shall provide solid waste receptacle areas screened on
three (3) sides with a masonry wall having a height at least one (1) foot above any receptacle or
container. A steel site-obscuring gate at least six (6) feet in height is required. This requirement may be
waived or modified by the DRC when it is determined that a “roll-out” residential style container is
sufficient for the type of operation proposed, or, the screen wall requirement may be waived when solid
waste receptacle areas are sufficiently screened or otherwise located within the project to not be visible
by or adversely impact adjoining properties.
15.4.16.150 Clear Vision Area
A. The clear vision area is formed by extending lines from each curb face to the point that the lines
intersect, measuring back 45 feet along each curb face and connecting those points. Fencing,
planting and other obstacles are restricted within this area as follows:
1. No solid fence shall exceed a height of three (3) feet, measured from the curb. Open
fences such as chain link and wrought iron may be as tall as four (4) feet in the clear
vision area, measured from the curb.
2. Trees in park strips shall be pruned to maintain a clear area below 14 feet in height.
3. Trees on private property must be pruned to maintain a clear area below eight (8) feet in
height.
4. Other site obscuring obstacles of that are three (3) feet or taller may not be placed in the
clear vision area.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 132/146
B. A second clear vision area is also required at each driveway or where the rear of a corner lot
adjoins an interior lot’s driveway. This clear vision area is formed by extending lines from the
point that the driveway or property line intersects the sidewalk, measuring back 20 feet along the
sidewalk and the driveway or property line and connecting those points. The same restrictions for
landscaping, fencing and obstacles apply in this area.
(Ord. No. 05-05, Enacted 06/07/2005)
(Ord. No. 12-08, Amended 09/16/2008)
(Ord. No. 23-10, Amended 11/16/2010)
(Ord. No. 14-12, Amended 09/18/2012)
(Ord. No. 15-13, Amended 09/03/2013)
15.4.16.160 Site Reclamation
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 133/146
Upon redevelopment of sites which have concrete products from prior uses available on site, limited to
old gravel pits or construction dump sites, and the concrete products are of use in constructing new
improvements in the new development, portable rock crushers may be allowed to help prepare the
material that is on-site for reuse in the new development. Crushed material shall neither be exported
from the site, nor shall material be brought to the site from another location to be crushed. The crushing
operation shall only be permitted for a limited and specified duration of time. The crushing operation
shall only operate during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. Appropriate
measures for that site shall be imposed by the Community Development Director to limit the impact of
noise and dust on surrounding land uses.
(Ord. No. 16-14, Enacted 11/18/2014)
15.4.16.170 Hillside Development
A. Slopes. Any land or parcel having a slope greater than 10% shall be deemed to be land having a
"steep slope" within the meaning of this section. Close proximity to a steep slope shall be defined
as the horizontal distance from the slope which is less than or equal to the vertical distance from
the crest of the slope to the toe of the slope. No person shall be permitted to grade, excavate, fill,
or to erect any structure on undisturbed hillside areas that exceed a slope of 30%. Any person
proposing to grade, excavate, fill or to erect any structure on any slope or hillside with a slope
between 10% and 30%, or within close proximity to a slope greater than 10%, shall be required
to submit a site specific geotechnical report. The geotechnical report shall include sufficient
subsurface exploration (soil borings), laboratory testing, and geotechnical engineering analysis,
as outlined in the Construction Standards, to render professional recommendations and opinions
regarding slope stability and required mitigation to protect planned or future construction above
and below the slope(s) from earth deformations and other adverse soil or geologic conditions on
or adjacent to the lot. The City will have that report reviewed by its own geotechnical engineer.
The cost of that review will be borne by the applicant.
Prior to any excavation, cutting, or filling on slopes in excess of 10%, a land disturbance permit
shall be obtained from the City. Prior to issuing the permit, the City will have qualified
professionals review the plans to assure public safety and to take precautions against potential
slides. The type and number of professionals will be determined by the City Engineer on a case
by case basis. The cost of the professional review will be borne by the applicant. In no case will
construction be allowed in, above, below, or laterally within 200 feet of a landslide, debris flow, or
potential debris flow.
Cut and fill slopes shall be constructed to eliminate sharp angles of intersection with the existing
terrain and shall be rounded and contoured as necessary to blend with existing topography to the
maximum extent possible, as determined in the sole discretion of the City Engineer. The City will
not accept the dedication and maintenance of cut and fill slopes except those within the required
street right-of-way. Maintenance of cut and fill slopes outside of street rights-of-way are the
responsibility of the individual property owner. Where a cut or fill slope occurs between two (2)
lots, the slope shall normally be made a part of the downhill lot. Cut and fill slopes shall not be
allowed to disrupt existing drainage channels.
The current version of the Building Code adopted by the Utah Uniform Building Code
Commission regulating excavation and grading shall be complied with.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 134/146
B. Building Sites. Each building lot shall contain a buildable area of not less than 4,000 square feet
with a natural slope that is less than 30%. The buildable area shall have minimum length and
depth dimensions of 50 feet.
No structure, primary or accessory, shall be located within 10 feet of a 30% slope. No slope in
excess of 10% shall be disrupted without first obtaining a land disturbance permit, described in
paragraph A.
An exception to these building site requirements is granted for existing building lots in platted and
recorded subdivisions, provided that each lot, prior to construction, provide the geotechnical
report required in paragraph A, and as described in more detail in the Construction Standards.
C. Drainage. Required storm water runoff collection facilities shall be designed so as to retain storm
water runoff on development sites for a sufficient length of time so as to prevent flooding and
erosion during storm water runoff flow periods. Retainage amounts and times shall mirror
historical amounts and times.
Required storm water runoff collection facilities shall be so designed as to divert surface water
away from natural slopes, cut faces, or sloping surfaces of a fill. French drains are not
acceptable.
Storm water detention or retention facilities should not be placed near the crest of natural or
manmade slopes.
Curb, gutter, and pavement designs shall be such that water on roadways is prevented from
flowing off the roadways.
Natural drainage shall be rip-rapped or otherwise stabilized to the satisfaction of the City
Engineer below drainage and culvert discharge points for a distance sufficient to convey the
discharge without channel erosion.
Waste material from construction, including soil and other solid materials, shall not be deposited
within a natural or manmade drainage course nor within irrigation channels.
Sediment catchment ponds shall be constructed downstream from each development, unless
sediment retention facilities are otherwise provided.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 135/146
D. Vegetation and Revegetation. Every effort shall be made to conserve topsoil which is removed
during construction for later use on areas requiring vegetation or landscaping, e.g., cut and fill
slopes.
Areas not contained within lot boundaries shall be protected with adapted, fire-resistant species
of perennial vegetation cover after all construction is completed. New planting shall be protected
with organic cover.
All disturbed soil surfaces shall be stabilized before final acceptance of the development by the
City. The developer shall be fully responsible for any destruction of native vegetation which is
required to be retained in all areas under the ownership and control of the developer. The
developer shall carry the responsibility for such areas both for the developer’s own employees
and for all subcontractors from the first day of construction until final acceptance of the
development by the City. The developer shall be responsible for replacing such destroyed
vegetation.
Prior to the termination of the development improvements bond, any dead plant materials
required to be installed by the developer shall be replaced and a new bond issued to assure
establishment of the replaced materials.
E. Streets and Driveways. All streets within a hillside area shall be designed to meet the standards
required for streets in all other areas of the City. Street and driveway grades shall not exceed
eight percent (8%), unless authorized by the City Engineer. The City Engineer may not authorize
street or driveway grades in excess of 12%.
F. Fire Protection. Lot size and potential placement of buildings thereon shall be such that
adequate clearance from combustible materials is provided, as determined by the City’s Fire
Marshal.
All easements for firebreaks for safety of built-up areas shall encompass access for firefighting
personnel and equipment and such easements shall be dedicated for this specific purpose by
being recorded with the plat, or by easement if there is no plat.
The inability to provide water pressure at fire hydrants consistent with the standards set by the
Insurance Service Organization for fighting fires shall be justification for denial of a development
request.
(Ord. No. 07-15, Enacted 02/17/2015)
15.4.16.180 Neighborhood Mailboxes
Residential Preliminary Plats are required to identify locations for neighborhood mailboxes, also known
as Neighborhood Delivery Collection Box Units, meeting the following criteria:
A. Neighborhood mailboxes are to contain the same number of collection boxes or units as there
are residential units in the plat.
B. Location of neighborhood mailboxes must be approved by the City after considering factors such
as street design, traffic levels, traffic movements, impact on adjacent properties and convenience
for the neighborhood residents.
C. Neighborhood mailboxes may not be located on collector or arterial roads unless otherwise
approved by the City.
D. Neighborhood mailboxes are to be located at least 200 feet from an intersection.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 136/146
E. Residential units in more than one Final Plat may share a neighborhood mailbox location,
provided that the neighborhood mailboxes are to be installed with the first Final Plat approved
which shares that neighborhood mailbox location and no Certificates of Occupancy will be issued
until there is a neighborhood mailbox available for that residential unit.
F. Neighborhood mailboxes are to be placed in the park strip between the sidewalk and the curb.
G. Neighborhood mailboxes are to be anchored in concrete from the curb to the sidewalk and out 2
feet on either side of the boxes.
H. United States Postal Service regulations for Neighborhood Delivery Collection Box Units must be
followed.
(Ord. No. 03-18, Enacted 02/20/2018)
15.4.20 Flood Damage Prevention
15.4.20.010 Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
15.4.20.020 General Provisions
15.4.20.030 Administration
15.4.20.040 Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction
15.4.20.050 Penalties For Violation
15.4.20.010 Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions, greater floods
can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This ordinance
does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas
will be free from flooding or flood damages. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the
community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
15.4.20.020 General Provisions
A. The ordinance shall apply to all areas with defined flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the
City.
B. The flood hazard areas, for the purposes of this ordinance, are those flood hazard areas in the
City that are identified by the current Federal Emergency Management Agency on Flood
Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Boundary-Floodway Maps (FIRM and FBFM) and any revisions
thereto and any accompanying scientific and engineering Flood Insurance Study Report are
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance.
C. Preliminary Plat approval, Site Plan approval, or a Building Permit shall be required to ensure
conformance with the provisions of this ordinance.
D. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full
compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations.
E. This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants,
or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance and another ordinance, easement, covenant,
or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall
prevail.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 137/146
F. In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, all provisions shall be:
1. Considered as minimum requirements.
2. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body.
3. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes.
G. All properties adjacent to the Spanish Fork River shall dedicate 40 feet of land adjacent to the
River for access and the installation, maintenance, repair, and replacement of roadway access
for the following public purposes:
1. Access to the Spanish Fork River.
2. The right to do necessary work in and adjacent to the Spanish Fork River to preserve the
river corridor buffer in an effort to reduce erosion and potential future flooding.
3. The right to install and maintain armor along the Spanish Fork River bank.
4. The right to maintain and repair the river bank and bed, and monitor river flow capacities.
5. The right to survey the area as needed for installation of armor and for periodic monitoring
of the River.
6. The right to construct a trail for public access and use.
The City may require additional land be dedicated to provide an access corridor from developed
areas to the River.
(Ord. No. 14-12, Amended 09/18/2012) (Ord. No. 04-14, Amended 04/01/2014)
15.4.20.030 Administration
A. The Spanish Fork City Engineer or his/her appointee is hereby appointed the Floodplain
Administrator, with the City Surveyor appointed as the Assistant Floodplain Administrator, to
administer and implement the provisions of this ordinance and other appropriate sections of 44
CFR (National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 138/146
B. The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to
the following:
1. Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this
ordinance.
2. Review permit application to determine whether proposed building site, including the
placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding from both
surface and groundwater as well as from flood-related erosion.
3. Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of
this ordinance.
4. Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary City permits have
been obtained.
5. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of
special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a
mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Floodplain Administrator shall make the
necessary interpretation.
6. Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the State Engineer’s office prior to
any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to
FEMA.
7. Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any
watercourse is maintained.
8. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with §030(B) the
Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation data and floodway data available from a Federal, State or other source, in order
to administer the provisions of §050.
9. When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the Floodplain Administrator must
require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development
(including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on City's FIRM, unless it is
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined
with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the City.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 139/146
C. Application for a Preliminary Plat, Site Plan, or Building Permit within a special floodplain hazard
area shall be presented to the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may
include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions,
and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, and the
construction of fences, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood
hazard and areas of special erosion hazard. Additionally, the following information is required:
1. Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
new and substantially improved structures.
2. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be flood
proofed.
3. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential
flood proofed structure shall meet the flood proofing criteria of §050(B)(2).
4. Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
5. A bank stability/erosion hazard analysis performed by a licensed professional engineer,
including site photographs, that evaluates potential flood-related erosion hazards and
identifies appropriate erosion hazard mitigation measures to protect any structural
improvements proposed in the area of special erosion hazard.
6. A geotechnical report that includes: at least one (1) measurement of the ambient
groundwater surface elevation on the site of proposed development collected between
May 1 and May 31 (unless otherwise approved by the Floodplain Administrator); an
engineer’s estimate of the maximum anticipated groundwater elevation anticipated on the
site during periods of flooding on the Spanish Fork River, referencing nearby base flood
elevations on the current FIRM and all other available sources; and an engineer’s
recommendation with regard to the lowest elevation(s) that the lowest floor(s) (including
basement) of all new and substantially improved structures should be constructed to be
protected from flooding from groundwater and groundwater that could be influenced by
surface water during periods of flooding.
7. A grading permit shall be obtained from the Floodplain Administrator before any
excavation or fill work that could modify the flood hazards defined on the community’s
FIRM is completed in the area of special erosion hazard area.
8. Maintain record of all such information in accordance with §040(B)(1).
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 140/146
D. Approval or denial of a Preliminary Plat, Site Plan, or any permit required by City shall be based
on all of the provisions of this ordinance and the following relevant factors:
1. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
2. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood and/or erosion damage
and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
3. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others.
4. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency
vehicles.
5. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including
maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems.
6. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood
waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site.
7. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable.
8. The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the
proposed use.
9. The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive General Plan for that area.
(Ord. No. 23-10, Amended 11/16/2010)
15.4.20.040 Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction
A. General Standards.
1. In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new
construction or substantial improvements:
a. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified)
and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the
structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects
of buoyancy.
b. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods
and practices that minimize flood damage.
c. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with
materials resistant to flood damage.
d. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other
service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from
entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
e. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
f. All new construction shall be required to connect to City’s sanitary sewer system.
g. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 141/146
h. No solid walls, solid fences, or other structures that could disrupt flowing water in
an area of special flood hazard shall be constructed in a position or direction
contrary to the direction of flowing water.
2. In all areas of special erosion hazards the following provisions are required for all new
construction or substantial improvements:
a. No new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed or
constructed until a licensed professional engineer certifies that no erosion hazard
exists on the reach of open channel adjacent to or upstream from the proposed
site for a distance of at least 150 feet or until any potential erosion hazard is
mitigated by measures designed by a registered professional engineer and
accepted by the Floodplain Administrator.
b. All permanent structures shall be set back a minimum of 60 feet from the top of
bank of the nearest open channel that conveys runoff water.
c. No excavation or fill that could modify the flood hazards defined on the FIRM shall
be performed without applying for and receiving a grading permit from the
Floodplain Administrator.
d. No solid walls, solid fences, or other structures that could disrupt flowing water in
an area of special erosion hazard shall be constructed in a position or direction
contrary to the direction of flowing water.
3. In all areas of special flood hazard, all areas of special erosion hazard, and areas with
potentially high groundwater levels, the following provisions are required for all new
construction or substantial improvements:
a. As part of the building or development permit process, a geotechnical report shall
be completed that includes a licensed professional engineer’s recommendation
with regard to the lowest elevation(s) that the lowest floor(s) (including basement)
of all new and substantially improved structures should be constructed to be
protected from flooding from groundwater and groundwater that could be
influenced by surface water during periods of flooding, in accordance with §040(C)
(6).
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 142/146
B. Specific Standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has
been provided as set forth in (I) §030(B); (ii) §040(B)(8); or (iii) §050((C)(3), the following
provisions are required:
1. Residential Construction - new construction or substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated a minimum of two feet
above the base flood elevation. A licensed professional engineer or land surveyor shall
submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this subsection
as proposed in §040(C)(1), is satisfied.
2. Nonresidential Construction - new construction or substantial improvements of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated a minimum of two feet above the base flood level or
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base
flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or
architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the
construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of
such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to
which such structures are flood proofed shall be maintained by the Floodplain
Administrator.
3. Enclosures - new construction or substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas
below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage in an area other than a basement, and which are subject to flooding shall be
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing
for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a licensed professional engineer or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
a. A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square
inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
b. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
c. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or
devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 143/146
4. Manufactured Homes.
a. Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on a community's
FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize
flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must
be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or
frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable State
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
b. Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved on a
permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is
elevated a minimum of two feet above the base flood elevation and be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement.
c. Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in
an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with Zones A1-30, AH and AE
on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of paragraph four
(4) of this section be elevated so that either:
(1) The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least two (2) feet above
the base flood elevation.
(2) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other
foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36
inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement.
5. Recreational vehicles, trailers, or motor homes placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH,
and AE on the community's FIRM must meet one of the following criteria:
a. Be on the site for fewer than 30 consecutive days.
b. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use.
c. Meet the permit requirements of §040(C)(1), and the elevation and anchoring
requirements for "manufactured homes" in paragraph four (4) of this section. A
recreational vehicle, trailer, or motor home is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 144/146
C. Standards for Subdivision Proposals.
1. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with this ordinance.
2. All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet the Development Permit
requirements of §030, §040and the provisions of §050 of this ordinance.
3. Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other
proposed development (including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions) greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser, if not
otherwise provided pursuant to §030(B), or §040(B)(8) of this ordinance.
4. All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards
form both surface water and groundwater.
5. All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 145/146
D. Standards for Areas of Shallow Flooding.
1. Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in §030(B), are areas
designated as shallow flooding (AO and AH Zones). These areas have special flood
hazards associated with base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly
defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where
velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow;
therefore, the following provisions apply:
a. All new construction or substantial improvements of residential structures shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least two (2) feet above the
base flood level.
b. All new construction or substantial improvements of non-residential structures:
(1) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least two (2) feet
above the base flood level.
(2) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that
below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy.
c. A licensed professional engineer shall submit a certification to the Floodplain
Administrator that the standards of this Section, as proposed in §040(C)(5) and
§040(C)(6), are satisfied.
d. Require within Zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on
sloping ground, to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures.
2. City’s FIRM may also identify areas of shallow flooding hazards with an average depth
less than on (1) foot deep (shaded Zone X), as established in §030(B). These areas may
be between the flood hazard boundaries defined for the 1 - and 0.2-percent-chanceannual-
flood or associated with base flood depths less than one (1) foot where a clearly
defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where
velocity may be evident. Such flooding is generally characterized by sheet flow; therefore,
the following provisions apply:
a. All new construction or substantial improvements of residential and non-residential
structures.
(1) All new construction or substantial improvements have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated above the estimated depth of the base flood
and above the highest groundwater level that is anticipated to occur during
periods of flooding.
(2) Require within shaded X Zones positive ground slopes away from
structures and adequate drainage paths around structures on sloping
ground to guide flood water around and away from proposed structures.
(3) A registered professional engineer shall submit certification to the
Floodplain Administrator that the standards of this Section, as proposed in
§040(C)(5) and §040(C)(6) are satisfied.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://spanishfork.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=ordinances&name=15_LAND_USE 146/146
E. Floodways. Floodways (located within areas of special flood hazard established in §030(B)) are
areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the
velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the
following provisions shall apply:
1. Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements
and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been
demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any
increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood
discharge.
2. If §050(A)(7) above is satisfied, all new construction or substantial improvements shall
comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Article 5.
F. Standards for Areas of Special Erosion Hazard. In order to prevent damage to structures in areas
subject to special erosion hazards, the following provisions shall apply:
1. No structural development will be allowed to be constructed in an area of special erosion
hazard unless the potential erosion hazards have been evaluated and mitigated and
buildings meet minimum setback requirements in accordance with §050(A)(2).
2. No excavation or fill that could modify flood hazard boundaries defined on the FIRM shall
be performed in areas of special erosion hazard without a grading permit, in accordance
with §050(C)(7).
3. No solid walls, solid fences, or other structures that could disrupt flowing water in an area
of special flood hazard or special erosion hazard shall be constructed in a position or
direction contrary to the direction of flowing water to create additional flooding and erosion
hazards.
15.4.20.050 Penalties For Violation
A. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered
without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations.
B. Violation of the provisions of this ordinance by failure to comply with any of its requirements
(including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a class B misdemeanor. In addition to any fine, a violator shall pay all costs and
expenses involved in the case.
C. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 07-09, Enacted 02/20/2009)