AMENDED TOOELE CITY CHARTER
(Effective January 2, 2006)
WHEREAS, Article XI, §5 of the Utah Constitution sets forth a process by which Utah
municipalities can frame, propose, and enact a Charter for self-governance; and
WHEREAS, after receiving the March 22, 1965, recommendation of the Charter
Commission, the voters of Tooele City Corporation approved the Tooele City Charter at a
special election held on July 13, 1965; and
WHEREAS, in the November 1975 regular municipal election, the voters of Tooele City
Corporation approved several amendments to the Tooele City Charter; and
WHEREAS, the voters of Tooele City Corporation have determined that the charter
provisions of the Utah Constitution provide unique opportunities for self-governance which are
not enjoyed by municipalities without charters, and they further have determined that the Tooele
City Charter is a unique document which is worthy of preservation, in that it allows for better
and more-efficient government; and
WHEREAS, the voters of Tooele City Corporation have determined that the existing,
amended Tooele City Charter, while unique and special, is in need of further amendment and
clarification;
NOW, THEREFORE, the voters of Tooele City Corporation, in accordance with the
requirements of law, do hereby enact this Amended Tooele City Charter, which Amended
Tooele City Charter shall become effective at 12:01 a.m. on Monday, January 2, 2006.
ARTICLE 1.
POWERS OF THE CITY
Section 1-01. Grant of Powers. Tooele City Corporation (the “City”) shall have and
possess all rights, powers and privileges relating to municipal affairs as are derived from the
people and as are allowed by law, and may propose, enact, adopt and enforce within its
jurisdictional limits such regulations, not in conflict with the general law, that it deems necessary
to promote the general health, welfare and protection of its citizens, subject only to the limits set
forth in the Constitution of the State of Utah, all of which rights, powers and privileges it may
exercise as fully and completely and as if they were specifically enumerated in this Charter.
Section 1-02. Construction. The rights, powers and privileges of the City granted
herein shall be liberally construed in favor of the City, and the enumeration or specific mention
of certain rights, powers, and privileges in this Charter shall not be interpreted as limiting the
exercise of other rights, powers or privileges not so enumerated or mentioned.
Section 1-03. Intergovernmental Relations. The City may cooperate with, and may
enter into written agreements with, other units of local government, or with the State of Utah, or
with the United States of America, or with any agencies or subdivisions thereof, in
accomplishing projects of common interest to the City and one or more of the other
governmental units, to the extent and in accordance with the Constitution and laws of the United
States and of the State of Utah.
ARTICLE 2.
MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT
Section 2-01. Vesting of Powers of Municipal Government. All rights, powers and
privileges of the municipal government of the City shall be vested in a Mayor and in a City
Council (the “Council”) of five members, to be elected at large on a non-partisan ballot as
provided elsewhere in this Charter.
Section 2-02. Legislative and Executive Powers. The Council shall be the Legislative
Body of the City, shall possess all legislative powers of the municipal government of the City,
shall propose and adopt such ordinances and resolutions as it deems appropriate, shall budget
and appropriate all funds, and shall perform all rights, powers, privileges and duties as may be
required of them by this Charter or the laws of the State of Utah. The Council, or any member
thereof, also is empowered to review, examine and comment upon administrative or executive
decisions. The Council, or any member thereof, may at any time examine and inspect the books,
records, papers and documents of the City, or of any officer or agent employed by the City,
except where such examination or inspection is prohibited by federal or state law.
The Mayor shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the City, shall see that all laws,
ordinances and resolutions are faithfully executed, and shall, subject to the provisions of this
Charter and the laws of the State of Utah, possess all executive and administrative powers of the
municipal government of the City. The Mayor may review, examine and comment upon
proposed decisions of the Council.
Section 2-03. Elected Officials -Elections - Term. On the first Tuesday following the
first Monday in November of odd numbered years there shall be held an election to fill all
elective offices to be vacated in the City at 12:00 o’clock p.m. MST on the first Monday of the
January following. Such elected officials shall continue in office for a term of four years and
until their successors are elected and qualified, except as provided herein, or unless earlier
removed by law. The officials so elected shall enter upon their duties at 12:00 o’clock p.m. MST
on the first Monday in January next succeeding their election.
Section 2-04. Council Chairperson -Meeting- Quorum - Transaction of Business.
The Council shall, either by resolution or by order entered in the official minutes, select one of
their number to act as Chairperson. Pending the selection of a Chairperson, the City Recorder
shall preside for the sole purpose of the selection of a Chairperson. The Council also shall select
such other Council officers as the Council deems necessary, with such designations made either
by resolution or by order entered in the official minutes.
The Council shall prescribe by ordinance the date, time and place of its regular public
meetings, provided at least one regular public meeting is held each month, and the ordinance
shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in Tooele County.
Moreover, the Council shall timely cause a listing of its scheduled regular public meetings to be
published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in Tooele County.
Not less than three members of the Council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction
of business, and no act of the Council shall be valid or binding unless three members concur
thereon, provided, however, that members of the Council may appear at any Council meeting by
telephone or by other electronic means with the consent of the Chairperson of the Council. Upon
every vote the yeas and nays shall be called and recorded, and every order, motion, resolution or
ordinance shall either be reduced to writing or read into the public record before the vote is taken
thereon.
The Council shall have the power to make and enforce such rules and regulations for the
administration of the Council, the preservation of order, and the transaction of the business of the
Council as may be necessary or proper. All meetings of the Council are presumed to be open to
the public, but the Council may close any meeting or any portion of a meeting of the Council as
long as the closure is allowed by applicable law, and the procedures and requirements for closing
the meeting or portion of the meeting have been followed.
If at any time the business of the City requires a special meeting of the Council, such
meeting may be called by the Chairperson of the Council, or by the written request of a majority
of the Council. If a majority of the Council calls the meeting, the request must be filed with the
City Recorder and entered in the minutes of the Council. Except in case of an emergency, not
less than two (2) business days notice of such special meeting must be given by the Recorder to
each member not joining in the order, such notice to be served either personally or upon a person
of suitable age and discretion who resides with the member, by electronic e-mail or facsimile
delivery to the e-mail address or facsimile number of the member that is on file with the City
Recorder, or by certified mail addressed to the member at the address on file with the City
Recorder. If a member of the Council attends a special meeting of the Council, the member
waives any right to object to the appropriateness of the notice concerning the special meeting.
Section 2-05. Ordinances and Resolutions. - Publication or Posting - Effective Date.
Every resolution or ordinance passed by the Council must be signed by a majority of the Council
members, and shall then be presented to the Mayor for his or her review. If the Mayor approves,
he or she shall sign the resolution or ordinance and then transmit it to the City Recorder for filing
in the official records of the City. If the Mayor disapproves of the resolution or ordinance, he or
she shall return the resolution or ordinance unsigned to the Council, together with a written
statement of his or her objections, within fifteen (15) calendar days, and the Council shall at its
next meeting reconsider the resolution or ordinance. If after reconsideration it again passes with
the concurrence of at least four members of the Council, it shall be filed with the Recorder and
shall have the same force and effect as if signed by the Mayor. If any resolution or ordinance be
not returned by the Mayor within fifteen (15) calendar days after its initial approval by the
Council, it shall be filed with the Recorder and shall have the same force and effect as if signed
by the Mayor.
All resolutions and ordinances of the City, unless otherwise indicated on the face of the
resolution or ordinance or unless otherwise required by law, shall take effect immediately upon
their passage in conformance with the requirements of this Charter, without further publication,
or act of the Council or Mayor. Resolutions and ordinances also may have retroactive effect
provided the Council makes the necessary findings required by the laws of the State of Utah with
respect to retroactivity. All resolutions and ordinances of the City shall set forth in the language
of the resolution or ordinance their effective date, shall be maintained by the City Recorder in a
book for that purpose, and shall be available for examination by the public free of charge.
Unless otherwise indicated on the face of the resolution or ordinance, resolutions and ordinances
of the City shall be deemed to be necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health or
safety of the City and its residents.
The City Recorder, or his or her designee as approved by the Council, shall attend all
regular and special meetings of the Council and shall act as clerk thereof. The City Recorder
shall record all resolutions and ordinances in the book kept for that purpose and said book, or a
certified copy of the ordinances and resolutions on file in the book, shall be received as evidence
in all courts and places without further proof, or if printed in a book or pamphlet by authority of
the Council, they shall be so received.
Section 2-06. Departments of City Government. The executive and administrative
powers, authority and duties of the City shall be conferred upon the Mayor and upon such
persons as the Mayor shall appoint or designate, subject to the further requirements of this
Charter or applicable law. Departments shall be established by ordinance of the Council. The
Mayor shall, with the consent of a majority of the Council, designate a head of each department
of City government. The Mayor, pursuant to applicable laws and procedures, shall determine the
powers and duties to be performed by the heads of departments established, and of all employees
therein. The Mayor may assign any particular office or employee to one or more departments;
may require an employee to perform duties of two or more departments and may make such
other rules and regulations as may be necessary or proper for the efficient and economical
conduct of the business of the City. The Mayor shall supervise all departmental activities
through his or her departmental heads. Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing herein shall
preclude the Council from hiring one or more persons to assist the Council in the performance of
its duties, and any person so hired shall have the powers and duties assigned by the Council,
shall report to the Council, shall be compensated in the amount and manner directed by the
Council, and shall serve at the pleasure of the Council.
Section 2-07. Mayor - Further Powers and Duties. The Mayor may remit fines and
forfeitures and release any person imprisoned for violation of a City ordinance. The Mayor also
shall see that all operative laws and ordinances are faithfully executed. The Mayor may, to the
extent allowed by law, examine and inspect the books, records and papers of any employee,
officer, or agent employed by the City.
Section 2-08. Vacancies in office of Mayor or Councilperson - How Filled. Any
official elected to office pursuant to this Charter shall forfeit his or her office if he or she (1)
lacks at any time during his or her designated term any qualification established by law, (2) is
convicted of any felony or any Class A misdemeanor involving acts of moral turpitude; or (3)
fails without good cause to attend all regular meetings of the City Council for three consecutive
months.
If a vacancy shall occur in the office of Mayor due to the death, permanent disability,
resignation or removal from office of the Mayor in any manner authorized by law, the
Chairperson of the Council shall act as Mayor pending the appointment, by majority vote of the
Council, within 30 days of the vacancy, of a member of the Council to act as temporary Mayor
until the next regularly scheduled municipal election, at which time the voters shall elect a
qualified elector to serve as interim Mayor for the remainder of the unexpired term, unless said
term expires at the time of that election. The Chairperson of the Council, while acting as
temporary Mayor under this section, shall retain his or her position on the Council, but shall
temporarily forfeit his or her position on the Council while acting as temporary Mayor. The
Chairperson shall be reinstated to his or her former position on the Council, if his or her term has
not previously expired, upon election of the interim Mayor at the next regular municipal election.
The Council shall determine in its absolute discretion whether a temporary Councilperson should
be chosen to fill the position temporarily vacated by the Chairperson while serving as the
temporary Mayor.
If any vacancy shall occur in the office of Councilperson due to the death, permanent
disability, resignation or removal from office of the Councilperson in any manner authorized by
law, such vacancy shall be filled by the Council appointing, by a majority vote, a replacement
who shall serve until the next regularly scheduled municipal election, at which time the voters
shall elect a qualified elector to fill the unexpired term, unless said term expires at the time of
that election. If at any time, through vacancies, the number of Councilpersons is reduced below
three, a special election shall be called to fill said vacancies for the remainder of their respective
terms. Such special election shall be held on the first Tuesday after the sixtieth day following the
occurrence of the most recent vacancy, unless such day be a legal holiday in which event it shall
be held on the Wednesday following.
Any person appointed or elected to the office of temporary Mayor or temporary
Councilperson shall have at the appointment or election, and shall maintain at all times during
his or her designated term, all qualifications for the office established by law.
At any time as he or she may deem expedient, the Mayor may authorize, in writing, the
Chairperson of the Council to act as Temporary Mayor of the City. If the Chairperson is
appointed as Temporary Mayor, he or she shall have, during the term of the appointment, all of
the rights, powers and privileges of the Mayor. The authority of the Chairperson to act as
Temporary Mayor shall expire upon the earlier of (a) the date and time set forth in the
appointment, or (b) the date and time set forth in any subsequent written notice of the Mayor.
Section 2-09. Assistant to Mayor. Upon filing his or her candidacy for Mayor, a
candidate shall declare, in writing with the Tooele City Recorder, a notice of intention to serve
as either a full-time or part-time Mayor and his or her intention as to the appointment of an
Assistant to the Mayor. Upon election, and in accordance with the notice of intention, the Mayor
will, with the affirmative approval of a majority of the Council, appoint a qualified assistant to
exercise such powers of administration and perform such duties as the Mayor shall prescribe.
The assistant shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor, and may be removed by the Mayor with
the affirmative consent of a majority of the Council.
Section 2-10. Termination of Department Heads. The heads of all departments shall
be discharged by the Mayor only after the Mayor receives the affirmative consent of a majority
of the Council.
Section 2-11. Dismissal, Discharge or Removal of Regular Employees. Except for
heads of departments and appointed, temporary, seasonal or on-call employees working in an “at
will” status, no employee of the City who shall have completed any probationary period
established by the City shall be discharged, dismissed, transferred or demoted to a position of
less remuneration unless such action complies with the applicable provisions of the City’s
policies and procedures and other applicable law. In all cases where such employee is
discharged, dismissed, transferred or demoted to a position of less remuneration, he or she shall
receive a letter in writing setting forth the reasons for the action, and shall have the right to
appeal such action pursuant to the City’s policies and procedures and other applicable law.
Moreover, the City shall establish a five-person Employee Appeals Board, three members of
which shall be elected by the regular employees of the City pursuant to procedures established
by the City, and two members of which shall be appointed by the Council.
ARTICLE 3.
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
Section 3-01. City Recorder. The Council, with the advice of the Mayor, shall select a
qualified elector of the City to act as City Recorder who shall be the clerk of the Council and
shall be the depository for all City records not needed for current operations of any department.
The term of office of the City Recorder shall be for a term of two years unless sooner removed
for cause, and said removal shall be in accordance with the City’s policies and procedures and
other applicable law.
Section 3-02. Independent Auditor. The Council shall select an independent auditor to
make an annual audit and such other audits of the financial accounts of the City as the Council
may direct, and to perform all other duties as are required by law.
ARTICLE 4.
CITY ADMINISTRATION
Section 4-01. Creation of Offices and Departments. The Council may, by resolution,
create such offices and departments for the City as the Council from time to time determines to
be necessary or beneficial for the effective performance of municipal functions and the exercise
of good government.
Section 4-02. Residence of City Personnel; Use of City Property. The Council shall,
by ordinance, establish such rules and regulations governing the residency of City, and the use of
City property by employees, officers and agents of the City, as the Council deems appropriate.
ARTICLE 5.
PLANNING AND ZONING
Section 5-01. Planning Commission. There shall be a Planning Commission of seven
members, three of whom shall be appointed by the Council, four of whom shall be appointed by
the Mayor, and none of whom may hold any other office in the City. The Council also may
appoint one or more of its members to sit in an advisory, non-voting role on the Planning
Commission.
Section 5-02. Term of Office and Vacancy. The terms of office of the members of the
Planning Commission and the manner of filling vacancies occurring during a term shall be
prescribed by ordinance of the Council.
Section 5-03. Powers and Duties. The Planning Commission shall have such powers
and duties with respect to City planning and zoning as is prescribed by the laws of the State of
Utah. It shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned to it by ordinance of the
Council.
ARTICLE 6.
NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS
Section 6-01. Municipal Elections. Regular elections shall be held as provided by the
laws of the State of Utah. The Council may by resolution order a special election at any time as
may be necessary to submit referenda or for the election of officials or for any other purpose as
required or allowed by law or this Charter.
Section 6-02. Election Procedure. The procedure for conducting elections in the City
shall be in accordance with the laws of the State of Utah.
ARTICLE 7.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 7-01. Amending the Charter. Amendments to this Charter may be framed and
submitted in the same manner as provided for in the Constitution of the State of Utah for the
making of Charters, or may be proposed by the Council upon the affirmative vote of at least four
members of the Council, or by a written petition of qualified electors to a number equal to fifteen
percent of the total votes cast for Mayor in the next preceding election, and any such amendment
may be submitted at the next regular municipal election, at the next regular general election in
the State of Utah, or at any special election called by the Council for that purpose, and having
been approved by the majority of the electors voting thereon; shall become part of the Charter at
the time fixed in such amendment and shall be certified and filed as provided in case of Charters.
Section 7-02. Separability Clause. If any part or section of this Charter shall be held
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this
Charter nor the context in which such section or part of section so held invalid may appear,
except to the extent that an entire section or part of section may be inseparably connected in
meaning and affect with the section or part of section to which such holding shall directly apply.
Section 7-03. Except as expressly set forth in this Charter, the rights, powers, privileges,
immunities and duties of the City, its elected and appointed officers and employees, and the
citizens and residents of the City shall be construed, interpreted, and enforced in accordance with
the Constitutions and general laws of the United States and the State of Utah.

TOOELE CITY CODE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TITLE 1. CODE AND OFFICES
Chapter 1. City Code.
Chapter 2. Saving Clause.
Chapter 3. Definitions.
Chapter 4. Punishments.
Chapter 5. City Council.
Chapter 6. Mayor.
Chapter 7. Repealed. (Ord. 84-07, 04-04-1984)
Chapter 8. Recorder.
Chapter 9. Treasurer.
Chapter 10. Police Department.
Chapter 11. Attorney.
Chapter 12. Official Bonds and Oaths.
Chapter 13. Boundaries and Seal.
Chapter 14. Director of Finance.
Chapter 15. Notification of Public Nuisances.
Chapter 16. Repealed. (Ord. 88-25, 08-03-1988)
Chapter 17. Repealed. (Ord 88-26, 09-07-1988)
Chapter 18. Franchise Provisions.
Chapter 19. Repealed. (Ord. 84-07, 04-04-1984)
Chapter 20. Engineer.
Chapter 21. Bail Commissioners.
Chapter 22. Financial Administration.
Chapter 23. City Records.
Chapter 24. Municipal Elections.
Chapter 25. Disposal of Significant Parcels of Real Property.
Chapter 26. Fees.
Chapter 27. Zoning Administrator.
Chapter 28. AdministrativeHearingOfficer.
TITLE 2. BOARDS
Chapter 1. Library.
Chapter 2. Tooele ValleyMuseumAdvisory Board.
Chapter 3. Planning Commission.
Chapter 4. Variances.
Chapter 5. Repealed. (Ord. 99-33, 12-1-1999)
Chapter 6. Employee Grievance Appeal Board.
Chapter 7. Historical Preservation Commission.
Chapter 8. Accessibility Committee.
TITLE 3. FIRE
Chapter 1. Fire Department.
Chapter 2. FlammableLiquids.
Chapter 3. Fire Code.
Chapter 4. Fireworks.
Chapter 5. Local Fire Officer.
Chapter 6. Fire Code: Enforcement and Abatement
Chapter 7. Fire Alarms
TITLE 4. BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1. Building Official.
Chapter 2. Repealed (Ord. 2012-19, 07-18-2012).
Chapter 3. Building Code.
Chapter 4. Electrical Code.
Chapter 5. Plumbing Code.
Chapter 6. ResidentialHousing.
Chapter 7. Mechanical Code.
Chapter 8. Road and Bridge Construction Standards.
Chapter 9. Street Excavation.
Chapter 10. Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code.
Chapter 11. Sidewalks.
Chapter 11a. Residential Park Strip Landscaping Requirements.
Chapter 12. Municipal Improvement District Act.
Chapter 13. Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance.
Chapter 14. Abatement of Dangerous Buildings.
Chapter 15. Development Impact Fees.
Chapter 16. UniformAdministrative Code.
Chapter 17. APWAManual of Standard Specifications andManual of
Standard Plans.
TITLE 5. BUSINESS REGULATION
Chapter 1. General Provisions.
Chapter 2. Auctions and Auctioneers.
Chapter 3. Closing Sale.
Chapter 4. Christmas Tree Sales.
Chapter 5. Repealed (Ord. 2012-31, 12-05-2012).
Chapter 6. HomeOccupations.
Chapter 7. Repealed. (Ord. 2007-17, 06-20-2007)
Chapter 7a. Agricultural Vendors; Itinerant or TransientMerchants;
Solicitors.
Chapter 8. Repealed. (Ord. 2012-28, 12-05-2012)
Chapter 9. Repealed. (Ord. 2012-29, 12-05-2012)
Chapter 10. Pawnbrokers.
Chapter 11. Private Police or Detective. Repealed.
Chapter 12. Repealed. (Ord. 2012-30, 12-05-2012)
Chapter 13. Repealed. (Ord. 94-04, 02-15-1994)
Chapter 14. Repealed. (Ord. 94-04, 02-15-1994)
Chapter 15. Secondhand and Junk Dealers. Repealed
TITLE 5. BUSINESS REGULATION
Chapter 16. Park Concessions.
Chapter 17. UniformLocal Sales and Use Tax Ordinance.
Chapter 18. Utility License Tax.
Chapter 18a. Municipal Energy and Use Tax.
Chapter 18b. Repealed. (Ord. 2004-08, 6-16-2004)
Chapter 18c. Telecommunication Service Providers Act.
Chapter 19. Franchise toMountain States Telephone and Telegraph
Company.
Chapter 20. Beer Licenses.
Chapter 21. Towing Companies.
Chapter 22. Ice CreamTrucks.
Chapter 23. Sexually Oriented Businesses.
Chapter 24. Telecommunications Rights-of-Way.
Chapter 25. Transient Room Tax
Chapter 26. Mobile Food Businesses
TITLE 6. ANIMAL CONTROL
Chapter 1. Animal Control Division; Powers and Authority.
Chapter 2. Definitions.
Chapter 3. Licensing.
Chapter 4. Animals at Large.
Chapter 5. Nuisance Animals.
Chapter 5a. Repealed. (Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003)
Chapter 5b. Aggressive Animals.
Chapter 6. Rabies Control.
Chapter 7. Impounding.
Chapter 8. Animal Control Shelter.
Chapter 9. Cruelty to Animals.
Chapter10. Wild Animals.
Chapter 11. Regulatory Permits; Kennels.
Chapter 12. Repealed. (Ord. 88-28, 09-07-1988)
Chapter 13. Repealed. (Ord. 88-28, 09-07-1988)
Chapter 14. Repealed. (Ord. 96-02, 02-07-1996)
TITLE 7. UNIFORM ZONING TITLE OF TOOELE CITY
Chapter 1. General Provisions.
Chapter 1A. Amendments to the Tooele City General Plan Zoning
Ordinance, and Zoning Districts Map.
Chapter 2. Supplementary and Qualifying Regulations.
Chapter 3. Nonconforming Uses.
Chapter 4. Off-street Parking Requirement.
Chapter 5. Conditional Use.
Chapter 6. Planned Unit Development Overlay District (PUD).
Chapter 7. Repealed. (Ord. 97-21, 06-04-1997).
Chapter 8. Mobile Home Parks.
Chapter 9. Recreational Vehicles and Recreational Vehicle Parks.
Chapter 10. Performance Standards for Industrial and Other Uses.
TITLE 7. UNIFORM ZONING TITLE OF TOOELE CITY
Chapter 11. Design Review.
Chapter 11a. Design Standards:Multi-Family Residential.
Chapter 11b. Design Standards: Single-Family Residential.
Chapter 12. Sensitive Area Overlay Zoning Regulations.
Chapter 13. Zoning Districts
Chapter 13a. OS Open Space Zone.
Chapter 14. Residential Zoning Districts.
Chapter 15. Residential Facilities for Persons with a Disability.
Chapter 15a. Residential Facilities for Elderly Persons.
Chapter 16. Zoning District Purpose and Intent. Mixed Use, Commercial,
Industrial and Special Purpose Districts.
Chapter 17. Repealed. (Ord. 98-40, 12-16-1998).
Chapter 18. Repealed. (Ord. 2003-10, 03-19-2003).
Chapter 19. Subdivisions.
Chapter 20. CondominiumApproval Procedure.
Chapter 21. Repealed. (Ord. 2012-17, 09-05-2012).
Chapter 22. Certificates of Occupancy.
Chapter 23. Official City Map andMajor Street Master Plan.
Chapter 24. Annexed Areas.
Chapter 25. Signs.
Chapter 26. Water Rights.
Chapter 27. PersonalWireless Telecommunications Facilities.
Chapter 28. Constitutional Taking Issues.
Chapter 29. Temporary Vehicle Sales Lots.
TITLE 8. HEALTH AND SANITATION
Chapter 1. Health Code.
Chapter 2. Repealed. (Ord. 88-02, 3-16-1988)
Chapter 3. Garbage Collection and Solid Waste Management.
Chapter 4. Abatement of Weeds, Junked,Wrecked, Unlicensed,
Abandoned, and InoperableMotor Vehicles, and Nuisances.
Chapter 5. Wastewater Control Ordinance General Provisions.
Chapter 6. Building Sewers, Connections and Repairs.
Chapter 7. Pump Stations.
Chapter 8. Subdivision.
Chapter 9. POTW Sewer Construction.
Chapter 10. Fees and Charges.
Chapter 11. Industrial Pretreatment Program.
Chapter 12. Subdivision. (Renumbered and Repealed).
Chapter 13. POTWSewer Construction. Renumbered and Repealed.
Chapter 14. No-fault Utilities Claims.
Chapter 15. Outdoor Smoking.
Chapter 16 Special Events.
TITLE 9. SERVICES
Chapter 1. City Cemetery.
Chapter 2. Utilities Billings.
Chapter 3. Repealed. (Ord. 77-20, 10-6-1977)
Chapter 4. Water Supply.
Chapter 5. Drinking Water Source Protection.
Chapter 6. Cross Connection Control - General Policy.
Chapter 7. Reclaimed Water Supply.
TITLE 10. TRAFFIC CODE
Chapter 1. Repealed. (Ord. 90-10, 6-14-1990)
Chapter 2. Miscellaneous provisions.
Chapter 3. Stopping, Standing and Parking.
Chapter 4. Low Profile Motorized Vehicles.
TITLE 11. CRIMINAL CODE
Chapter 1. Crimes.
Chapter 2. Noise Control.
Chapter 3. Repealed. (Ord. 94-27, 12-19-1994)
Chapter 4. Graffiti.
1 - 1 (July 2, 2013)
TITLE 1. CODE AND OFFICES
Chapter 1. City Code.
Chapter 2. Saving Clause.
Chapter 3. Definitions.
Chapter 4. Punishments.
Chapter 5. City Council.
Chapter 6. Mayor.
Chapter 7. Repealed. (Ord. 84-07, 04-04-1984)
Chapter 8. Recorder.
Chapter 9. Treasurer.
Chapter 10. Police Department.
Chapter 11. Attorney.
Chapter 12. Repealed. (Ord. 2018-06, 05-02-2018)
Chapter 13. Boundaries and Seal.
Chapter 14. Director of finance.
Chapter 15. Repealed. (Ord 2018-03, 01-17-2018)
Chapter 16. Repealed. (Ord. 88-25, 08-03-1988)
Chapter 17. Repealed. (Ord 88-26, 09-07-1988)
Chapter 18. Franchise Provisions.
Chapter 19. Repealed. (Ord. 84-07, 04-04-1984)
Chapter 20. Repealed.
Chapter 21. Bail Commissioners.
Chapter 22. Financial Administration.
Chapter 23. City Records.
Chapter 24. Municipal Elections.
Chapter 25. Disposal of Significant Parcels of Real
Property.
Chapter 26. Fees.
Chapter 27. Zoning Administrator.
Chapter 28. Administrative Hearing Officer.
CHAPTER 1. CITY CODE
1-1-1. Title.
1-1-2. Acceptance.
1-1-3. Amendments.
1-1-4. Construction of words.
1-1-5. Interpretations.
1-1-6. Pagination.
1-1-7. Enacting ordinance reference number and
date to be indicated.
1-1-8. Reference to date of insertion of additional
pages.
1-1-9. Effective date.
1-1-10. Applicability and offenses prior to effective
date.
1-1-11. Rule of strict construction not applicable.
1-1-12. Severability.
1-1-1. Title.
The Codification of the Ordinances of Tooele City
shall be known as the "Tooele City Code." The Code
shall be divided into Titles, Chapters and Sections and
reference thereto shall be made in that order. (Ord. 87-24,
01-02-88)
1-1-2. Acceptance.
This city code, as hereby presented in printed form,
shall hereafter be received without further proof in all
courts and in all administrative tribunals of this State as
the ordinances of the City of general and permanent
effect. (Ord. 67-3, 08-14-67)
1-1-3. Amendments.
All ordinances amending the Tooele City Code shall
include the citation reference to Title, Chapter and Section
being added, repealed or otherwise amended. Such
reference shall satisfy all statutory or common law
requirements of adoption by ordinance, as long as the said
amendment is adopted by ordinance. All such
amendments shall be drafted in such form as they will
appear in the Tooele City Code, and shall be prepared for
insertion within the volumes of the Tooele City Code
within 30 days of its final passage. (Ord. 87-24, 01-02-
88; Ord. 76-4, 02-09-76)
1-1-4. Construction of words.
Whenever any word in any section of this City Code
importing the plural number is used, in describing or
referring to any matters, parties, or persons, any single
matter, party, or person shall be deemed to be included,
although distributive words may not have been used.
When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in
this City Code by words importing the singular number
only, or the masculine gender, several matters, parties,
persons and females as well as males and bodies corporate
shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these rules
of construction shall not be applied to any section of this
City Code which contains any express provision excluding
such construction or where the subject matter or content
may be repugnant thereto. (Ord. 67-3, 08-14-67)
1-1-5. Interpretations.
In the determination of the provisions of each section
of this Code the following rules shall be observed:
(1) Intent to Defraud: Whenever an intent to defraud
is required in order to constitute an offense, it shall be
sufficient if an intent appears to defraud any person.
(2) Liability of Employers and Agents: When the
provisions of any section of this City Code prohibit the
commission of an act, not only the person actually doing
the prohibited act or omitting the directed act, but also the
employer and all other persons concerned with or in
aiding or abetting the said person shall be guilty of the
offense described and liable to the penalty set forth. (Ord.
67-3, 08-14-67)
1-1-6. Pagination.
All pages in addition to those occurring in the Tooele
City Code prior to amendment shall be numbered
consecutively using a decimal system to designate the
additional pages, beyond the page where the additional
pages are inserted, with the principal number being the
number of the previous page, and the additional pages
being numbered with decimals commencing with the
number 0.1 and running in sequence to the furthest
number necessary. For example, if following page 25,
forty five additional pages were added by amendment to
the Tooele City Code, the first additional page would be
designated page 25.1 and the last additional page would
(September 13, 1996) 1-2
be number 25.45. (Ord. 87-24, 01-02-88; Ord. 76-4, 02-
09-76)
1-1-7. Enacting ordinance reference number and date
to be indicated.
Whenever the Tooele City Code shall be amended by
ordinance, the reference number of the amending
ordinance and the date of its passage shall be provided in
parenthesis following the ordinance amendment. Such
reference data shall serve as legislative history only.
(Ord. 87-24, 01-02-88; Ord. 76-4, 02-09-76)
1-1-8. Reference to date of insertion of additional
pages.
All additional pages inserted into the Tooele City
Code shall include, in addition to the pagination
requirements of section six of this title and chapter, a
reference in parenthesis at the bottom of the page to the
date the said sheets are prepared for insertion into the said
Tooele City Code. (Ord. 87-24, 01-02-88; Ord. 76-4, 02-
09-76)
1-1-9. Effective date.
The Tooele City Code shall become effective on July
4, 1976. (Ord. 87-24, 01-02-88; Ord. 76-4, 02-09-76)
1-1-10. Applicability and offenses prior to effective
date.
(1) The provisions of this Code shall govern the
construction of, the punishment for, and defenses against
any offense defined in this Code, or except where
otherwise specifically provided or the context otherwise
requires, any offense defined outside this code; provided
such offense was committed after the effective date of this
code.
(2) Any offense committed prior to the effective date
of this Code shall be governed by the law existing at the
time of commission thereof, except that a defense or
limitation on punishment available under this Code shall
be available to any defendant tried or retried after the
effective date. An offense under the laws of this City shall
be deemed to have been committed prior to the effective
date of this Code if any of the elements of the offense
occurred prior thereto. (Ord. 76-4, 02-09-76)
1-1-11. Rule of strict construction not applicable.
The rule that a penal statute is to be strictly construed
shall not apply to this Code, any of its provisions, or any
offense defined by the laws of this City. All provisions of
this Code and offenses defined by the laws of this City
shall be construed according to the fair import of their
terms to promote justice and to effect the objects of the
law. (Ord. 76-4; 02-09-76)
1-1-12. Severability.
Should any phrase, sentence, section or chapter of
this Tooele City Code be determined to be invalid for any
reason by any court of competent jurisdiction wherein the
validity of the said phrase, sentence, section or chapter
was at issue, the invalidity of said provision shall not
affect the balance of this Tooele City Code and said
provision shall be considered severable from the balance
to the extent the meaning and clear intent of the balance of
this Code is not affected. (Ord. 87-24, 01-02-88; Ord. 76-
4, 02-09-76)
1-3 (August 4, 1988)
CHAPTER 2. SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1. Repeal of general ordinances.
1-2-2. Public utility ordinances.
1-2-3. Court proceedings.
1-2-1. Repeal of general ordinances.
All general ordinances of the City passed prior to
the adoption of this City Code are hereby repealed,
except such as are referred to herein as being still in
force or are by necessary implication herein reserved
from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in
the following section), from which are excluded the
following ordinances which are not hereby repealed; tax
levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances relating to
boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and
other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations, contract ordinances authorizing the
execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants;
salary ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or
vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances
relating to election; ordinances relating to the transfer or
acceptance of real estate by or from the City; and all
special ordinances. (Ord. 67-3, 08-14-67)
1-2-2. Public utility ordinances.
No ordinances relating to railroads or railroad
crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating
to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities
shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this City
Code or by virtue of the preceding Section, excepting as
this City Code may contain provisions for such matters,
in which case this City Code shall be considered as
amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect of
such provisions only. (Ord. 67-3, 08-14-67)
1-2-3. Court proceedings.
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to
repeal a former ordinance, whether such former
ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any
act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising under the
former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any
such offense or act so committed or so done, or any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred or any
right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance
takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter
shall conform to the ordinance in force at the time of
such proceeding, so far as practicable. If any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision
of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by the
consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment
announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by
express words or implication, whether the repeal is in
the ordinance making any new provisions upon the
same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this or the preceding Section
shall be construed as abating any action now pending
under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the City
herein repealed; or as discontinuing, abating, modifying
or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as
affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation,
or as waiving any right of the City under any ordinance
or provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption
of this City Code. (Ord. 67-3, 08-14-67)
1-4 (November 25, 2014)
CHAPTER 3. DEFINITIONS
1-3-1. Definitions, general.
1-3-1. Definitions, general.
Whenever the following words or terms are used in
this Code they shall have the meaning herein ascribed to
them, unless the content makes such meaning repugnant
thereto, and unless otherwise more specifically defined
elsewhere in this Code:
AGENT: The word "Agent" as used in this Code
shall mean a person acting on behalf of another.
CITY: The word "City" as used in this Code shall
mean the City of Tooele.
CODE: The word "Code" unless otherwise
specifically stated, shall mean the Tooele City Code.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this
Code to a City employee by title, this shall be construed
as though followed by the words, "of the City of
Tooele," and shall include authorized designees of the
referenced employee.
FEE: The word "Fee" as used in this Code shall
mean a sum of money charged by the City for the City
services rendered or for activities regulated.
KNOWINGLY: The word "Knowingly" imports
only a knowledge that the fact exists which brings the
act or omission within the provisions of this Code. It
does not require any knowledge of the unlawfulness of
such act or omission.
LICENSE: The word "License" as used in this
Code shall mean the permission granted for the carrying
on of a business, profession, or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: The word "Misdemeanor" shall
mean any offense deemed a violation of the provisions
of this Code which is a lesser offense than a felony and
a greater offense than an infraction, both as defined by
State law.
NEGLIGENT: The word "Negligent", as well as
"Neglect", Negligence", and "Negligently" imports a
want of such attention to the nature of probable
consequences of the act or omission as a prudent person
ordinarily bestows in acting in his or her own concern.
OCCUPANT: The word "Occupant" applied to a
building or land shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land whether
alone or with others.
OFFENSE: The word "Offense" shall mean any
act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the
omission of any act required by the provisions of this
Code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this
Code to a City officer by title only, this shall be
construed as though followed by the words of the City
of Tooele, and shall include authorized designees of the
referenced officer.
OPERATOR: The word "Operator" as used in this
Code shall mean the person who is in charge of any
operation, business, or profession.
OWNER: The word "Owner" applied to a building
or land shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant
in common, joint tenant, or lessee of the whole or of a
part of such building or land.
PERSON: The word "Person" shall include the
singular and the plural and shall also mean and include
any person, firm, corporation, association, partnership,
or any other form of association or organization.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: The term "Personal
Property" shall include every description of money,
goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and
all written instruments by which any pecuniary
obligation, right, or title to property is created,
acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated,
discharged, or diminished and every right or interest
therein.
RETAILER: The word "Retailer" as used in this
Code, unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be
understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise,
articles, or things in small quantities directly to the
consumer.
STREET: The word "Street" shall include alleys,
lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, roads and road
rights-of-way, public squares, public places, and
sidewalks.
TENANT: The word "Tenant" applied to a
building or land shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land whether
alone or with others.
WHOLESALER: The word "Wholesaler" and
"Wholesale Dealer" as used in this Code, unless
otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to
relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles, or
things in quantity to persons who purchase for the
purpose of resale or retail sales.
WILFULLY: The term "Wilfully" when applied to
the intent with which an act is done or omitted, implies
simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or
make the omission referred to. It does not require any
intent to violate law, or to injure another, or to acquire
an advantage.
(Ord. 2014-17, 11-05-2014) (Ord. 2004-15, 10-20-
2004) (Ord. 1997-14, 03-19-1997) (Ord. 1987-24, 01-
02-1988) (Ord. 1978-17, 07-13-1978) (Ord. 1976-26,
11-11-1976) (Ord. 1967-3, 08-14-1967)
1-5 (November 25, 2014)
(July 20, 2018) 1-6
CHAPTER 4. PUNISHMENTS
1-4-1. Application - Separate offenses for each day
of violation.
1-4-2. Classification of offense.
1-4-3. Penalties.
1-4-4. Labor in case of default - Incarceration in
lieu of fine or labor. (Repealed.)
1-4-5. Revocation of licenses upon conviction.
1-4-6. Liability of officers.
1-4-7. Indigent defense.
1-4-1. Application - Separate offenses for each day
of violation.
(1) Whenever acting or failing to act constitutes a
violation of any section or provision of this Tooele City
Code, and no classification of offense, fine, or sentence
is specifically found to apply to the violation, the
provisions of this Chapter shall apply.
(2) Each 24-hour period in which a violation of
any section or provision of this Code occurs shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 2017-06, 02-15-2017) (Ord. 1994-54, 11-08-
1994)
1-4-2. Classification of offense.
An offense designated as a misdemeanor in this
Code or in another law, without specification as to
punishment or category, is a class B misdemeanor. Any
offense which is an infraction within this Code is
expressly designated as such.
(Ord. 2017-06, 02-15-2017) (Ord. 1994-54, 11-08-
1994)
1-4-3. Penalties.
(1) A person who has been convicted of a
misdemeanor under this Code may be sentenced to
imprisonment as follows:
(a) in the case of a class B misdemeanor, for a
term not exceeding 6 months;
(b) in the case of a class C misdemeanor, for a
term not exceeding 90 days.
(2) A person convicted of an offense may be
sentenced to pay a fine, not exceeding:
(a) $1,000 when the conviction is for a class
B misdemeanor, plus applicable state surcharges;
(b) $750 when the conviction is for a class C
misdemeanor or infraction, plus applicable state
surcharges.
(3) Subsection (2) does not apply to a corporation,
association, partnership, government, governmental
instrumentality, or other business entity.
(4) The sentence to pay a fine, when imposed upon
a corporation, association, partnership, government,
governmental instrumentality, or other business entity
for an offense defined in this Code shall be to pay an
amount, fixed by the court, not exceeding:
(a) $5,000 when the conviction is for a class
B misdemeanor, plus applicable state surcharges;
(b) $1,000 when the conviction is for a class
C misdemeanor or for an infraction, plus applicable
state surcharges.
(Ord. 2017-06, 02-15-2017) (Ord. 1994-54, 11-08-
1994)
1-4-4. Labor in case of default - Incarceration in
lieu of fine or labor. (Repealed.)
(Ord. 2017-06, 02-15-2017) (Ord. 1994-54, 11-08-
1994)
1-4-5. Revocation of licenses upon conviction.
Any person found guilty of violating any provision
of this Code, when the violation necessarily includes the
violation of the terms of any license or permit issued to
the person by Tooele City, shall be subject to revocation
of the license or permit upon a hearing held pursuant to
the procedures of Chapter 5-1 and Chapter 1-28, as
applicable.
(Ord. 2017-06, 02-15-2017) (Ord. 1994-54, 11-08-
1994)
1-4-6. Liability of officers and employees.
No provision of this City Code designating the
duties of any city officer or employee shall be so
construed as to make the officer or employee liable for
any fine or penalty provided under this Code for a
failure to perform such a duty, unless the intention of
the City Council to impose a fine or penalty on the
officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed
in the Code provision creating the duty.
(Ord. 2017-06, 02-15-2017) (Ord. 1994-54, 11-08-
1994)
1-4-7. Indigent defense.
When a penalty for a violation of the City Code
includes any possibility of imprisonment, Tooele City
will provide legal counsel to an indigent accused as
required by the United States Constitution, the Utah
Constitution, and the Utah Code.
(Ord. 2018-10, 07-18-2018)
1-7 (March 23, 2020)
CHAPTER 5. CITY COUNCIL
1-5-1. Definitions.
1-5-2. City council as governing body.
1-5-3. Chairperson.
1-5-4. Regular meetings - Special meetings.
1-5-5. Meetings open to the public - Exceptions.
1-5-6. Public notice of meetings; emergency
meetings.
1-5-6.5. Electronic meetings.
1-5-7. Minutes of open and closed meetings - Public
records - Recording of meetings - Approval of
Minutes
1-5-8. Achieving a quorum - Voting.
1-5-9. Reconsideration.
1-5-10. Claims approval.
1-5-11. Compensation of city officers and employees.
1-5-12. Councilmembers not to hold created office.
1-5-13. Rules.
1-5-14. Disciplinary powers.
1-5-15. Standards of conduct.
1-5-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
(1) "Meeting" means the convening of the Tooele
City Council, with a quorum present, whether in person or
by means of electronic equipment, for the purpose of
discussing or acting upon a matter over which the council
has jurisdiction or advisory power.
(2) "Convening" means the calling of a meeting of
the city council by the council chairperson, the mayor or
any three members of the council, for the express purpose
of discussing or acting upon a subject over which the
council has jurisdiction.
(3) "Quorum" means three or more members of the
council.
(Ord. 1994-12, 03-22-1994)
1-5-2. City council as governing body.
The governing body of Tooele City is a council
composed of five people elected at large in the manner
and for the terms prescribed by law. The city council
shall exercise the legislative powers of the city.
(Ord. 1994-12, 03-22-1994)
1-5-3. Chairperson.
The city council shall, by order entered in the
minutes, select one of their number to act as chairperson.
Pending selection of a chairperson, the city recorder shall
preside for the sole purpose of the chairperson selection.
(Ord. 1994-12, 03-22-1994)
1-5-4. Regular meetings - Special meetings.
(1) The city council shall hold at least one public
meeting each month. The date, time and place of such
meetings shall be set by ordinance.
(2) Special meetings may be called by the council
chairperson or any three council members, provided that
at least 24 hours notice is given by the city recorder to
each councilmember. No business shall be transacted at
any special meeting except that stated in the noticed
agenda.
(Ord. 2012-11, 04-04-2012) (Ord. 1994-12, 03-22-1994)
1-5-5. Meetings open to the public - Exceptions.
(1) Every meeting of the city council is open to the
public unless closed pursuant to Subsections (2) and (3).
(2) A closed meeting may be held upon the
affirmative vote of a quorum present at an open meeting
for which notice is given pursuant to Section 1-5-6. No
closed meeting is allowed except as to matters declared in
Subsection (3); provided, no ordinance, resolution, rule,
regulation, contract, or appointment shall be approved at
a closed meeting. The reason or reasons for holding a
closed meeting and the vote, either for or against the
proposition to hold such a meeting, cast by each member
by name shall be entered on the minutes of the meeting.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require any
meeting to be closed to the public.
(3) A closed meeting may be held for any purposes
allowed by Utah law, including the following:
(a) discussion of the character, professional
competence, or physical or mental health of an individual;
(b) strategy sessions with respect to collective
bargaining, pending or reasonably imminent litigation, or
the purchase, exchange, lease, or sale of real property,
including water rights;
(c) discussion regarding deployment of security
personnel, systems, or devices;
(d) investigative proceedings regarding
allegations of criminal misconduct.
(4) This chapter shall not apply to any chance
meeting or social meeting. No chance meeting or social
meeting shall be used to circumvent this Chapter.
(Ord. 2012-11, 04-04-2012 (Ord. 1994-12, 03-22-1994)
1-5-6. Public notice of meetings; emergency
meetings.
(1) The city council shall give public notice at least
once each year of its annual meeting schedule as provided
in this section. The public notice shall specify the date,
time, and place of such meetings.
(2) In addition to the notice requirements of
Subsection (1), the council shall give not less than 24
hours' public notice of the agenda, date, time and place of
each of its meetings.
(3) Public notice shall be satisfied by:
(a) posting written notice at Tooele City Hall;
(b) providing notice to
(i) at least one newspaper of general
circulation within Tooele City, or
(ii) a local media correspondent; and,
(c) posting written notice on the Utah Public
Notice Website.
1-8 (April 6, 2012)
(4) When because of unforeseen circumstances it is
necessary for the council to hold an emergency meeting to
consider matters of an emergency or urgent nature, the
notice requirements of Subsection (2) may be disregarded
and the best notice practicable given. No such emergency
meeting of the council shall be held unless an attempt has
been made to notify all of its members and a majority
votes in the affirmative to hold the meeting.
(Ord. 2012-11, 04-04-2012) (Ord. 1994-12, 03-22-1994)
1-5-6.5. Electronic meetings.
(1) Pursuant to the authority of the Tooele City
Charter and the Utah Code, the Tooele City Council may
convene and conduct electronic meetings, as defined in
the Utah Open and Public Meetings Act, in accordance
with this Section.
(2) The anchor location for an electronic meeting
shall be Tooele City Hall.
(3) The City Recorder and at least one City Council
member shall attend an electronic meeting at the anchor
location.
(4) To schedule an electronic meeting, a member of
the City Council shall make a request to the Council
Chairperson for the meeting at least three days before the
meeting, except as provided in Section 1-5-6 for
emergency meetings.
(5) Notice of an electronic meeting shall be given to
all members of the City Council at least 24 hours before
the meeting so that they may participate in and be counted
as present for all purposes, including the determination
that a quorum is present. The notice shall include a
description of how the City Council members will be
connected to the electronic meeting.
(6) A quorum of the City Council must be present,
in person or via electronic means, to convene the meeting,
and shall indicate their presence with a City Council
member roll call. The roll call shall indicate which City
Council members are attending electronically.
(7) The City Council shall provide space and
facilities at the anchor location so that interested persons
and the public may attend and monitor the open portions
of the meeting.
(8) If comments from the public will be accepted
during the electronic meeting, the City Council shall
provide space and facilities at the anchor location so that
interested persons and the public may attend, monitor, and
participate in the open portions of the meeting.
(9) Compliance with the provisions of this Section
by the City Council shall constitute full and complete
compliance by the City Council with the corresponding
provisions of the Utah Open and Public Meetings Act.
(10) Public notice of an electronic meeting shall
be given:
(a) in accordance with UCA Section 52-4-202;
and,
(b) by posting written notice at the anchor
location.
(Ord. 2020-16, 03-18-2020)
1-5-7. Minutes of open and closed meetings - Public
records - Recording of meetings - Approval of minutes.
(1) Written minutes shall be kept of all open
meetings. Such minutes shall include:
(a) the date, time and place of the meeting;
(b) the names of members present and absent;
(c) the substance of all matters proposed,
discussed, or decided, and a record, by individual
member, of votes taken;
(d) the names of all citizens who testified during
a public hearing and the substance in brief of their
testimony;
(e) any other information that any member
requests be entered in the minutes.
(2) Written minutes shall be kept of all closed
meetings. Such minutes shall include:
(a) the date, time and place of the meeting;
(b) the names of members present and absent;
(c) the names of all others present except where
such disclosure would infringe on the confidence
necessary to fulfill the original purpose of closing the
meeting.
(3) The minutes of open meetings are classified as
public records. The minutes of closed meetings are
classified as protected records.
(4) All or any part of an open meeting may be
recorded by any person in attendance; provided, the act of
recording does not interfere with the peaceful and orderly
conduct of the meeting, in the discretion of the council
chairperson.
(5) Minutes shall be deemed the official record of the
meeting upon the approving vote of the City Council and
the approving signature of the City Council chairperson or
designee.
(Ord. 2012-11, 04-04-2012) (Ord 2009-14, 11-21-2009)
(Ord. 1994-12, 03-22-1994)
1-5-8. Achieving a quorum - Voting.
(1) Attendance of city council members at city
council meetings is required unless excused by the
chairperson for cause. Should any member of the council
refuse or neglect to attend any meeting of the council
without being excused by the chairperson for cause and
when notified that such member's presence is necessary to
form a quorum, that member may be fined a sum not
exceeding $250.00 upon the vote of a majority of the
council.
(2) The vote of each council member voting for or
against an ordinance or resolution shall be recorded upon
the original thereof. The concurrence of three council
members shall be necessary for the passage of any
ordinance, resolution or other business item.
(Ord. 2012-11, 04-04-2012) (Ord. 1994-12, 03-22-1994)
1-5-9. Reconsideration.
No vote of the council shall be reconsidered or
rescinded unless at a meeting where there is present at
least the same number of the council as was present when
1-9 (April 6, 2012)
such vote was taken.
(Ord. 2019-06, 04-03-2019) (Ord. 1994-12, 03-22-1994)
1-5-10. Claims approval.
The city council shall examine all claims in excess of
$20,000 presented against the city and when found to be
valid obligations of the city, approve their payment.
(2012-11, 04-04-2012) (Ord. 1994-12, 03-22-1994)
1-5-11. Compensation of city officers and employees.
(1) The council shall, by resolution in June of each
municipal election year, fix the compensation per term of
any and all Tooele City officers to be elected.
(2) The council shall adopt a salary schedule for all
Tooele City employees with each fiscal year's budget.
(Ord. 1994-12, 03-22-1994)
1-5-12. Council members not to hold created office.
(1) A council member may not hold or be appointed
to any city office or position created, or for which the
compensation has increased, during that council member’s
term, until one year after the council member's term
expires.
(2) Subsection (1) shall not apply to a council
member serving on any board or appendage of Tooele
City government during that member's term of office and
as a part of that member's duty as a council member.
(3) As used in this section, "compensation" means
anything of economic value which is paid, loaned, given,
granted, donated or transferred to any person or business
entity, for or in consideration of personal services,
materials, property, or anything whatsoever.
(Ord. 2012-11, 04-04-2012) (Ord. 1994-12, 03-22-1994)
1-5-13. Rules.
The council may, from time to time, make such rules
for governing its proceedings as deemed necessary and
proper.
(Ord. 1994-12, 03-22-1994)
1-5-14. Disciplinary powers.
The council may punish its members for disorderly
conduct and may, with the concurrence of a quorum,
expel a member from any meeting for good cause. No
member shall be removed from a meeting unless afforded
an opportunity of being heard.
(Ord. 2012-11, 04-04-2012) (Ord. 1994-12, 03-22-1994)
1-5-15. Standards of conduct.
(1) A council member's unexcused absence will
result in that member's monthly salary being reduced by
the percentage of meetings missed to the total meetings
held for the month. An unexcused absence is an absence
in which the council member did not contact the council
chairperson, indicating the cause of the absence, prior to
the meeting.
(2) Use of profanity is not permitted by the city
council. Any council member who uses profanity will be
warned once and then fined, by vote of the council, for
any subsequent use of profanity in that or subsequent
meetings.
(3) Council members are encouraged to be prepared
for meetings. Any apparent unpreparedness may result in
the balance of the council not allowing the unprepared
council member to participate in the discussion. An
unprepared council member may still vote on the issue.
(4) Council members shall perform their duties in a
professional manner. They shall make no personal attacks
on other council members, city employees, or on any
citizen in attendance at council meetings.
(5) Because council members are elected
representatives of the community, they are expected to
participate in parades, social functions, and any civic
activity, where possible, to show support of the activity by
the city government.
(Ord. 2012-11, 04-04-2012) (Ord. 1994-12, 03-22-1994)
(September 5, 2019) 1-10
CHAPTER 6. MAYOR
1-6-1. Mayor and mayor pro tem; vacancy.
1-6-2. Mayor.
1-6-3. Duties.
1-6-4. Powers generally.
1-6-5. Messages.
1-6-6. Officers.
1-6-7. Assistant to mayor. Repealed.
1-6-8. Appointments. Repealed.
1-6-9. Sign for city.
1-6-1. Mayor and mayor pro tem; vacancy.
The chief executive of the City shall be the Mayor,
and during the Mayor’s temporary absence or disability,
the Chairperson of the City Council shall act as Mayor
Pro Tem, who during such absence or disability shall
possess the power of Mayor. Whenever a vacancy shall
happen in the office of Mayor, the Council shall appoint
an interim Mayor until the next Municipal election and
until a successor is elected and qualified.
(Ord. 2019-07, 04-03-2019) (Ord. 2012-11, 04-04-
2012) (Ord. 1967-3, 08-14-1967)
1-6-2. Mayor.
The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of
the City.
(Ord. 1967-3, 08-14-1967)
1-6-3. Duties.
The Mayor shall perform all duties which are or
may be prescribed by law or this Code and shall see that
they are faithfully executed.
(Ord. 2012-11, 04-04-2012) (Ord. 1967-3, 08-14-1967)
1-6-4. Powers generally.
The Mayor shall exercise within the City limits the
power conferred upon the Mayor to suppress disorder
and keep peace. The Mayor shall have authority to
grant full pardons for violations of the provisions of this
Code or to remit so much of any fine or penalty as
belongs to the City, together with the costs of
prosecution when to the Mayor it shall seem just,
reasonable, and a meritorious cause. The Mayor shall
report to the Council the number of fines remitted and
pardons granted and the reasons therefor. The Mayor
may permit the use of the facilities in the City Hall, by
proper persons and for proper purposes, but not to
interfere with the rights and uses of the City. The
Mayor shall have power and authority at all times to
examine and inspect the books, records and papers of
any officer or agent employed by the City. The Mayor
shall have power, when necessary, to call upon every
inhabitant of the City over the age of twenty-one (21)
years to aid in enforcing the laws and provisions of this
Code, in suppressing riots and other disorderly conduct.
The Mayor’s powers and duties shall include:
(1) To appoint and dismiss from employment all
persons employed by the City except for the city
recorder or other employees appointed by the Council,
and except as conditioned upon Council consent, both
as provided by the Charter. All such appointments are
to be made on the basis of fitness alone.
(2) To have direct supervision and responsibility
over operations in the Finance Department, City
Attorney’s Office, City Recorder’s Office, Human
Resources Department, Police Department, Fire
Department, City Hall, Community Development
Department, Public Works Department, Parks and
Recreation Department, and other administrative
departments as may be created or amended from time to
time. Included as a part thereof, the Mayor shall have
direct supervision of the construction, improvements,
repairs, and maintenance of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
lanes, bridges, and other public highways; of sewers,
drains, ditches, culverts, streams and water courses, and
gutters and curbs; of all public buildings, boulevards,
parks, playgrounds, squares, and other grounds and
facilities belonging to the City; and the collection and
disposal of waste materials.
(3) To care for and preserve all machinery, tools,
appliances, facilities, and property belonging to the
City.
(4) To oversee the issuing of building permits, the
inspection of buildings, plumbing, and wiring, subject to
uniform codes adopted by the City.
(5) To act as the purchasing agent for the City
through an authorized designee, to see that city codes
and purchasing policies are adhered to, to approve all
claims against the City less the $20,000.00, and to see
that all goods purchased by and for the City are received
as per contract.
(6) To attend all meetings of the Council with the
right to take part in the discussion but not to vote,
except in case of a tie vote of the Council; to
recommend to the Council for adoption such measures
as the Mayor may deem necessary or expedient.
(7) To be the budget officer of the City and, in that
capacity, to prepare the annual tentative budget (to be
construed as a financial estimate only) and present it to
the City Council by the first Wednesday in May, to
prepare and present the annual final budget to the City
Council as required by state law, and to keep the
Council advised as to the financial condition and needs
of the City.
(8) To perform such other duties as may be
required by ordinance or resolution of the Council or
otherwise allowed by the Charter or by State law.
(Ord. 2019-21, 09-04-2019) (Ord. 2019-07, 04-03-
2019) (Ord. 2012-11, 04-04-2012) (Ord. 1995-21, 01-
06-1996) (Ord. 1976-23, 11-11-1976) (Ord. 1967-3, 08-
14-1967)
1-6-5. Messages.
The Mayor shall from time to time give the Council
1-11 (September 5, 2019)
information relative to the affairs of the City and shall
recommend for their consideration such measures as the
Mayor may deem expedient.
(Ord. 2019-07, 04-03-2019) (Ord. 1967-3, 08-14-1967)
1-6-6. Officers.
The Mayor shall appoint the following officers: city
attorney, treasurer, police chief, fire chief, four
members of the Planning Commission, all department
heads except the city recorder, and members of advisory
boards as provided by this Code, with the consent of the
City Council, except as expressly permitted otherwise
by the City Code or Utah Code. (The following officers
shall be appointed by the Council: city recorder,
auditor, annual independent auditor, and three members
of the Planning Commission.)
(Ord. 2019-07, 04-03-2019) (Ord. 2012-11, 04-04-
2012); (Ord. 1994-56, 01-31-1995) (Ord. 1967-3, 08-
14-1967)
1-6-7. Assistant to mayor. Repealed.
(Ord. 2012-11, 04-04-2012)
1-6-8. Appointments. Repealed.
(Ord. 2012-11, 04-04-2012)
1-6-9. Sign for city.
The Mayor shall sign contracts, leases, deeds, and
other writings on the part of the City as authorized by
resolution of the Council or as required by law.
Notwithstanding, the Mayor shall have authority to sign
contracts on the part of the City which are
administrative in nature and which are for less than
$20,000.00, without further City Council authorization.
(Ord. 2019-07, 04-03-2019) (Ord. 2012-11, 04-04-
2012) (Ord. 2000-17, 08-16-2000) (Ord. 1967-3, 08-14-
1967)
(October 5, 2000) 1-12
CHAPTER 7. Repealed. (Ord. 84-07, 04-04-84)
1-13 (September 5, 2019)
CHAPTER 8. RECORDER
1-8-1. City recorder - Duties.
1-8-2. Pay over money.
1-8-3. Financial reports.
1-8-1. City recorder - Duties.
It shall be the duty of the City Recorder to keep the
records, papers, and Seal of the City in order, the date
of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the Council
in a book kept for that purpose. The Recorder shall
keep in a separate book, a record of the proceedings of
the Council, whose meetings it shall be the Recorder’s
duty to attend. The Recorder shall keep in a book
provided for that purpose the name of all persons
elected or appointed to an office within the City, their
terms of office and the names of the person appointed to
fill the vacancy so created. The Recorder shall cause a
certified copy of all ordinances passed by the Council to
be posted in three (3) public places in the City within
one (1) week after the passage of such Ordinance by the
Council, unless published as otherwise provided by law.
The Recorder shall keep an office at the place of
meeting of the Council or some other place convenient
thereto as the Council may direct. Copies of all papers
filed in the Recorder’s office and transcripts from all
records of the Council attested to or certified by the
Recorder under the Corporate Seal shall be evidence in
all courts as if the original were produced.
(Ord. 2019-22, 09-04-2019) (Ord. 1967-3, 08-14-1967)
1-8-2. Pay over money.
The Recorder shall pay into the Treasury all monies
belonging to the City coming into the Recorder’s
possession by virtue of the Recorder’s office. The
Recorder shall deliver to successors in office the
Corporate Seal, together with all books, papers, records,
and other property in the Recorder’s possession
belonging to the City.
(Ord. 2019-22, 09-04-2019) (Ord. 1967-3, 08-14-1967)
1-8-3. Financial reports.
The Recorder shall provide to the Council monthly
summary financial reports and quarterly detail financial
reports as provided by State law.
(Ord. 2019-22, 09-04-2019)
1-14
CHAPTER 9. TREASURER
1-9-1. Appointment by mayor - removal.
1-9-2. Duties generally.
1-9-3. Duties with respect to issuance of checks.
1-9-4. Warrants - Order of payment.
1-9-5. Deposit of city funds - Commingling with
personal funds unlawful - Suspension from
office.
1-9-6. Bond.
1-9-1. Appointment by mayor - removal.
(1) The Mayor, with the consent of the City
Council, shall appoint a qualified person to the office of
treasurer.
(2) The Mayor, with the consent of the City
Council, may remove the treasurer from appointed
office, subject to the Tooele City Charter, with or
without cause.
(Ord. 2015-23, 08-19-2015) (Ord. 1988-29, 12-07-
1988)
1-9-2. Duties generally.
(1) The treasurer shall not assume the duties of the
finance director.
(2) The treasurer shall:
(a) be custodian of all money, bonds, or other
securities of the City;
(b) determine the cash requirements of the City
and provide for the investment of all idle cash;
(c) ensure compliance with the State Money
Management Act and other applicable laws, and to
prepare the reports required by the Act; and,
(d) maintain and resolve any matters relating to
bank, financial, or other short-term investment services
including electronic service, on-line access, with
primary concerns being to provide for account security
from fraud or other unwarranted access..
(Ord. 2015-23, 08-19-2015) (Ord. 1988-29, 12-07-
1988)
1-9-3. Duties with respect to issuance of checks.
The treasurer shall:
(1) ensure that a roster of authorized check signers
is maintained and that all checks are signed and
countersigned by authorized individuals;
(2) be authorized to sign all checks prepared by
the finance director and/or the city recorder, but not the
payroll office; and,
(3) ensure that a sufficient amount is on deposit in
the appropriate bank accounts of the city to honor the
warrants to be tendered by checks, including by
receiving and reviewing any records relating to
warrants.
(Ord. 2015-23, 08-19-2015) (Ord. 1988-29, 12-07-
1988)
1-9-4. Warrants - Order of payment.
In the absence of appropriate monies, as set forth in
Utah Code Annotated section 10-6-140, the treasurer
shall pay all warrants in the order in which presented
and as money becomes available for payment thereof in
the appropriate funds of the city. The treasurer shall
note upon the back of each warrant presented the date of
presentation and the date of payment.
(Ord. 2015-23, 08-19-2015) (Ord. 1988-29, 12-07-
1988)
1-9-5. Deposit of city funds - Commingling with
personal funds unlawful - suspension from office.
The treasurer shall receive from the finance director
all public funds and monies paid to the City and
promptly deposit all city funds in the appropriate bank
accounts of the city. It shall be unlawful for any person
to commingle city funds with his or her own money.
Whenever it shall appear that the treasurer or any other
officer is making profit out of public money, or is using
the same for any purpose not authorized by law, such
treasurer or officer shall be suspended from office.
(Ord. 88-29, 12-07-88)
1-9-6. Bond.
The treasurer shall be included with the public
employee blanket bond of the City at the sum of 5% of
budgeted revenues for the previous year but not less
than $300,000.
(Ord. 2015-23, 08-19-2015)
15 (February 28, 2
CHAPTER 10. POLICE DEPARTMENT
1-10-1. Police department created.
1-10-2. The chief of police.
1-10-3. Duties of special police.
1-10-4. Service of writs and other process.
1-10-5. Conduct of members of department.
1-10-6. Rules and regulations of department.
1-10-7. Witness fees.
1-10-8. Repealed.
1-10-9. Repealed.
1-10-10. Repealed.
1-10-11. Repealed.
1-10-12. Repealed.
1-10-13. Repealed.
1-10-14. Repealed.
1-10-15. Repealed.
1-10-16. Repealed.
1-10-17. Repealed.
1-10-18. Repealed.
1-10-19. Repealed.
1-10-20. Repealed.
1-10-21. Definitions.
1-10-22. Police administration.
1-10-23. Traffic division.
1-10-24. Records of traffic violations.
1-10-25. Investigate accidents.
1-10-26. Traffic accident studies.
1-10-27. Traffic accident reports.
1-10-28. Driver's files.
1-10-29. Annual traffic safety report.
1-10-30. Authority.
1-10-31. Senior reserve patrol.
1-10-1. Police department created.
There is hereby created and established a Tooele
City Police Department. The offices of which shall be
the Chief of Police, Captain, Lieutenant, Sergeant,
Patrol Officer, Special Police Officer and Dispatcher.
The duties of the officers other than the Chief of Police
shall be established by job description in the Policy and
Procedure Manual of Tooele City, when not so
specified in this chapter. (Ord. 76-8, 04-12-76)
1-10-2. The chief of police.
The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council.
He shall qualify for the position as required by the
Policy and Procedure Manual of Tooele City. The
Chief shall be responsible for the actions of and shall
supervise all other officers and members of the Police
Department. He shall maintain a daily radio log, and
such reports as will inform the Mayor of the daily
activities of the Department personnel or as may be
required by law. He shall perform all duties required
by law, including orders of all courts for the State of
Utah. He shall see that the laws of Tooele City, the
State of Utah and the United States of America are
strictly enforced and that violators thereof are brought
to justice. (Ord. 2007-04, 2-21-2007); (Ord. 88-08,
04-06-88)
1-10-3. Duties of special police.
Special police officers shall perform such duties as
are designated by the Chief of Police. Such persons
shall be sworn police officers for the limited purpose of
appointment. (Ord. 76-8, 04-12-76)
1-10-4. Service of writs and other process.
All members of the Police Department are
authorized to serve writs, summonses and other process
issuing from any court of the State of Utah, but no
member shall serve the same except on prior authority
to do so being given by the Chief of Police. (Ord.
88-08, 04-06-88)
1-10-5. Conduct of members of department.
It is the duty of every member of the Police
Department to conduct himself in a proper and law
abiding manner, to avoid the appearance of unlawful
conduct, and to avoid the use of any unnecessary force.
(Ord. 76-8, 04-12-76)
1-10-6. Rules and regulations of department.
The Chief of Police may make or prescribe such
rules and regulations for the conduct and guidance of
the members of the Department as he shall see fit; such
rules, when approved by the Mayor, shall be binding
upon its members. (Ord. 76-8, 04-12-76)
1-10-7. Witness fees.
Every member of the Police Department shall
appear as a witness whenever necessary in an action at
law for the violation of any ordinance or statute of this
City, any County or State of the United States of
America. No such person shall retain any witness fee
for service as a witness in any action or suit to which
this City is a party, any fees paid for such services shall
be remitted to the Chief of Police who shall
immediately deposit the same with the City Treasurer.
(Ord. 76-8, 04-12-76)
1-10-8. Repealed.
(Ord. 87-22, 01-02-88)
1-10-9. Repealed.
(Ord. 87-22, 01-02-88)
1-10-10. Repealed.
(Ord. 87-22, 01-02-88)
1-10-11. Repealed.
(Ord. 87-22, 01-02-88)
(June 19, 1990) 16
1-10-12. Repealed.
(Ord. 87-22, 01-02-88)
1-10-13. Repealed.
(Ord. 87-22, 01-02-88)
1-10-14. Repealed.
(Ord. 87-22, 01-02-88)
1-10-15. Repealed.
(Ord. 87-22, 01-02-88)
1-10-16. Repealed.
(Ord. 87-22, 01-02-88)
1-10-17. Repealed.
(Ord. 87-22, 01-02-88)
1-10-18. Repealed.
(Ord. 87-22, 01-02-88)
1-10-19. Repealed.
(Ord. 87-22, 01-02-88)
1-10-20. Repealed.
(Ord. 87-22, 01-02-88)
1-10-21. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to the
interpretation of the provisions of this chapter:
(1) Peace Officer means any member of the
Tooele City Police Department that meets the
qualifications for a peace officer as determined by the
State of Utah.
(2) Police Officer means any member of the
Tooele City Police Department regardless as to whether
the person meets the requirements of a peace officer or
not.
(3) Policeman means Police Officer.
(4) Special Police Officer means any person
so designated as provided by the provisions of this
chapter. A special police officer may or may not meet
the requirements necessary to be classified as a peace
officer. (Ord. 76-8, 04-12-76)
1-10-22. Police administration.
(1) There is hereby established in the Police
Department of this City a Traffic Division to be under
the control of a police officer appointed by an directly
responsible to the Chief of Police.
(2) It shall be the general duty of the Police
Department to determine the installation and proper
timing and maintenance of traffic control devices, to
plan the operation of traffic on the streets and highways
of the City and to cooperate with other City Officials in
the development and means to improve traffic
conditions and to carry out the additional powers and
duties imposed by the provisions of this Code. (Ord.
76-8, 04-12-76)
1-10-23. Traffic division.
It shall be the duty of the Traffic Division with
such aid as may be rendered by other members of the
Police Department to enforce the Street Traffic
Regulations of this City and all of the State vehicle laws
applicable to street traffic in this city, to make arrests
for traffic violations, to investigate accidents and to
cooperate with other Officers of the City in the
administration of the traffic laws and in developing
ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to
carry out those duties specially imposed upon said
Division by this title and the traffic ordinances of the
City. (Ord. 76-8, 04-12-76)
1-10-24. Records of traffic violations.
(1) The Police Department or the Traffic Division
thereof shall keep record of all violations of the traffic
ordinances of the City or of the State vehicle laws of
which any person has been charged, together with a
record of the final disposition of all such alleged
offenses. Such record shall accumulate during at least
a five (5) year period and from that time on the record
shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent
five (5) year period.
(2) All forms for records of violations and notices
violations shall be serially numbered. For Each month
and year a written record shall be kept available to the
public showing the disposal of all such forms.
(3) All such records and reports shall be public
records. (Ord. 76-8, 04-12-76)
1-10-25. Investigate accidents.
It shall be the duty of the Traffic Division, assisted
by other Police Officers of the Department to
investigate traffic accidents, to arrest and to assist in the
prosecution of those persons charged with violations of
law causing or contributing to such accidents. (Ord.
76-8, 04-12-76)
1-10-26. Traffic accident studies.
Whenever the accidents at any particular location
become numerous, the Traffic Division shall conduct
studies of such accidents and determine remedial
measures. (Ord. 76-8, 04-12-76)
1-10-27. Traffic accident reports.
The Traffic Division shall maintain a suitable
system of filing traffic accident reports. (Ord. 76-8,
04-12-76)
1-10-28. Driver's files.
(1) The Police Department or the Traffic Division
thereof, shall maintain a suitable record of all traffic
accidents, warnings, arrests, convictions, and
complaints reported for each driver, which shall be filed
(June 19, 1990) 17
alphabetically under the name of the driver concerned.
(2) Said Division shall study the cases of all the drivers
charged with frequent or serious violations of the traffic
laws, or involved in frequent accidents, or any serious
accident, and shall attempt to discover the reasons
therefor, and shall take whatever steps that are lawful
and reasonable to prevent the same.
(3) Such records shall accumulate during at least
a five (5) year period and from that time on such
records shall be maintained complete for at least the
recent five (5) year period. (Ord. 76-8, 04-12-76)
1-10-29. Annual traffic safety report.
The Traffic Division shall annually prepare a
traffic report which shall be filed with the Mayor.
Such report shall contain information on traffic matters
in the City as follows:
(1) The number of traffic accidents, the number
of persons killed, the number of persons injured, and
other pertinent traffic accident data;
(2) The number of accidents investigated and
other pertinent data on the safety activities of the
Police;
(3) The plans and recommendations of the
Division for future traffic safety activities. (Ord. 76-8,
04-12-76)
1-10-30. Authority.
(1) It shall be the duty of the Officers of the
Police Department or such Officers as are assigned by
the Chief of Police to enforce all street traffic, criminal,
and nuisance laws of the City and all of the State
vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the City.
(2) Officers of the Police Department or such
Officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police are
hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, or
signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that,
in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite
traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, Officers of the Police
Department may direct traffic as conditions may require
notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
(3) Officers of the Fire Department, when at the
scene of a fire, may direct or assist the Police in
directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity.
(Ord. 78-19, 07-13-78; Ord. 76-8, 04-12-76)
1-10-31. Senior reserve patrol.
There is hereby created within the police
department a Senior Reserve Patrol. Such patrol shall
consist of senior citizens who shall perform limited
police functions, including issuing civil parking
citations, making security checks, passing crime
information reports, receiving traffic accident
information, and other duties as may be assigned by the
chief of police. Members of the Senior Reserve Patrol
shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 90-05,
06-14-90)
(December 9, 1988) 1-18
CHAPTER 11. ATTORNEY
1-11-1. Duties.
1-11-1. Duties.
It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to
prosecute and defend in all courts, all actions in behalf
of the City on account of official acts; to make appeals
or sue out writs of error on behalf of the City or any
Officer as aforesaid, with the consent and approval of
the Mayor, and make the necessary affidavits,
acknowledgments, resolutions and ordinances, and
execute the necessary bonds in the name of the City; to
advise officers on such legal questions as may arise in
relation to the business of the City. Having personal
knowledge of the violation of any provision of this
Code or upon receiving reliable information of any
violation, he shall institute the necessary steps to bring
the offender to punishment. (Ord. 67-3, 08-14-67)
1-19 (May 15, 2018)
CHAPTER 12. OFFICIAL BONDS AND OATHS
(Repealed. Ord. 2018-06, 05-02-2018)
(December 9, 1988) 1-20
CHAPTER 13. BOUNDARIES AND SEAL
1-13-1. Boundaries.
1-13-2. Seal.
1-13-1. Boundaries.
The boundaries of Tooele City shall be as follows:
Beginning at the Northeast corner of Section Twenty-
Two in Township Three South of Range Four West,
Salt Lake Base and Meridian, thence West three miles;
thence South three miles; thence East three miles;
thence North three miles to the place of beginning.
(Ord. 67-3, 08-14-67)
1-13-2. Seal.
The seal heretofore provided and used for Tooele
City, described as follows: One and three-fourths
inches in diameter, with head of deer in center and the
inscription "Tooele City Seal, Tooele County, Utah"
around the outer edge is hereby declared to have been,
that it is now and hereafter shall be the Corporate Seal
of Tooele City. (Ord. 67-3, 08-14-67)
1-21 (September 5, 2019)
CHAPTER 14. DIRECTOR OF FINANCE
1-14-1. Head of department of finance.
1-14-2. Appointment as budget officer. (Repealed.)
1-14-3. Purchasing procedures.
1-14-4. Duties.
1-14-5. Warrants for payment of claims.
1-14-6. Authorization of payments.
1-14-7. Monthly and quarterly financial reports.
1-14-8. Bond.
1-14-9. Special assessments - application of
proceeds.
1-14-1. Head of department of finance.
The Department of Finance shall be headed by a
director. The director of finance shall be a qualified
person appointed and removed with the advice and
consent of the governing body, and may not assume the
duties of the city treasurer. The financial administrative
duties of the director of finance prescribed in the
Uniform Accounting Manual for Utah Cities is hereby
adopted, the same as if set forth in full herein.
(Ord. 1988-29, 12-07-1988)
1-14-2. Appointment as budget officer.
(Repealed by Ord. 2019-23, 09-04-2019.)
1-14-3. Purchasing procedures.
All purchases or encumbrances thereof by the city
shall be made or incurred according to the purchasing
procedures established by ordinance or resolution and
only on an order or approval of the person duly
authorized to act as a purchasing agent for the City.
(Ord. 1988-29, 12-07-1988)
1-14-4. Duties.
The director of finance shall:
(1) Maintain the general books for each fund of
the city and all subsidiary records relating thereto,
including a list of the outstanding bonds, their purpose,
amount, terms, date and place payable.
(2) Keep accounts with all receiving and
disbursing officers of the city.
(3) Pre-audit all claims and demands against the
city before they are allowed, and shall prepare the
necessary checks in payment. Such checks shall include
an appropriate certification pursuant to Section 11-1-1,
Utah Code Annotated. The director shall also certify on
the voucher or check copy, as appropriate, that:
(a) The claim has been pre-audited and
documented,
(b) The claim has been approved by the
Mayor, if the claim is not in excess of $20,000.00; if the
claim is in excess of $20,000.00, that the claim has been
approved by the city council,
(c) The claim is within the lawful debt limit of
the city, and,
(d) The claim does not overexpend the
appropriate departmental budget established by the city
council.
(4) Collect and receive all public funds and money
payable to the City, within three business days after
collection, including all taxes, licenses, fines, and
intergovernmental revenue, special taxes, assessments,
as provided by law and ordinance, and keep an accurate
detailed account thereof.
(5) Forward all collected and received funds to the
treasurer for deposit, investment, and safe keeping.
(6) Give or cause to be given to every person
paying money to the City a receipt or other evidence of
payment, specifying, as appropriate, the date of payment
and upon which account payment was made, and shall
file the duplicate of the receipt, a summary report, or
other evidence of payment in the office of the finance
director or city recorder, as appropriate.
(7) Present annual independent audit proposals to
the Council prior to the date of adoption of the tentative
budget.
(Ord. 2019-23, 09-04-2019) (Ord. 2015-23, 08-19-
2015) (Ord. 2015-22, 08-19-2015) (Ord. 1988-29, 12-
07-1988)
1-14-5. Warrants for payment of claims.
In the event the city is without funds on deposit in
one of its appropriate bank accounts with which to pay
any lawfully approved claim, the director of finance
shall draw and sign a warrant upon the treasurer of the
city for payment of the claim, the warrant to be tendered
to the payee named thereon.
(Ord. 1988-29, 12-07-1988)
1-14-6. Authorization of payments.
The director of finance is authorized to act as the
financial officer for the purpose of approving:
(1) payroll checks, if the checks are prepared in
accordance with a salary schedule established in a
personnel ordinance or resolution, and if such checks
are properly countersigned by another employee with
signing authority; or
(2) routine expenditures, such as utility bills,
payroll-related expenses, supplies, materials, and capital
expenditures which were referenced in the budget
document and approved by an appropriation resolution
adopted for the current fiscal year.
(Ord. 2015-23, 08-19-2015) (Ord. 1988-29, 12-07-
1988)
1-14-7. Monthly and quarterly financial reports.
The director of finance shall prepare and deliver to
the Recorder for presentation to the Council monthly
summary financial reports and quarterly detail financial
reports as provided by State law.
(Ord 2019-23, 09-04-2019) (Ord. 1988-29, 12-07-1988)
1-22 (September 5, 2019)
1-14-8. Bond.
The director of finance shall be included within
public employee blanket bonds of the city at the sum of
five percent of budgeted revenues for the previous year
but not less than $300,000.00.
(Ord. 1988-29, 12-07-1988)
1-14-9. Special assessments - application of
proceeds.
All money received by the City on any special
assessment shall be applied to the payment of the
improvement for which the assessment was made. The
money shall be used for the payment of interest and
principal on bonds or other indebtedness issued in
settlement thereof, and shall be used for no other
purpose whatever, except as otherwise provided by law.
(Ord. 2015-23, 08-19-2015)
1-22 (January 18, 2018)
CHAPTER 15. NOTIFICATION OF PUBLIC
NUISANCE
Repealed. (Ord. 2018-03, 01-17-2018)
1-23 (January 18, 2018)
( Pages 1-23 Reserved)
(December 9, 1988) 1-24
CHAPTER 16. Repealed. (Ord. 88-25, 08-03-88)
1-25 (December 9, 1988)
CHAPTER 17. Repealed. (Ord. 88-26, 09-07-88)
(December 9, 1988) 1-26
CHAPTER 18. FRANCHISE PROVISIONS
1-18-1. Application, copies, fees.
1-18-2. Nonassignability
1-18-3. Manner of assignment.
1-18-4. Forfeiture of rights.
1-18-5. Repealed.
1-18-6. Repealed.
1-18-7. Repealed.
1-18-8. Repealed.
1-18-9. Repealed.
1-18-10. Repealed.
1-18-11. Repealed.
1-18-12. Repealed.
1-18-13. Repealed.
1-18-14. Repealed.
1-18-15. Repealed.
1-18-16. Repealed.
1-18-17. Repealed.
1-18-18. Repealed.
1-18-19. Repealed.
1-18-20. Repealed.
1-18-21. Repealed.
1-18-22. Repealed.
1-18-23. Repealed.
1-18-24. Repealed.
1-18-1. Application, copies, fees.
Whenever application shall be made to the Council
for a franchise or grant of special privileges or for the
extension or renewal of an existing franchise or grant of
special privilege, the applicant shall furnish to the
Recorder, for the use of the Council, ten (10) copies of
the proposed Resolution or Ordinance, and pay into the
Treasury a fee to be determined by the Council. (Ord.
67-3, 08-14-67)
1-18-2. Nonassignability.
All franchises and grants of special privilege shall
be deemed to be nonassignable without the express
permission of the Council, whether such limitation is set
forth in the body of the franchise or grant or not. (Ord.
67-3, 08-14-67)
1-18-3. Manner of assignment.
All assignment of franchise and special grants must
be in writing and a copy thereof filed in the office of the
Recorder before any assignment or transfer will be
recognized by the Council. (Ord. 67-3. 08-14-67)
1-18-4. Forfeiture of rights.
Any attempted assignment or transfer of a franchise
or special privilege not made in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter shall operate as a forfeiture of
all the rights of the grants therein given. (Ord. 67-3. 08-
14-67)
1-18-5. Repealed.
(Ord. 87-15, 08-13-87)
1-18-6. Repealed.
(Ord. 87-15, 08-13-87)
1-18-7. Repealed.
(Ord. 87-15, 08-13-87)
1-18-8. Repealed.
(Ord. 87-15, 08-13-87)
1-18-9. Repealed.
(Ord. 87-15, 08-13-87)
1-18-10. Repealed.
(Ord. 87-15, 08-13-87)
1-18-11. Repealed.
(Ord. 87-15, 08-13-87)
1-18-12. Repealed.
(Ord. 87-15, 08-13-87)
1-18-13. Repealed.
(Ord. 87-15, 08-13-87)
1-18-14. Repealed.
(Ord. 87-15, 08-13-87)
1-18-15. Repealed.
(Ord. 87-15, 08-13-87)
1-18-16. Repealed.
(Ord. 87-15, 08-13-87)
1-18-17. Repealed.
(Ord. 87-15, 08-13-87)
1-18-18. Repealed.
(Ord. 87-15, 08-13-87)
1-18-19. Repealed.
(Ord. 87-15, 08-13-87)
1-18-20. Repealed.
(Ord. 87-15, 08-13-87)
1-18-21. Repealed.
(Ord. 87-15, 08-13-87)
1-18-22. Repealed.
(Ord. 87-15, 08-13-87)
1-18-23. Repealed.
(Ord. 87-15, 08-13-87)
1-18-24. Repealed.
(Ord. 87-15, 08-13-87)
1-27 (December 9, 1988)
CHAPTER 19. CLERK OF THE COURT
1-19-1. Repealed. (Ord. 84-07, 04-04-84)
(April 20, 2020) 1-28
CHAPTER 20. ENGINEER (Repealed.)
1-20-1. Duties. (Repealed.)
1-20-1. Duties. (Repealed.)
1-29 (December 9, 1988)
CHAPTER 21. BAIL COMMISSIONERS
1-21-1. Bail commissioners.
1-21-2. Collection of fines - Accounting.
1-21-3. Term - Requirements for office.
1-21-1. Bail commissioners.
The Mayor, by and with the consent of the Council,
may appoint from among the officers and members of
the Police Department one or more discreet persons to
be known as Bail Commissioners, who shall have and
exercise all the powers which are now or hereafter may
be conferred by law upon City Judges in respect to the
fixing of bail of persons arrested within the Corporate
Limits for misdemeanors under the laws of the State or
for the violation of the provisions of this Code, and to
the taking and approving of the same. Any person who
has been ordered by any Bail Commissioner to give bail
may deposit the amount thereof in money with the Bail
Commissioner. (Ord. 67-3, 08-14-67)
1-21-2. Collection of fines - Accounting.
In addition to their duties in respect to the fixing of
bail, the Bail Commissioners shall have power on nonjudicial
days, and after the hour of five o'clock (5:00)
P.M. and before the hour of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. on
judicial days, to collect and receipt for moneys tendered
in payment of the fine of any person serving sentence or
in default of the payment of person serving sentence or
in default of the payment of such fine. All moneys
collected by the Bail Commissioners in cases arising
under the provisions of this Code, shall be accounted
for at least once a month to the Treasurer, or in cases
arising under the State Laws to the County Treasurer.
(Ord. 67-3, 08-14-67)
1-21-3. Term - Requirements for office.
Bail Commissioners appointed under this Chapter
shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor appointing
them, and shall receive no compensation as such.
Before entering upon their duties as Bail
Commissioners, they shall take and subscribe an oath to
faithfully and impartially discharge the duties of their
office, and shall give bond to the City with two (2) good
and sufficient individual sureties, or with a single
corporate surety to be approved by the Mayor, which
bond shall be in the amount specified in Chapter 12 of
this Title, conditioned on the faithful performance of
their duties as Commissioners, and that they will well
and truly account for and turn over to the City Treasurer
or to the County Treasurer, as the case may be, at such
times as may be designated by the Council, all moneys,
bonds, property and records coming into their hands as
Commissioners, and at the expiration of their term of
office, they will surrender and turn over all funds,
bonds, property, papers and records then in their hands
pertaining to their respective offices. Suit upon any
such bond may be brought by the city or by any person
injured. The oaths and bonds of the Commissioners
shall upon their approval by the Mayor be filed with the
Recorder. (Ord. 68-3, 08-14-67)
(October 20, 2016) 1-30
CHAPTER 22. FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION
1-22-1. Mayor as budget officer.
1-22-2. Purchases and sales by established
procedures.
1-22-3. Repealed. (Ord. 92-19, 10-20-92)
1-22-4. Payments authorized by mayor.
1-22-1. Mayor as budget officer.
The Mayor, as the budget officer of the City, shall
require all expenditures by any department to conform
with the departmental budget.
(Ord. 1981-02, 01-15-1981)
1-22-2. Purchases and sales by established
procedures.
All purchases or encumbrances of the City shall be
made or incurred according to the purchasing
procedures established by resolution or ordinance, and
only on an order or approval of the person duly
authorized to act as a purchasing agent for the City.
City property shall be sold according to procedures
established by resolution.
(Ord. 1981-02, 01-15-1981)
1-22-3. Repealed. (Ord. 92-19, 10-20-92)
1-22-4. Payments authorized by mayor.
(1) The Mayor is authorized, subject to paragraph
(2) below, to approve the following claims against the
City:
(a) Payroll checks, if the checks are prepared
in accordance with a salary schedule established in a
personnel ordinance or resolution,
(b) Routine expenditures, such as utility bills,
payroll related expenses, supplies and materials,
(c) Payments on City approved contracts,
(d) Capital expenditures which were referred
in the budget document and approved by an
appropriation resolution adopted for the current fiscal
year.
(2) The authority of the Mayor to approve claims
against the City in the above paragraph is subject to the
following restrictions:
(a) No claim may be approved by the Mayor
which is not within the duly and legally adopted or
adjusted budget.
(b) No claim may be approved by the Mayor
which is not made or incurred according to the
purchasing procedures established by resolution or
ordinance.
(c) No claim may be approved by the Mayor
which is in excess of $20,000.00.
(Ord. 2016-04, 01-20-2016) (Ord. 1981-02, 01-15-
1982)
(December 3, 2009) 1-31
CHAPTER 23. CITY RECORDS.
1-23-1. Maintenance and Access of Records.
1-23-2. Compliance with Government Records
Access and Management Act.
1-23-3. Repealed. (Ord. 2008-03, 05-07-08)
1-23-4. Repealed. (Ord. 2008-03, 05-07-08)
1-23-5. Repealed. (Ord. 2008-03, 05-07-08)
1-23-6. Repealed. (Ord. 2008-03, 05-07-08)
1-23-7. Repealed. (Ord. 2008-03, 05-07-08)
1-23-8. Repealed. (Ord. 2008-03, 05-07-08)
1-23-9. Unwarranted invasion of personal
privacy.
1-23-10. Retention.
1-23-11. Written request.
1-23-12. Fees.
1-23-13. Repealed. (Ord. 2008-03, 05-07-08)
1-23-14. Repealed. (Ord. 2008-03, 05-07-08)
1-23-15. Amendment of records.
1-23-16. Disciplinary action.
1-23-17. Records officer.
1-23-18. Repealed. (Ord. 2008-03, 05-07-08)
1-23-19. Maintenance procedures.
1-23-20. Document formats.
1-23-21. Repealed. (Ord. 2008-03, 05-07-08)
1-23-22. Appeals.
1-23-1. Maintenance and access of records.
(1) It is the purpose of this Chapter, and it is in the
best interests of Tooele City and the citizens thereof,
and essential for the administration of city government,
to:
(a) maintain and preserve accura te
governmental records;
(b) provide ready access to records which are
defined by law as open to the public;
(c) maintain the security of records which are
defined by law as private, controlled, protected, or
otherwise confidential; and
(d) ensure the preservation of vital and
historically valuable records.
(2) As the records of the City are a resource
containing information which allows government
programs to function, provides officials with a basis for
making decisions and ensuring continuity with past
operations, and permits citizens to research and
document matters of personal and community
importance, it is the intent of this Chapter that this
resource be systematically and efficiently managed.
(3) It is the policy of the City that all city records,
which are defined by applicable Utah statutory and case
law as public records, will be made available to citizens
within a reasonable time after request and at a
reasonable cost as set forth in this Chapter and
GRAMA.
(4) Tooele City recognizes a public policy interest
in allowing the government to restrict access to certain
records for the public good.
(Ord. 2008-03, 05-07-08); (Ord. 92-09, 08-11-92)
1-23-2. Compliance with Government Records
Access and Management Act.
In enacting this Chapter, it is the purpose and intent
of the City to acknowledge and comply with the
Government Records Access and Management Act
(“GRAMA”), Chapter 2 of Title 63G of the Utah Code
Annotated (1953, as amended), and to provide for its
application in the city.
(Ord. 2009-09, 10-21-09); (Ord. 2008-03, 05-07-08);
(Ord. 92-09, 08-11-92)
1-23-3. Repealed. (Ord. 2008-03, 05-07-08)
(Ord. 92-09, 08-11-92)
1-23-4. Repealed. (Ord. 2008-03, 05-07-08).
(Ord. 92-09, 08-11-92)
1-23-5. Repealed. (Ord. 2008-03, 05-07-08)
(Ord. 92-09, 08-11-92)
1-23-6. Repealed. (Ord. 2008-03, 05-07-08)
(Ord. 92-09, 08-11-92)
1-23-7. Repealed. (Ord. 2008-03, 05-07-08)
(Ord. 92-09, 08-11-92)
1-23-8. Repealed. (Ord. 2008-03, 05-07-08)
(Ord. 92-09, 08-11-92)
1-23-9. Unwarranted invasion of personal privacy.
(1) The City recognizes and upholds the personal
right of privacy retained by persons who may be the
subject of governmental records. The City also
recognizes that GRAMA and Utah case law establish a
presumption that governmental records will generally be
considered open and public, unless otherwise properly
classified. In circumstances where a record's
classification is not clearly established by GRAMA or
another statute, by this Chapter, or by policies
established or classifications made under this Chapter,
the public's right to access a particular record may be
restricted where that access would constitute a clearly
unwarranted invasion of personal privacy. In
accordance with decisions of the Utah appellate courts,
city records that have not been specifically made public
by GRAMA, that refer to named or readily identifiable
individuals, and that deal with matters of a delicate
nature which could engender shame, humiliation or
embarrassment in the subject of that record shall
generally not be classified as public records, and release
thereof may constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of
personal privacy. In the same manner, certain data may
be classified as private, controlled, or protected,
although other data in the record, or the record itself,
may be classified as public.
(2) The City may, as determined appropriate by the
Records Officer, notify the subject of a record that a
request for access to the subject's record has been made.
(December 3, 2009) 1-32
(3) When responding to a request for private
records, the City shall require that the requester of
records provide a written release, notarized within 30
days before request, from the subject of the records in
question before access to such records is provided.
(Ord. 2008-03, 05-07-08); (Ord. 92-09, 08-11-92)
1-23-10. Retention.
All city records will be retained according to
retention schedules promulgated by the State of Utah.
Nothing herein shall prevent the City from retaining a
record for longer than required under the retention
schedules.
(Ord. 2008-03, 05-07-08); (Ord. 92-09, 08-11-92)
1-23-11. Written request.
Requests for records shall be submitted to the
Records Officer upon a form approved by the City
Attorney.
(Ord. 2008-03, 05-07-08); (Ord. 92-09, 08-11-92)
1-23-12. Fees.
Fees shall be established by Resolution of the City
Council and incorporated into a city fee schedule.
(Ord. 2008-03, 05-07-08); (Ord. 92-09, 08-11-92)
1-23-13. Repealed. (Ord. 2008-03, 05-07-08);
(Ord. 92-09, 08-11-92)
1-23-14. Repealed. (Ord. 2008-03, 05-07-08);
(Ord. 92-09, 08-11-92)
1-23-15. Amendment of records.
Requests to amend records shall be submitted to the
Records Officer.
(Ord. 2008-03, 05-07-08); (Ord. 92-09, 08-11-92)
1-23-16. Disciplinary Action.
(1) City employees who knowingly refuse to
permit access to records in accordance with GRAMA
and this Chapter, who knowingly permit access to
nonpublic records, or who knowingly, without
authorization or legal authority, dispose of, alter, or
remove records or allow other persons to do so in
violation of the provisions of GRAMA, this Chapter, or
other law or regulation, may be subject to criminal
prosecution and disciplinary action, including
termination.
(Ord. 2008-03, 05-07-08); (Ord. 92-09, 08-11-92)
1-23-17. Records officer.
The City Recorder shall be the Records Officer for
purposes of this Chapter, and shall oversee and
coordinate records access, management, and archives
activities.
(Ord. 2008-03, 05-07-08); (Ord. 92-09, 08-11-92)
1-23-18. Repealed. (Ord. 2008-03, 05-07-08)
(Ord. 92-09, 08-11-92)
1-23-19. Maintenance procedures.
(1) Records maintenance procedures shall be
developed to ensure that due care is taken to maintain
and preserve city records safely and accurately over the
long term. The Records Officer shall be responsible for
monitoring the application and use of technical
processes in the creating, duplication, and disposal of
city records. The Records Officer shall monitor
compliance with required standards of quality,
permanence, and admissibility pertaining to the
creation, use, and maintenance of records. Policies and
regulations regarding types and formats of papers, inks,
electronic media, and other records and information
storage media, materials, equipment, procedures and
techniques shall be developed an promulgated, subject
to the approval of the Mayor.
(2) All city records shall remain the property of the
City unless federal or state legal authority provides
otherwise. Property rights to city records may not be
permanently transferred from the City to any private
individual or entity, including those legally disposable
obsolete city records. This prohibition does not include
the providing of copies of records otherwise produced
for release or distribution under this chapter.
(3) Custodians of city records shall, at the
expiration of their terms of office, appointment or
employment, deliver custody and control of all records
kept or received by them to their successors,
supervisors, or to the Records Officer.
(4) All records which are in the possession of any
city department shall, upon termination of activities of
such department, be transferred to any successor
department, provided that such transfer is consistent
with the formal provisions of such termination.
(Ord. 2008-03, 05-07-08); (Ord. 92-09, 08-11-92)
1-23-20. Document formats.
(1) The City retains and reserves to itself the right
to use any type of nonverbal or nonwritten formats for
the storage, retention and retrieval of government
records, including but not limited to audio tapes, video
tapes, micro-forms, and any type of computer, data
processing, imaging, or electronic information storage
or processing equipment or systems, which are not
prohibited by state statute, and do not compromise legal
requirements for record storage, retrieval, security, and
maintenance, to store and maintain city records.
(Ord. 2008-03, 05-07-08); (Ord. 92-09, 08-11-92)
1-23-21. Repealed. (Ord. 2008-03, 05-07-08)
(Ord. 92-09, 08-11-92)
1-23-22. Appeals.
The Tooele City Mayor shall be the chief administrative
officer for purposes of appeals under Utah Code Ann.
§63G-2-401 of Tooele City records determinations.
(Ord. 2009-09, 10-21-09)
(December 3, 2009) 1-33
(PAGES 133 to 138 RESERVED)
1-39 (November 4, 2005)
CHAPTER 24. MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS.
1-24-1. Filing Fees.
1-24-1. Filing Fees.
At the time of filing for Tooele City elected office:
(1) all candidates for mayor shall pay a filing
fee of $50.00;
(2) all candidates for city council shall pay a
filing fee of $30.00.
(Ord. 2005-18, 7-12-2005)
(July 27, 2007) 1-40
CHAPTER 25. DISPOSAL OF SIGNIFICANT
PARCELS OF REAL PROPERTY
1-25-1. Definitions.
(1) ASignificant Parcel of Real Property@ means a
single parcel of real property owned by Tooele City
regardless of size or value.
(2) AReasonable Notice@ means, for purposes of this
Chapter, publication of notice in a newspaper of
general circulation at least 14 calendar days prior to a
public hearing. (Ord. 2007-21, 07-18-07)
1-25-2. Disposal of Significant Parcel of Real
Property.
If at any time, the City intends to dispose of a
Significant Parcel of Real Property by conveyance of
a fee simple absolute interest in said Real Property,
the City Recorder shall provide reasonable notice.
The City Council, following the provision of
reasonable notice, shall hold a public hearing to allow
for public comment on the proposed disposition of
the property in question. (Ord. 2007-21, 07-18-07)
1-41 (August 24, 2011)
CHAPTER 26. FEES
1-26-1. Fee Establishment Authority.
1-26-2. Fee Appeal Authority.
1-26-1. Fee Establishment Authority.
The City Council is authorized to establish Tooele
City fees by resolution, to be incorporated into a Tooele
City Fee Schedule, for activities regulated by the City,
for applications approved by the City, for permits
issued by the City, for services delivered by the City,
and otherwise as allowed by law.
(Ord. 2011-16, 08-17-11)
1-26-2. Fee Appeal Authority.
(1) Unless provided otherwise by a specific
provision of the Utah Code or Tooele City Code, the
Mayor shall be the Appeal Authority for purposes of
appealing a City fee.
(2) Unless provided otherwise by a specific
provision of the Utah Code or Tooele City Code, all
appeals of City fees shall be filed in writing within the
later of (a) 10 calendar days of payment of the fees, or
(b) if an itemized fee statement has been requested
pursuant to U.C.A. §10-9a-510, within 10 calendar days
of the City providing the itemized fee statement.
(3) The appellant has the burden of proving that
the fee paid does not reflect the reasonable estimated
cost of
(A) regulating the industry
(B) processing the application
(C) issuing the permit, or
(D) delivering the service.
(4) The appellant shall state in the written appeal
the full legal and factual basis for the appeal.
(5) The Mayor shall evaluate the merits of the
appeal and shall issue a written decision within 15
calendar days of the filing of the appeal. The Mayor’s
decision shall state its effective date and shall constitute
the City’s final decision regarding the fee.
(6) The Mayor shall provide a copy of each
written decision to the City Council.
(7) The Mayor’s decision is subject to District
Court review as provided by U.C.A. §10-9a-801 et. seq.
(Ord. 2011-16, 08-17-11)
1-42 (December 5, 2016)
CHAPTER 27. ZONING ADMINISTRATOR
1-27-1. Appointment.
1-27-2. Duties of the Zoning Administrator.
1-27-3. Effect of Interpretations and Decisions.
1-27-4. Request for Review by Director.
1-27-5. Appeal.
1-27-6. Administrative Interpretations.
1-27-1. Appointment.
The Mayor, with the advice of the City Council, may
appoint from among the employees of Tooele City a
Zoning Administrator, who shall be primarily responsible
for administering, interpreting, and enforcing the terms of
the Tooele City Code Title 7, Uniform Zoning Title.
(Ord. 2013-04, 06-19-2013)
1-27-2. Duties of the Zoning Administrator.
(1) Administrative Interpretation. The Zoning
Administrator shall interpret Title 7, Uniform Zoning
Title, to members of the public, City departments, and to
other branches of City government, subject to general and
specific ordinances and policies established by the City
Council and City Administration. Upon written request,
the Zoning Administrator shall make a written
interpretation of any part or portion of the text of Title 7
pursuant to this Chapter. Such interpretations may include
use interpretations to determine whether a proposed use is
substantially similar to a listed use shown to be a permitted
or conditional use in Title 7. The Zoning Administrator
shall confer as necessary with the City Attorney in making
any administrative interpretation or decision.
(2) Administrative Duties. The Zoning
Administrator shall be responsible for all administrative
actions required by Title 7, including the giving of notice,
holding of hearings, preparation of staff reports, issuance
of decisions, and receiving and processing of appeals.
(3) Land Use Applications. The Zoning
Administrator shall review or cause to be reviewed all
applications for a site plan, subdivision, Conditional Use
Permits, General Plan text amendment, General Plan Land
Use Map amendment, Title 7 text amendment, Zoning
Map amendment, and all other land use applications as set
forth in Title 7, and inform the appropriate land use
authority of the findings of that review
(4) Enforcement. The Zoning Administrator shall
enforce or cause the enforcement of the provisions of Title
7, and the terms or conditions of any land use approval
wherever and however violations of those provisions or
approvals occur. This may include consultation with the
City Attorney, Ordinance Enforcement Officer, or Police
Department, as applicable, issuing notices to comply or
take other appropriate action, and the preparation of
exhibits, testimony, and other data which may be needed
in such enforcement. The failure of the Zoning
Administrator to enforce the provisions of Title 7 or the
terms or conditions of any land use approval shall not
legalize or be deemed to condone any act in violation of
such provisions or approvals.
(5) Administrative Decisions. The Zoning
Administrator shall render administrative decisions on
those certain routine and uncontested matters as may be
delegated to him or her by ordinance of the City Council
and pursuant to established guidelines or policies relating
thereto.
(6) Advice. The Zoning Administrator may advise
all persons making application for any project which
requires approval by the Planning Commission or City
Council.
(7) Appeals. The Zoning Administrator shall be
responsible for providing the complete written record to
the Administrative Hearing Officer.
(Ord. 2016-15, 10-19-2016) (Ord. 2013-04, 06-19-2013)
1-27-3. Effect of Interpretations and Decisions.
(1) An administrative interpretation or decision shall
apply only to the property for and circumstances under
which the interpretation or decision is given.
(2) A use interpretation finding a use to be a
permitted or conditional use in a particular zoning district
shall be deemed to authorize only that use on only the
property that is the subject of the interpretation. A use
interpretation shall not authorize another allegedly similar
use for which a separate use interpretation has not been
issued.
(3) A use interpretation finding a particular use to be
a permitted or conditional use shall not authorize the
establishment of such use nor the development,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, or moving of any
building or structure, but shall merely authorize the
preparation, filing, and processing of applications for any
approvals or permits that may be required by Title 4 or
Title 7, or other applicable provisions of the Tooele City
Code.
(Ord. 2013-04, 06-19-2013)
1-27-4. Request for Review by Director.
Any person aggrieved by a written interpretation or
decision of the Zoning Administrator may request, in
writing, a review of that interpretation or decision by the
Community Development Director. The Community
Development Director shall issue a written decision in
which he or she may affirm, modify, overturn, or remand
for further consideration the interpretation or decision of
the Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. 2013-04, 06-19-2013)
1-27-5. Appeal.
Any person aggrieved by the Community
Development Director’s decision after review of the
Zoning Administrator’s interpretation or decision may file
a written appeal of the decision to the Administrative
Hearing Officer. The Administrative Hearing Officer shall
hear and conduct all such appeals based upon a review of
the written record alone, taking no new testimony or
evidence. The written record shall consist of the land use
application that is the subject of the decision, the land use
applicant’s request for a Zoning Administrator
1-42.1 (December 5, 2016)
interpretation, the Zoning Administrator interpretation or
decision, and the Community Development Director’s
decision, including accompanying documents and
materials.
(Ord. 2016-15, 10-19-2016) (Ord. 2013-04, 06-19-2013)
1-27-6. Administrative Interpretations.
(1) Initiation. Any person may request an
administrative interpretation.
(2) Procedure. An application for an administrative
interpretation shall be considered and processed as
provided in this Section.
(a) A complete application shall be submitted to
the office of the Zoning Administrator on a form
established by the City along with any fee established by
the City. The application shall include at least the
following information:
(i) the name, address, and telephone
number of the applicant and the applicant’s agent, if any;
(ii) the specific provision or provisions of
Title 7 for which an interpretation is requested;
(iii) specific facts of the situation which
illustrate the need for an administrative interpretation;
(iv) the precise interpretation claimed by the
applicant to be correct;
(v) the legal and other grounds that support
the interpretation claimed by the applicant to be correct;
and
(vi) when a use interpretation is requested
the application shall include:
(A) a statement explaining why the
proposed use should be deemed included within a use
category allowed by the zoning district applicable to the
property; and
(B) documents, statements, and
other evidence demonstrating that the proposed use will
conform to all use limitations established by the zoning
district applicable to the property.
(b) After the application is determined by the
City to be complete, the Zoning Administrator shall review
the request and make an interpretation of Title 7 in
accordance with the standards set forth in this Chapter.
(c) After making a decision, the Zoning
Administrator shall provide to the applicant written notice
of the decision, mailed to the address indicated on the
application.
(d) A record of all Zoning Administrator
administrative interpretations and decisions, all
Community Development Director decisions, and all
Administrative Hearing Officer decisions, issued pursuant
to the provisions of this Chapter, shall be maintained in the
office of the Zoning Administrator.
(3) Standards for Making Administrative
Interpretations. The following standards shall apply to
administrative interpretations.
(a) Administrative interpretations shall not add
to, ignore, or amend the provisions of the Tooele City
Code.
(b) Questions about the location of zoning
district boundaries shall be resolved by applying the
following standards:
(i) zoning district boundaries indicated as
approximately following the edge or center line, as the
case may be, of a street, alley, railroad, highway, or other
public way, incorporated municipality, flood plain, body
of water or topographic feature that was in existence when
the boundary was established, shall be interpreted as
following such edge or center line;
(ii) zoning district boundaries indicated as
approximately following platted lot lines, block, or parcel
tract boundaries shall be interpreted as following such
lines;
(iii) when a public road, street, or alley is
officially vacated, such property shall have the same
zoning as the adjacent property and in the event vacated
property is adjacent to two zones, each zone shall extend
to the center line of the vacated property; and
(iv) when a physical or cultural feature
existing on the ground is at odds with one shown on the
Zoning Map, or when any other uncertainty exists with
respect to a zone boundary, the Zoning Administrator shall
determine the boundary location.
(c) An administrative interpretation shall be
consistent with:
(i) The provisions of Title 7; and
(ii) Any previously rendered interpretations
based on similar facts, unless those previous
interpretations are determined to be incorrect.
(d) A use interpretation shall also be subject to
the following standards:
(i) A use of a structure or property defined
in the Tooele City Code shall be interpreted as provided as
defined therein.
(ii) Any use specifically listed or otherwise
designated as “not permitted” in a table of permitted and
conditional uses for a particular zoning district shall not be
allowed in that zone.
(iii) No use interpretation shall allow a use
in a zoning district unless evidence is presented
demonstrating that the use will conform to development
standards established for that district.
(iv) No use interpretation shall allow a use
in a particular zoning district unless findings of evidence
are provided to demonstrate the use to be substantially
similar to uses allowed in that zone.
(v) If a proposed use is most similar to a
conditional use authorized in the zoning district in which
it is proposed to be located, any interpretation allowing
such use shall require that the use be approved only as a
conditional use subject to Chapter 7-5 of the Tooele City
Code.
(vi) No use interpretation shall allow the
establishment of any use that would be inconsistent with
the statement of purpose of the zoning district in which it
would be located.
(Ord. 2016-15, 10-19-2016) (Ord. 2013-04, 06-19-2013)
1-42.2 (December 5, 2016)
(Page 1-42.2 Reserved)
(March 18, 2015) 1-43
CHAPTER 28. ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING
OFFICER
1-28-1. Appointment; qualifications.
1-28-2. Duties.
1-28-3. Hearing procedure.
1-28-4. Decision.
1-28-5. Appeals to District Court.
1-28-6. Hearing record.
1-28-1. Appointment; qualifications.
(1) The Mayor, with the consent of the City Council,
shall appoint one or more Administrative Hearing Officers
(“Hearing Officer”) to hear appeals of certain
administrative actions and decisions.
(2) The Hearing Officer shall be a resident of Tooele
City and shall possess such qualifications as the Mayor
may determine necessary for the fair and thorough
determination of facts and application of law.
(3) The Hearing Officer may not be an elected
official or a City employee.
(4) The Mayor may revoke the appointment of a
Hearing Officer with the consent of the City Council.
(Ord. 2015-11, 03-18-2015) (Ord. 2013-07, 04-17-2013)
1-28-2. Duties.
(1) The duty of the Hearing Officer shall be to hear
appeals of administrative actions or decisions as
authorized by this Code.
(2) The Hearing Officer shall be the appeal authority
in the event that this Code does not expressly provide an
appeal authority for administrative actions or decisions
related to the interpretation, application, or enforcement
of the City’s land use ordinances.
(Ord. 2013-07, 04-17-2013)
1-28-3. Appeal and hearing procedure.
(1) Unless provided specifically elsewhere in this
Code, this Chapter shall govern appeals to the Hearing
Officer. Where other provisions of this Code fail to
address procedural matters addressed by this Chapter, this
Chapter shall govern those procedural matters.
(2) Where authorized by this Code, any person
directly adversely affected by an administrative action or
decision of Tooele City may file a written appeal in the
office of the City Recorder within 10 calendar days of the
administrative action or decision being appealed.
(3) The appeal shall contain the name, address, and
telephone number of the appellant, the date of the appeal,
and the legal and factual grounds for the appeal, which
grounds shall determine the scope of the administrative
appeal hearing, hearing evidence, and judicial review of
the Hearing Officer decision. The appeal shall include a
copy of the written action decision, if applicable, that is
the subject of the appeal.
(4) The Hearing Officer shall determine a schedule
for the pre-hearing exchange of evidence, for the briefing
of legal arguments, and for the hearing, and shall notify
the parties of that schedule.
(5) The appellant may file a brief summarizing facts,
evidence, and law applicable to the appeal, within the
scope of the grounds stated in the appeal, and the City
may file a responsive brief, both in accordance with the
schedule established by the Hearing Officer.
(6) The Hearing Officer may accept any evidence he
or she deems reliable. Evidence shall be submitted by
proffer. The Hearing Officer may also allow witness
testimony. The Hearing Officer shall not consider
evidence or information not presented by the parties at the
hearing or in pre-hearing briefs.
(7) In the appeal and the hearing, the City bears the
burden of proving that substantial evidence exists to
support the administrative action or decision being
appealed.
(8) The parties may be represented by legal counsel
in the hearing.
(9) Each party may cross-examine any witnesses
called to testify by the other party. Each party must
secure the attendance of their own witnesses.
(10) The Hearing Officer shall provide for the
hearing to be recorded.
(11) The hearing shall be public.
(12) The Hearing Officer shall enforce principles of
civility during the hearing.
(Ord. 2013-11, 06-19-2013); (Ord. 2013-07, 04-17-2013)
1-28-4. Decision.
(1) The Hearing Officer shall prepare written
findings of fact and a decision (collectively “Decision”)
within a reasonable time after the hearing.
(2) The Decision shall be final for purposes of
issuance on the date it is signed by the Hearing Officer
(3) The Decision shall be considered issued for
purposes of appeal and enforcement on the date of
transmittal to the appellant, either by mail, fax, email, or
otherwise.
(4) The Hearing Officer shall cause the Decision to
be transmitted to the parties by any reasonable means,
including personal delivery, mail, fax, or email.
(5) The Decision shall be maintained in the office of
the Tooele City Recorder.
(Ord. 2013-07, 04-17-2013)
1-28-5. Appeals to District Court.
(1) Any party to the appeal may appeal the Decision
to the District Court no later than 30 calendar days after
the issuance of the Decision.
(2) The standard of review to be employed by the
District Court in its review of the Decision shall be
substantial evidence in the record. The review shall not
be de novo.
(3) For purposes of this Code, the term “substantial
evidence” shall mean that quantum and quality of relevant
evidence that is adequate to convince a reasonable mind
to support a conclusion. This standard does not require or
specify a quantity of evidence but requires only such
(March 18, 2015) 1-44
relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as
adequate to support a conclusion.
(Ord. 2013-07, 04-17-2013)
1-28-6. Hearing record.
(1) The record of the hearing shall include all
proffered evidence that is admitted by the Hearing
Officer, all pre-hearing briefs submitted to the Hearing
Officer, the audio recording of the hearing, and the
Decision.
(2) Any party may make an audio or video recording
of the hearing, but only the recording prepared by the City
shall be considered part of the record of the hearing.
(Ord. 2013-07, 04-17-2013)
1-28-7. Appeal fees.
The City Council may require by resolution the
payment of fees associated with appeals heard by the
Hearing Officer.
(Ord. 2013-07, 04-17-2013)
(April 3, 2017) 2-1
TITLE 2. BOARDS
Chapter 1. Library.
Chapter 2. Tooele Valley Museum Advisory Board.
Chapter 3. Planning Commission.
Chapter 4. Variances.
Chapter 5. Repealed. (Ord. 99-33, 12-01-99).
Chapter 6. Employee Grievance Appeal Board.
Chapter 7. Historical Preservation Commission.
Chapter 8. Accessibility Committee.
CHAPTER 1. LIBRARY
2-1-1. Establishment of public library.
2-1-2. Nonresident use.
2-1-3. Library board of directors - Appointment -
Membership - Payment of Expenses.
2-1-4. Library board of directors - Terms -
Election of officers - Removal - Vacancies -
Duties.
2-1-5. Report of librarian.
2-1-6. Donations.
2-1-7. Repealed.
2-1-8. Library fund.
2-1-9. Annual reports to City Council and Utah
State Library Board.
2-1-1. Establishment of public library.
There is hereby established the Tooele City public
library. The library shall be forever free to the use of
the citizens and residents of Tooele City, subject to such
reasonable rules and regulations as proposed by the
library board of directors and adopted by the Mayor as
regulations governing the management and use of the
library. The board may exclude from the use of the
library any and all persons who shall willfully violate
such rules. (Ord. 89-13, 08-02-89)
2-1-2. Nonresident use.
The Mayor, upon the advice of the library board of
directors, may extend the privileges and use of the
library to persons residing outside the limits of Tooele
City upon such terms and conditions as prescribed by its
regulations. Nonresidents will be required to provide at
least partial consideration for the privilege of using the
library facilities and services. (Ord. 89-13, 08-02-89)
2-1-3. Library board of directors - Appointment -
Membership - Payment of Expenses.
There is hereby appointed a library board of
directors, chosen from the citizens of Tooele City at
large with reference to their fitness for such office. The
board of directors shall consist of not less than five
members and not more than nine members. Not more
than one member of the City Council shall be, at any
one time, a member of such board. Directors shall serve
without compensation, but their actual and necessary
expenses incurred in the performance of their official
duties may be paid from library funds. All members
shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the
City Council. The Recorder shall notify such
appointees and request from them a written acceptance
of appointment. All appointees shall within 30 days of
receipt of such notification file with the Recorder an
acceptance of appointment. Should the same not be
filed within 30 days, the person shall be considered to
have declined the appointment, and the Mayor shall
designate another person for appointment. The same
procedure for appointment shall thereafter be followed.
(Ord. 89-13, 08-02-89)
2-1-4. Library board of directors - Terms - Election
of officers - Removal - Vacancies - Duties.
Directors shall be appointed for three-year terms, or
until their successors are appointed. Initially,
appointments shall be made for one-, two- and threeyear
terms. Annually thereafter, the Mayor shall, with
consent of the City Council, before the first day of July
of each year, appoint for three-year terms directors to
take the place of the retiring directors. Directors shall
serve not more than two full terms in succession.
Following such appointments, the directors shall meet
and elect a chairman and such other officers, as they
deem necessary, for one-year terms. The Mayor, with
consent of the City Council, may remove any director
for misconduct or neglect of duty. Vacancies in the
board of directors, occasioned by removals,
resignations, or otherwise, shall be filled for the
unexpired term in the same manner as original
appointments. The library board of directors shall meet
quarterly and shall make and adopt rules and
regulations, not inconsistent with law, for the governing
of the library. The rules, regulations, and policies of the
board shall be effective upon the adoption and
publication thereof by the Mayor. (Ord. 89-13, 08-02-
89)
2-1-5. Report of librarian.
The City Librarian shall annually on or before the
31st day of June, report to the Mayor as to the number
of books and periodicals on hand, the number added by
purchase, gift or otherwise, referring to the titles of
periodicals, rather than total number of the same, the
number of books lost or missing; the number of patrons
on a monthly basis, the number of books loaned out,
and such other statistics information and suggestions as
the librarian may deem of general interest, or requested
by the Mayor. (Ord. 76-12, 04-12-76)
2-1-6. Donations.
Any person desiring to make donations of money,
personal property, or real estate, for the benefit of this
(April 3, 2017) 2-2
library shall have the right to vest the title to the money
or real estate so donated in the name of Tooele City, to
be held and credited to the general fund library account,
when accepted, according to the terms of the deed, gift,
devise, or bequest of such property; and as to the
property, the Council shall be held and considered to be
special trustees. (Ord. 76-12, 04-12-76; Ord. 67-3, 08-
14-67)
2-1-7. Repealed.
(Ord. 89-13, 08-20-89)
2-1-8. Library fund.
All funds previously maintained by the Tooele City
Board of Directors separately from the General Fund of
Tooele City shall upon the final passage of this
provision be transferred to the Tooele City general fund,
and the funds and receipts accumulated or received
from all sources by the operation of the Library shall
hereafter be controlled by the Mayor, as part of the City
budget general fund accounts. (Ord. 76-12, 04-12-76)
2-1-9. Annual reports to City Council and Utah
State Library Board.
The library board of directors shall make an annual
report to the City Council and Mayor on the condition
and operation of the library, including a financial
statement. The directors shall also provide for the
keeping of records required by the Utah State Library
Board in its request for an annual report from the public
libraries, and shall submit such annual report to the
board. (Ord. 89-13, 08-20-89)
2-3 (January 31, 1995)
CHAPTER 2. TOOELE VALLEY MUSEUM
ADVISORY BOARD
2-2-1. Creation of museum advisory board - Duties.
2-2-2. Removal of board members.
2-2-3. Donations.
2-2-4. Museum named.
2-2-1. Creation of museum advisory board - Duties.
(1) There is hereby created a museum advisory
board of a minimum of seven members and a maximum
of 14 members, one of whom shall be the mayor or the
mayor's designee. Four of the members may be exofficio
members.
(2) The museum advisory board's chairperson
shall be selected by a majority vote of the board
members.
(3) Members of the museum advisory board shall
serve without compensation for a term of three years.
They are eligible at the end of the term for reappointment
for additional terms.
(4) All board members shall be appointed by the
mayor with the consent of the council. The museum
advisory board shall recommend new members for
approval.
(5) Museum advisory board members shall be
residents of Tooele Valley, with the exception of the
four ex-officio members, who may not be.
(6) The city recorder shall notify such appointees
as the mayor with the consent of the council shall
designate, and request a written acceptance from them
of their appointment. All designated appointees shall
within 30 days file with the recorder an acceptance of
appointment. Should the same not be filed within that
period, the person shall be considered to have declined
the appointment, and the mayor shall, with the consent
of the council, designate another party for such
appointment.
(7) Designated appointees, upon filing acceptance
of appointment, shall automatically be members of the
museum advisory board for the period of three years.
(8) The museum advisory board shall meet
regularly as the mayor shall designate and shall
determine and recommend rules, regulations, policies
and procedures for the orderly operation and
management of the museum facilities and services. The
rules, regulations and policies of the board shall be
effective upon the adoption and publication thereof by
the mayor.
(9) All vacancies on the board occasioned by
removal, resignation or otherwise, shall be reported to
the mayor, who shall fill such vacancy pursuant to the
manner of appointment provided in this section. (Ord.
94-57, 01-31-95); (Ord. 85-06, 06-05-85)
2-2-2. Removal of board members.
The mayor, by and with the consent of the council,
may remove any museum advisory board member for
misconduct or neglect of duty or other grounds
constituting cause. If any member of the board should
refuse or neglect to attend three consecutive monthly
meetings without justifiable reason for the absence, this
shall be grounds for removal. (Ord. 94-57, 01-31-95);
(Ord. 85-06, 06-05-85)
2-2-3. Donations.
Any person desiring to make donations of money,
personal property or real estate for the benefit of the
museum shall have the right to vest the title to the
money or real estate so donated in the name of Tooele
City, to be held and credited to the general fund
museum account, when accepted, according to the terms
of the deed, gift, devise or bequest of such property.
The council shall be held and considered to be special
trustees of the property. (Ord. 94-57, 01-31-95); (Ord.
85-06, 06-05-85)
2-2-4. Museum named.
The museum shall be named "Tooele Valley
Museum." (Ord. 94-57, 01-31-95); (Ord. 85-06, 06-
05-85)
2-4 (February 22, 2018)
CHAPTER 3. PLANNING COMMISSION
2-3-1. Planning commission created.
2-3-2. Duties of planning commission.
2-3-3. Organization.
2-3-4. Assignments to each member.
2-3-5. Compensation.
2-3-6. Meetings.
2-3-7. Proceedings and records.
2-3-8. Removal from office.
2-3-1. Planning commission created.
There is herewith created a commission to be
hereafter called the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 1978-26, 10-26-1978)
2-3-2. Duties of planning commission.
The duties of the Planning Commission shall be as
follows:
(1) To make and certify to the City Council a
zoning plan, including the text of zoning ordinances,
and maps designating the boundaries of the various
zoning districts of the City.
(2) To recommend changes, amendments,
additions, and deletions to the zoning ordinances or
maps within thirty days of any proposal being submitted
to the Commission by the Community Development
Director (Director). Failure of the Commission to make
a recommendation within said thirty day period or to
obtain an extension from the City Council prior to the
expiration of said period shall be considered as the
approval of the proposal for all purposes.
(3) To ho l d publ ic hearin g s , make
recommendations and certify to the City Council a
master plan for at least the uses of the land within the
boundaries of Tooele City.
The Commission may include in any master plan
proposal areas outside the geographic boundaries of the
City, if the Commission finds said areas bear relation to
the proper or expected development of the community
and the concurrence of the governing body of the
county or municipality having jurisdiction to govern the
area proposed to be included is first obtained.
(4) To amend, change, add to, delete or alter the
master plan from time to time as the Commission shall
see fit, with the concurrence of the City Council.
(5) To review all applications for building permits
proposals of any person, company, corporation,
partnership or other legal entity for all uses requiring a
conditional use permit. Commercial buildings are
buildings used for commercial purposes including
residential structures greater than a fourplex. Said
proposals include but are not limited to proposals to
construct, erect, reconstruct, improve, repair, alter,
move, divide, subdivide or use any improvement,
fixture or parcel of real property within the City and the
review shall be for the purpose of determining, if the
proposal complies with the ordinances, codes,
specifications, regulation or requirements of Tooele
City and its departments. No construction, erection,
reconstruction, improvement, repair, alteration, move,
division or subdivision proposal for other than standard
single family residences shall be implemented or
commenced until said proposal has been approved by
the Commission in accordance with this Code.
(6) To adopt a Major Street Plan for Tooele City
indicating the existing and proposed major streets,
roads, and thoroughfares of the community.
(7) To amend, change and to delete or alter the
Master Street Plan, from time to time as the
Commission shall see fit, with the concurrence of the
City Council.
(8) To review all redevelopment agency
recommendations regarding the selection and
designation of a redevelopment project area and project
plans to make its recommendation regarding the
selection and designation thereof to the City Council.
(9) In general, to have all powers as may be
necessary or convenient to provide for, promote, and
perform municipal planning.
All city staff personnel, private consultants, and
planners shall be under the immediate supervision of the
Director.
The Commission shall also have among its powers,
the right and authority to enter upon any land, at
reasonable times, to make examinations, surveys, or to
place markers and monuments; to make reports and
recommendations to the City Council or other public
agencies and bodies, and the public in general,
regarding the planning and development of the City.
(Ord. 2018-05, 02-21-2018) (Ord. 2004-10, 09-15-
2004) (Ord. 1981-35, 01-07-1982) (Ord. 1978-26, 10-
26-1978)
2-3-3. Organization.
There shall be seven members of the City Planning
Commission, three of whom shall be appointed by the
City Council, and four of whom shall be appointed by
the Mayor. The City Council and Mayor may each
appoint an Alternate Commissioner, to act with full
authority for an absent Commissioner. The initial
appointment shall be for staggered terms as determined
by the Mayor. All appointments after the initial
appointments shall be for periods of four (4) years each,
beginning on January 1 of even-numbered years.
(Ord. 2006-09, 03-29-2006) (Ord. 2005-04, 02-02-
2005) (Ord. 2004-10, 09-15-2004) (Ord 1999-31, 12-
01-1999) (Ord. 1979-03, 04-05-1979)
2-3-4. Assignments to each member.
The chairman may assign specific areas of concern
to each member of the Commission and said members
of a subcommittee of such composition as the member
and the Mayor shall see fit. The Commission member
shall be the Chairperson of the subcommittee he/she is
appointed to, and the subcommittee shall assist the
2-5 (February 22, 2018)
commission member in the area of his special concern
as designated by the Commission Chairperson.
(Ord. 2004-10, 09-15-2004) (Ord. 1978-26, 10-26-
1978)
2-3-5. Compensation.
The members of the Commission shall receive such
salary and reimbursement for expenses as the City
Council shall from time to time by resolution determine.
Any subcommittee members appointed shall serve
without compensation other than for reimbursement of
out-of-pocket expenses incurred with the prior approval
of the Chairman of the Commission.
(Ord. 1979-03, 04-05-1979)
2-3-6. Meetings.
The Commission shall meet at least once each
month and all meetings shall comply with the Open and
Public Meeting Law of the State of Utah, Section 52-4-
1 et seq. Should any member of the Commission fail to
attend three consecutive meetings without first having
made arrangements to be excused, he shall be
automatically ineligible for membership on the
Commission; and his position shall vacate, to be filled
by appointment of the Mayor in the manner heretofore
prescribed.
(Ord. 2004-10, 09-15-2004) (Ord. 1978-26, 10-26-
1978)
2-3-7. Proceedings and records.
The Commission proceedings and records, the
comprehensive plan, and the ordinances administered
and enforced by the Commission shall be available for
public inspection at all times during regular business
hours. Copies of all ordinances shall be available for
purchase at such cost as the Mayor shall determine to be
adequate to reimburse the general fund for the cost of
the preparation and administration of selling the
documents.
The Director shall see that the Commission
Secretary or other designee prepares the minutes of all
meetings of the Commission and that the same are
prepared and preserved by the Director.
Minutes shall be deemed the official record of the
meeting upon the approving vote of the Commission
and the approving signature of the Commission
chairperson or designee.
On or before the 31st day of June of each year, the
Director shall present to the City Council and the Mayor
an annual report covering the activities of the Engineer's
Office and the Commission.
(Ord. 2009-14, 10-21-2009) (Ord. 2004-10, 09-15-
2004) (Ord. 1978-26, 10-26-1978)
2-3-8. Removal from office.
(1) Members of the Planning Commission serve at
the pleasure of the appointing authority, whether the
Mayor or the City Council. Members of the Planning
Commission do not have a property interest in their
position on the Planning Commission.
(2) Members of the Planning Commission may be
removed from office by the appointing authority,
whether the Mayor or the City Council, for cause.
Cause shall include unprofessional conduct, dishonesty,
insulting or abusive behavior, conflicts of interest that
remain unresolved after notice, criminal acts, and
malfeasance in office.
(Ord. 2014-06, 05-07-2014)
2-6 (December 5, 2016)
CHAPTER 4. VARIANCES
2-4-1. Board of adjustment - Appointment - Term
- Vacancy. (Repealed)
2-4-2. Organization - Procedures. (Repealed)
2-4-3. Powers and duties.
2-4-4. Appeals. (Repealed)
2-4-5. Routine and uncontested matters.
(Repealed)
2-4-6. Repealed. (Ord. 93-08, 05-13-93)
2-4-7. Variances.
2-4-8. District court review of board of adjustment
decision. (Repealed)
2-4-1. Board of adjustment - Appointment - Term
- Vacancy. (Repealed)
(Ord. 2016-15, 10-19-2016)
2-4-2. Organization - Procedures. (Repealed)
(Ord. 2016-15, 10-19-2016)
2-4-3. Powers and duties.
(1) The administrative hearing officer shall hear
and decide:
(a) appeals from zoning decisions applying
the zoning ordinance; and
(b) variances from the terms of the zoning
ordinance.
(2) The Zoning Administrator may make
determinations regarding the existence, expansion, or
modification of nonconforming uses.
(Ord. 2016-15, 10-19-2016) (Ord. 2006-24, 11-15-
2006) (Ord. 1993-08, 05-13-1993)
2-4-4. Appeals. (Repealed)
(Ord. 2016-15, 10-19-2016)
2-4-5. Routine and uncontested matters.
(Repealed)
(Ord. 2016-15, 10-19-2016)
2-4-6. Repealed.
(Ord. 2006-24, 11-15-2006)
2-4-7. Variances.
(1) Any person or entity desiring a waiver or
modification of the requirements of the zoning
ordinance as applied to a parcel of property that he
owns, leases, or in which he holds some other beneficial
interest may apply to the administrative hearing officer
for a variance from the terms of the zoning ordinance.
(2) (a) The administrative hearing officer may
grant a variance only if:
(i) literal enforcement of the zoning
ordinance would cause an unreasonable hardship for the
applicant that is not necessary to carry out the general
purpose of the zoning ordinance;
(ii) there are special circumstances
attached to the property that do not generally apply to
other properties in the same district;
(iii) granting the variance is essential to
the enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed
by other property in the same district;
(iv) the variance will not substantially
affect the general plan and will not be contrary to the
public interest; and
(v) the spirit of the zoning ordinance is
observed and substantial justice done.
(b) (i) In determining whether or not
enforcement of the zoning ordinance would cause
unreasonable hardship under Subsection (2)(a), the
administrative hearing officer may not find an
unreasonable hardship unless the alleged hardship:
(A) is located on or associated with
the property for which the variance is sought; and
(B) comes from circumstances
peculiar to the property, not from conditions that are
general to the neighborhood.
(ii) In determining whether or not
enforcement of the zoning ordinance would cause
unreasonable hardship under Subsection (2)(a), the
administrative hearing officer may not find an
unreasonable hardship if the hardship is self-imposed or
economic.
(c) In determining whether or not there are
special circumstances attached to the property under
Subsection (2)(a), the administrative hearing officer
may find that special circumstances exist only if the
special circumstances:
(i) relate to the hardship complained of;
and
(ii) deprive the property privileges
granted to other properties in the same district.
(3) The applicant shall bear the burden of proving
that all of the conditions justifying a variance have been
met.
(4) Variances run with the land.
(5) Use variances shall not be granted.
(6) In granting a variance, the administrative
hearing officer may impose additional reasonable
conditions on the applicant that will:
(a) mitigate any anticipated detrimental
effects of the variance; or
(b) serve the purpose of the zoning standard
or requirement that is waived or modified.
(Ord. 2016-15, 10-19-2016) (Ord. 1993-08, 05-13-
1993)
2-4-8. District court review of board of adjustment
decision. (Repealed)
(Ord. 2016-15, 10-19-2016)
2-9 (January 18, 2000)
CHAPTER 5. REPEALED. (Ord. 99-33, 12-01-99)
2-10 (March 28, 2006)
CHAPTER 6. EMPLOYEE GRIEVANCE
APPEAL BOARD
2-6-1. Establishment of employee grievance appeal
board.
2-6-2. Selection of Board Members and alternates.
2-6-3. Vacancies.
2-6-4. Conflicts of interest.
2-6-5. Hearing Procedure.
2-6-6. Court of Appeals.
2-6-1. Establishment of employee grievance appeal
board.
There is herewith established an Employee
Grievance Appeal Board (hereinafter in this Chapter the
“Board”).
(Ord. 2006-01, 01-04-2006); (Ord. 91-02, 06-14-91)
2-6-2. Selection of Board members and alternates.
(1) Three members of the board shall be elected in
December or January by popular vote of the regular
status employees of Tooele City. The election shall be
effectuated by the Human Resources Director. If the
popular vote results in a tie, the City Recorder shall
randomly select one name of those tied to serve on the
Board. Three alternates shall be elected in the same
manner. The Board members shall serve staggered twoyear
terms, running from January 1 to December 31. At
the first election held, two members shall be selected to
serve a two-year term and one member shall be selected
to serve a one-year term. Thereafter all terms shall be
two years unless terminated sooner as provided herein.
(2) The Tooele City Council, in January of each
year following a municipal election, shall appoint two
individuals to serve as Board members and a first and
second alternate. The City Council shall designate one
appointee to serve as Chair of the Board during the
appointee’s Board term.
(Ord. 2006-01, 01-04-2006); (Ord. 91-02, 06-14-91)
2-6-3. Vacancies.
(1) Whenever a vacancy occurs in the Board due
to a conflict of interes, death, illness, accident,
termination or resignation of a Board member, the first
alternate Board member shall hear the appeal. If the
first alternate is unavailable or disqualified, the second
and successive alternates shall hear the appeal. The
alternate Board member shall come from the same
representing group (i.e. City Council appointment v.
popular vote) from which the vacancy occurred.
(Ord. 2006-01, 01-01-2006); (Ord. 91-02, 06-14-91)
(2) When a vacancy is filled with an alternate on a
temporary basis, the alternate shall fill the vacancy for
the specific appeal at issue and then revert back to
alternate status. When a vacancy is protracted or
permanent, the alternate shall fill the vacancy for the
balance of the absent Board member’s term. Questions
regarding the temporariness or permanency of a
vacancy shall be resolved by a vote of the non-absent
Board members.
(Ord. 2006-01, 01-04-2006)
2-6-4. Conflicts of interest.
(1) Board members shall avoid the appearance of
impropriety in their actions including avoiding conflicts
of interest, undue bias, or prejudice.
(2) Conflicts of interest may occur when the
appealing employee and a Board member, for example:
(a) are relatives, as defined in the City’s
Nepotism policy;
(b) are close neighbors;
(c) are close friends;
(d) have a minister / congregant relationship
(e) have made a campaign contribution to or
received a campaign contribution from one or the other;
(f) are immediate co-workers;
(g) have a direct supervisor/subordinate
relationship; or,
(h) have both filed grievances involving the
same or similar occurrences or issues.
(3) Any party alleging that a conflict of interest
exists shall submit a letter in writing to the City
Recorder in advance of the hearing date. The City
Recorder shall forward the letter to the Board Chair.
(4) A Board member who has been identified as
potentially having a conflict of interest may temporarily
resign or may be removed from the hearing by majority
vote of the remaining Board members.
(Ord. 2006-01, 01-04-2006); (Ord. 91-02, 06-14-91)
2-6-5. Hearing Procedure.
(1) After exhausting all procedural steps afforded
to employees by Tooele City’s Personnel Policies and
Procedures, an employee may appeal to the Appeal
Board if the decision resulted in any of the following:
(a) involuntary separation (i.e., termination or
dismissal);
(b) suspension without pay for more than two
days;
(c) involuntary transfer from one position to
another with less remuneration; or,
(d) involuntary demotion to a position of less
remuneration.
(2) Appeals to the Appeal Board must be
submitted to the City Recorder’s Office within ten (10)
working days after receiving the final decision from
internal grievance processes. The City Recorder will
promptly refer a copy of the appeal to the Appeal Board
members. Upon receipt of the appeal, the Appeal Board
will have up to twenty (20) working days to schedule
and conduct a hearing.
(3) Appealing employees have the right to appear
before the Appeal Board in person, to be represented by
legal counsel, to present their own witnesses and
evidence, to have a public hearing, to confront the
witnesses whose testimony is to be considered, and to
examine the evidence to be considered by the Appeal
Board. Appealing employees do not have the right to
2-11 (March 28, 2006)
require the City to compel the attendance of witnesses
not under the City’s direct control.
(4) The defending City representative has the right
to appear before the Appeal Board in person, to be
represented by counsel, to present their own witnesses
and evidence, to confront the witnesses whose
testimony is to be considered, and to examine the
evidence to be considered by the Appeal Board.
(5) The Appeal Board is entitled to determine the
following:
(a) whether the appealing employee was
afforded adequate due process;
(b) whether the adverse employment action
was lawful;
(c ) whether the adverse employment action
was supported by substantial evidence; and
(d) whether applicable, established Tooele
City Policies and Procedures were substantially
followed.
(6) The Appeal Board may not decide an appeal
based upon an interpretation of law or policy different
from that of managers, override or modify policy
previously approved by the City Council by ordinance,
override or modify duly enacted laws or regulations, or
render findings based on superseded laws, policies,
procedures, or practices.
(7) Each decision of the Appeal Board is by secret
ballot. The Appeal Board shall transmit the ballots to
the City Recorder. The Appeal Board will
communicate to the City Recorder the results of the
vote within five (5) working days from the date of the
appeal hearing. For good cause, the Appeal Board may
extend the 5-day period to a maximum of fifteen (15)
working days. The City Recorder, in turn, will
communicate the decision to the appealing employee
and to the Mayor.
(8) If the Appeal Board finds in favor, in full or in
part, of the appealing employee, the Appeal Board must
provide that the employee receive either (i) the
employee’s salary for the period of time during which
the employee is discharged or suspended without pay,
or (ii) any deficiency in salary for the period during
which the employee was transferred or demoted to a
position of less remuneration. Any reinstatement of
salary shall be offset by any compensation the employee
received from other employment during the pendency of
the appeal. Insurance reinstatement is under the control
of the respective insurer and reinstatement may still
result in the employee being subject to re-hire status,
pre-existing condition clauses, etc.
(9) Both the City and the appealing employee may
submit documents and other evidence to the Board in
advance of the hearing. Any materials sent to the Board
shall be sent to the opposing party at the same time and
in the same manner.
(10) Separate from the hearing, the Board shall not
independently investigate the facts and circumstances
giving rise to the appeal.
(11) Prior to the hearing, Board members shall not
discuss with any employee, witness, or other party,
directly or indirectly, the facts and circumstances giving
rise to the appeal.
(12) The Board shall have the discretion to
determine matters of hearing procedure, including:
(a) the date, time, and place of the hearing;
(b) whether to allow opening statements;
(c) whether to allow closing statements;
(d) the order in which evidence is to be
presented;
(e) whether to allow argument on the
evidence;
(f) the length of time each party has to
present statements and argument, if any, and evidence;
(g) pre-vote deliberations;
(h) the preparation of findings of fact; and,
(i) other procedural matters.
(13) The Appeal Board will deliver to the City
Recorder written findings supporting the majority vote.
(14) The City Recorder will keep a record of the
appeal. The record will include, among other things,
the following:
(a) the marked ballots;
(b) the findings;
(c) any recording of the appeal proceedings;
and,
(d) all evidence and materials submitted to the
Board by the City and by the appealing employee.
(Ord. 2006-01, 01-04-2006); (Ord. 91-02, 06-14-91)
2-6-6. Court of Appeals.
(1) The result of the Appeal Board’s secret ballot
vote may be appealed by either the City or the
appealing employee to the Utah Court of Appeals by
filing with that Court a Notice of Appeal pursuant to
U.C.A. §10-3-1106 (1953), as amended.
(2) In the event an appeal is filed with the Court of
Appeals, the decision of the Appeal Board, including
payment of back wages, will be automatically stayed
from the date of the Appeal Board’s vote until a ruling
has been rendered by the Court of Appeals.
(Ord. 2006-01, 01-04-2006)
2-12 (May 20, 1993)
CHAPTER 7. HISTORICAL PRESERVATION
COMMISSION
2-7-1. Historical preservation commission.
2-7-2. Duties.
2-7-1. Historical preservation commission.
There is hereby created an Historical Preservation
Commission of five (5) members with a demonstrated
interest, compliance or knowledge in historical
preservation. At least two (2) of these members shall be
professionals from the disciplines of history and
architecture or architectural history. The members shall
be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the
Council. Said members shall be residents of Tooele
City. The Recorder shall notify such appointees and
request a written acceptance from them on their
appointment. All such designated appointees shall
within thirty (30) days file with the Recorder his or her
acceptance of appointment. Should the same not be
filed within the said period, the person shall be
considered to have declined the appointment, and the
Mayor shall, with the consent of the Council, designate
another party for such appointment. The designated
appointees upon filing acceptance of appointment, shall
automatically be members of the Historical Preservation
Commission. The Historical Preservation Commission
shall meet at least twice each year and shall appoint a
Chairperson from among its members. Business shall
be conducted in open public meetings with written
minutes of each Commission meeting, prepared and
available for public inspection. All vacancies on the
Commission occasioned by removal, resignation or
otherwise shall be reported to the Mayor, who shall fill
such vacancy pursuant to the manner of appointment
provided herein. (Ord. 85-02, 02-28-85)
2-7-2. Duties of the commission.
It shall be the duty of the Commission to:
(1) Survey and inventory community historic
resources.
The Historic Preservation Commission shall
conduct or cause to be conducted a survey of historic,
architectural and archeological resources within Tooele
City. The survey shall be compatible with the Utah
Inventory of Historic and Archeological Sites. Survey
and Inventory documents shall be maintained and open
to the public. The survey will be updated at least every
ten (10) years.
(2) Review Proposed Nominations to the National
Register of Historic Places.
The Historic Preservation Commission shall
review and comment to the State Historic Preservation
Officer on all proposed National Register nominations
for the properties within the boundaries of Tooele City.
When the Historic Preservation Commission considers a
National Register nomination which is normally
evaluated by professionals in a specific discipline and
that discipline is not represented on the Commission,
the Commission will seek expertise in this area before
rendering its decision.
(3) Provide advice and information.
(a) The Historic Preservation Commission
shall act in an advisory role to other officials and
departments of Tooele City regarding the identification
and protection of local historic and archeological
resources.
(b) The Historic Preservation Commission
shall work toward the continuing education of citizens
regarding historic preservation and Tooele City's
history.
(4) Enforcement of State Historic Preservation
Laws.
The Commission shall support the enforcement
of all State laws relating to historic preservation. These
include, but are not limited to the following Utah Code
Sections: Utah Code Annotated Section 11-18-2, "The
Historic District Act"; Utah Code Annotated Sections
63-18-25, 27, and 30 regarding the protection of Utah
antiquities; and Utah Code Annotated Section 63-18-37
regarding notification of the State Historic Preservation
Office of any known proposed action which would
destroy or effect a site, building or object owned by the
State of Utah and included on or eligible for the State of
National Registers. (Ord. 85-02, 02-20-85)
(January 18, 2000) 2-13
CHAPTER 8. ACCESSIBILITY COMMITTEE
2-8-1. Establishment of Accessibility Committee -
Responsibilities.
2-8-2. Committee membership.
2-8-3. Committee member terms of service -
Election of officers - Removal -Vacancies -
Duties.
2-8-4. Quarterly reports to city council.
2-8-1. Establishment of Accessibility Committee -
Responsibilities.
(1) There is hereby established an Accessibility
Committee.
(2) The committee shall bear the responsibility of
completing on or before July 26, 1992 a "transition
plan" identifying all obstacles to accessibility in City
facilities and programs, and providing a detailed plan
and schedule to correct the problems.
(3) The committee shall also complete by January
26, 1993 an evaluation of all city services, programs
and policies to identify all barriers to accessibility.
(4) The committee shall review for disabled
accessibility all plans and designs for new construction
in the city, both public and private, and make
recommendations and give advice to the city engineer
and building inspector regarding such plans.
(5) The committee shall evaluate and report on the
city's compliance with the ADA. (Ord. 99-32, 12-01-
99); (Ord. 92-07, 3-4-92)
2-8-2. Committee membership.
The Accessibility Committee shall consist of three
members, two of whom shall be chosen from the
citizens of Tooele City at large with reference to their
fitness for such office, and the other representing the
city community development department. The
committee members shall serve without compensation.
All members shall be appointed by the mayor with the
consent of the city council. The city recorder shall
notify such appointees and request from them a written
acceptance of appointment. All appointees shall within
30 days of receipt of such notification file with the
recorder an acceptance of appointment. Should the
same not be filed within 30 days, the person shall be
considered to have declined the appointment and the
mayor shall designate another person for appointment.
The same procedure for appointment shall thereafter be
followed. (Ord. 99-32, 12-01-99); (Ord. 92-07, 3-4-92)
2-8-3. Committee member terms of service -
Election of officers - Removal - Vacancies - Duties.
Accessibility committee members shall be
appointed for a two-year term. Following their
appointments, the members shall meet and elect a
chairman and such other officers as they deem
necessary. The mayor, with consent of the city council,
may remove any director for misconduct or neglect of
duty. Vacancies in the board of committee members,
occasioned by removals, resignations, or otherwise,
shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same
manner as original appointments. The Accessibility
committee shall establish their own schedule of
meetings. (Ord. 99-32, 12-01-99); (Ord. 92-07, 3-4-92)
2-8-4. Quarterly reports to city council.
The Accessibility committee shall make a quarterly
report to the city council and mayor on the progress
toward creating the transition plan and the selfevaluation
due January 26, 1993. (Ord. 99-32, 12-01-
99); (Ord. 92-07, 3-4-92)
3-1 (August 17, 2017)
TITLE 3. FIRE
Chapter 1. Fire Department.
Chapter 2. Flammable Liquids.
Chapter 3. Fire Code.
Chapter 4. Fireworks.
Chapter 5. Local Fire Officer.
Chapter 6: Fire Code: Enforcement and Abatement.
Chapter 7: Fire Alarms.
CHAPTER 1. FIRE DEPARTMENT
3-1-1. Composition of department.
3-1-2. Compensation of members.
3-1-3. Appointment and removal.
3-1-4. Duties and powers of the fire chief.
3-1-5. Special duties of the fire chief.
3-1-6. Authority.
3-1-7. Street blockade.
3-1-8. Limits at fire.
3-1-9. Disobedience of by-standers.
3-1-10. Conduct of members at fires.
3-1-11. Unlawful interference.
3-1-12. Use of water.
3-1-13. Rules for theaters, places of public
assemblage.
3-1-14. Combustibles.
3-1-15. Right to enter.
3-1-16. Dangerous and defective structures.
3-1-17. Unoccupied buildings.
3-1-18. Investigation.
3-1-19. Repealed.
3-1-20. Repealed.
3-1-21. Repealed.
3-1-22. Repealed.
3-1-23. Repealed.
3-1-24. Apparatus.
3-1-25. Damage to be reported.
3-1-26. Interference with fire apparatus.
3-1-27. Fire outside city limits.
3-1-28. Repealed.
3-1-1. Composition of department.
The Fire Department, a part of the Department of
Public Safety, shall consist of the Chief of the
Department, one or more assistant chiefs, one or more
chauffeurs or engineers and not to exceed fifty (50) men
as call men who shall or may volunteer for such
services, and be accepted by a majority vote of the
membership.
(Ord. 67-3, 08-14-67)
3-1-2. Compensation of members.
The salary of the Chief of the Fire Department shall
be fixed by ordinance, and the salary of the members of
the Fire Department shall be fixed by the Assistant to
the Mayor, with the approval of the Mayor, within any
adopted salary schedule. (See Charter, Sec. 2-10)
(Ord. 67-3, 08-14-67)
3-1-3. Appointment and removal.
The Chief of the Fire Department may recommend the
appointment or removal of any officer or member of the
Department to the Mayor. However, in case of emergency
the Fire Chief may appoint or discharge members of the
Department for the duration of the emergency. (Ord. 67-3,
08-14-67)
3-1-4. Duties and powers of the fire chief.
The duty of extinguishing fires and of protecting life
and property is entrusted to the Chief of the Fire
Department. He may divide the City into Fire districts and
make such rules and regulations, subject to the approval of
the Director of Public Safety for the government of all
officers and members of the Department, as he may deem
expedient. He may make suitable regulations under which
the officers and members of the Department shall be
required to wear an appropriate uniform or badge, by
which, in case of fire and at other times, the authority and
position in the Fire Department may be known. The Chief
shall have the sole and entire command over all officers
and members of the Department at fires. He shall have full
charge at all times of all apparatus and appurtenances
belonging to the Department, and he shall adopt such
measures as he shall deem expedient for the extinguishment
of fires, protection of property, or preservation of order and
observance of the laws of the State, and for the
enforcement of the duties required of him by law and the
provisions of this Code. It shall be the duty of the Chief of
the Department to inspect engines, hose and hook ladder
equipment of the Fire Department.
(Ord. 67-3, 08-17-67)
3-1-5. Special duties of the fire chief.
It shall be especially the duty of the Chief of the Fire
Department to see that at all times the provisions of this
Code relating to the protection and regulations of property
are strictly enforced, and also all provisions for the
prevention of and the protection against fires.
(Ord. 67-3, 08-14-67)
3-1-6. Authority.
When a fire is in progress, the Chief of the
Department, or in his absence, the Officer in charge, in
case of urgent public necessity, may order any telegraph,
telephone, electric light wires or poles, in close proximity
thereto, to be torn down or otherwise disposed of for the
purpose of checking the conflagration, but neither the Chief
of the Department or any Officer or member of the Fire
Department shall unnecessarily or recklessly destroy or
injure any building or other property.
(Ord. 67-3, 08-14-67)
3-1-7. Street blockade.
When a fire shall occur it shall be lawful for the Chief
or the Officer in command to blockade any street, avenue,
alley, sidewalk or other place if in his judgment it is
3-2 (August 17, 2017)
necessary to secure the efficient working of the men,
hose, engines, or hook and ladder apparatus under his
command, and to protect the hose of said Department
from injury. It shall be unlawful for any person to break
through said blockade. (Ord. 67-3, 08-14-67)
3-1-8. Limits at fire.
The Chief of Police in conjunction with the Fire
Officer in charge may prescribe the limits in the vicinity
of the fire within which no person, except members of
the department, and police, or those admitted by order
of the Officer in charge shall be permitted to come.
(Ord. 67-3, 08-14-67)
3-1-9. Disobedience of by-standers.
The Chief or any Officer in charge of the
Department may require the aid of every citizen,
inhabitant or stander-by in drawing any engine, cart or
other fire apparatus to the fire and upon the refusal or
neglect of any such person to immediately comply with
such requirement, the offender shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor. All officers authorized to command the
aid or assistance of a citizen, inhabitant or by-stander,
are authorized likewise to arrest such citizen, inhabitant
or by-stander for refusal to obey any reasonable
directions for the extinguishing of fire or the protection
of property. (Ord 67-3, 08-14-67)
3-1-10. Conduct of members at fires.
Prompt, quiet obedience must be given all orders
from Officers, and no disputing shall be allowed while
on duty. In going to, while at, or returning from fires,
all unnecessary noise shall be avoided, and a civil
demeanor shall always be preserved to citizens, but no
orders shall be taken from them. (Ord. 67-3, 08-14-67)
3-1-11. Unlawful interference.
Any person who shall wilfully hinder any Officer or
Fireman in the charge of his duty at a fire, or in any
manner injure, deface or destroy any engine, hose or
other fire apparatus belonging to the City or who shall
interfere with any Fire Company or person, or who shall
wilfully break or injure a water pipe, or in any way
interfere with the water or its source of supply shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 67-3, 08-14-67)
3-1-12. Use of water.
The Chief of the Fire Department or any other
Officer in charge, shall have the right to use water from
any source for the purpose of extinguishing fires or for
saving property in danger of being destroyed thereby.
(Ord. 67-3, 08-14-67)
3-1-13. Rules for theaters, places of public
assemblage.
It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief, subject to the
approval of the Director of Public Safety, to make such
rules and regulations as may be necessary for the
prevention of fire in theaters, schools, churches and other
places of assemblage or public amusement. Such rules and
regulations shall be printed and posted in conspicuous
places as designated by the Fire Chief, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to remove, obstruct or deface the
same. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner,
manager, agent or person having control of such building to
cause and bring about compliance with all such rules and
regulations. (Ord 67-3, 08-14-67)
3-1-14. Combustibles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit the
accumulation of empty boxes, waste, or other flammable
substance on any premises or carry on any business in or
about any premises in such a manner as to endanger such
premises or building or other buildings to fire or explosion.
(Ord. 67-3, 08-14-67)
3-1-15. Right to enter.
The Fire Chief or his Deputies shall have the right to
enter upon any premises at all reasonable hours for the
purpose of inspecting the same. (Ord. 67-3, 08-14-67)
3-1-16. Dangerous and defective structures.
Whenever in the judgment of the Fire Chief, any
building or structure, or any portion thereof, or any
appurtenances or fixtures thereto, or any chimney,
smokestack, stove, oven, furnace or wiring or thing
connected with such building or premises is deemed
defective or unsafe, and such defect or unsafe condition is
such as to create a danger from fire; or whenever the owner
or occupant of said building or structure or part thereof
keeps material, waste or rubbish of any description in such
a manner that the same creates a danger from fire; the Fire
Chief or his deputies shall give the owner, or person having
control of such building or structure not exceeding five (5)
days notice of required changes, alterations, or repairs
necessary to render the same safe to life and property from
fire, and any person refusing or neglecting to comply with
such notice shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 67-3, 08-14-67)
3-1-17. Unoccupied buildings.
Whenever any unoccupied building is not properly
secured or enclosed, the Fire Chief, or his deputies shall
immediately visit the premises and notify the owners or
persons having control of the same forthwith to secure or
enclose the same and the person so notified as aforesaid,
shall, within forty-eight (48) hours comply therewith.
(Ord. 67-3, 08-14-67)
3-1-18. Investigation.
The Chief (or in his absence, his assistants in charge of
the fire), shall, after its extinguishment, make a prompt and
thorough investigation of the cause of the fire, the time of
breaking out, the amount of loss and insurance, a
description of the affected buildings and premises, and
shall secure all other useful information and data available,
and record the same in a book kept for that purpose in the
3-3 (August 17, 2017)
office of the Department and shall report the same to
the Public Safety Director at such times as he may
direct. (Ord. 67-3, 08-14-67)
3-1-19. Repealed.
(Ord. 87-22, 01-02-88)
3-1-20. Repealed.
(Ord. 87-22, 01-02-88)
3-1-21. Repealed.
(Ord. 87-22, 01-02-88)
3-1-22. Repealed.
(Ord. 87-22, 01-02-88)
3-1-23. Repealed.
(Ord. 87-22, 01-02-88)
3-1-24. Apparatus.
All City engines, hose and other fire equipment
shall be kept at such place or places as the Public Safety
Director shall provide and designate, and shall be kept
in proper condition for immediate use. (Ord. 67-3, 08-
14-67)
3-1-25. Damage to be reported.
If, by accident or otherwise, the property of any
person is damaged by the Fire Company, it shall be the
duty of the Officer having charge of such Company
causing the damage to report the same immediately to
the Chief. (Ord. 67-3, 08-14-67)
3-1-26. Interference with fire apparatus.
Any person who may use or in any way interfere
with any fire apparatus, without the consent of the
Chief, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 67-3,
08-14-67)
3-1-27. Fire outside city limits.
The Council may enter into cooperative agreements
with the governing bodies of Cities, Towns and
Counties of the State of Utah and in close proximity to
the City to extinguish fires in any such areas outside the
City limits of the City and may authorize the Fire
Department under regulations established for that
purpose to extinguish fires in such areas; and the City
shall not be liable for any damage to persons or
property resulting from fire fighting equipment being
outside the City limits pursuant to such agreements.
(Ord. 67-3, 08-14-67)
3-1-28. Repealed
(Ord. 87-22, 01-02-88)
3-1-29. Burning of solid waste; recreational fires.
(1) General Rule. No person shall, for the purpose
of final disposal thereof, burn on any lot, street, alley,
gutter or on any land, public or private, any solid waste.
(2) Exception. Recreational or cooking fires are
allowed by persons on their own property so long as:
(a) the recrational or cooking intention for the fire
is evident;
(b) the fire pile height does not exceed 12 inches
above the bottom of the fire ring, fire pit, or other fire
containing structure at any time;
(c) the fire is contained within a non-combustible
fire ring, fire pit, or other fire containing structure no larger
than 36 inches in diameter;
(d) fire extinguishing items are immediately onhand
(e.g., hose, shovel, water bucket, fire extinguisher);
and,
(e) the fire does not become a smoke or fume
nuisance to neighboring properties.
(Ord. 2012-08, 03-21-2012) (Ord. 1993-18, 10-01-1993)
(November 4, 2004) 3-4
CHAPTER 2. FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS
3-2-1. Definitions.
3-2-2. Repealed.
3-2-3. Repealed.
3-2-4. Routing of tank vehicles.
3-2-1. Definitions.
All words and phrases used in this Chapter have
been defined by the latest edition of the International
Fire Code as adopted by the State of Utah and by
Tooele City. (Ord. 2004-15, 10-20-04); (Ord. 99-20,
07-07-99); (Ord. 67-3, 08-14-67)
3-2-2. Repealed.
(Ord. 75-22, 9-25-75)
3-2-3. Repealed.
(Ord. 73-04, 8-13-73)
3-2-4. Routing of tank vehicles.
Tank trucks, tank full trailers, tank semi-trailers,
and all tank vehicles making deliveries of flammable
liquids to bulk storage plants located on East Vine
Street shall do so over the following described routes, to
wit: Utah Avenue east to 2nd Street, thence south on
2nd Street. Tank trucks, tank full trailors, tank semitrailers,
and all tank vehicles making deliveries of
flammable liquids to bulk storage plants located within
the City on West Vine Street shall do so over the
following described route, to wit: First North Street
west to Coleman Street; thence south on Coleman Street
to Vine Street; thence east on Vine Street to bulk plant.
(Ord. 67-3, 08-14-67)
(December 3, 2009) 3-5
CHAPTER 3. FIRE CODE
3-3-1. International fire code.
3-3-2. Enforcement.
3-3-3. Definitions.
3-3-4. Conflict.
3-3-5. Amendments made in the "International Fire
Code".
3-3-6. Establishment of limits of districts in which
storage of flammable or combustible liquids
in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited.
3-3-7. Establishment of limits in which storage of
liquefied petroleum gases is to be restricted.
3-3-8. Establishment of limits of districts in which
storage of explosive materials is to be
prohibited.
3-3-9. Flammable and combustible liquids.
3-3-10. Fires on paved streets prohibited.
3-3-11. Appeals.
3-3-12. New materials, processes, or occupancies
which may require permits.
3-3-13. Penalties.
3-3-14. Internal Coaxial Antennas.
3-3-15. Smoke and Heat Vents.
3-3-16. Key Lock Box System.
3-3-1. International Fire Code.
Tooele City recognizes that the State of Utah has
adopted the International Fire Code, as amended and/or
revised, as law governing the State of Utah and all
political subdivisions thereof. To the extent that Tooele
City is not preempted by the law of the State of Utah from
adopting the International Fire Code as an ordinance of
Tooele City, its most current edition is so adopted,
including its Appendices B,C, and D. (Ord. 2005-14, 06-
15-2005); (Ord. 2004-15, 10-20-04); (Ord. 98-04, 01-
21-98); (Ord. 95-04, 05-19-95)
3-3-2. Enforcement.
(1) The "International Fire Code" and the
"International Fire Code Standards" shall be enforced by
the bureau of fire prevention in the Tooele City fire
department.
(2) The chief of the fire department shall recommend
to the mayor the employment of technical inspectors,
who, when such authorization is made, shall be selected
through an examination to determine their fitness for the
position. The examination shall be open to members and
nonmembers of the fire department, and appointments
made after examination shall be for an indefinite term
with removal only for cause. (Ord. 2004-15, 10-20-04);
(Ord. 95-04, 05-19-95)
3-3-3. Definitions.
As used in the "International Fire Code":
(1) "Jurisdiction" means Tooele City.
(2) "Chief of the bureau of fire prevention" means
the fire chief. (Ord. 2004-15, 10-20-04); (Ord. 95-04,
05-19-95)
3-3-4. Conflict.
The provisions of the “International Fire Code” shall
be read and interpreted whenever possible so as to comply
with the provisions of the zoning, building, and other
ordinances of Tooele City. If a conflict between the
"International Fire Code" and another ordinance arises,
the conflicting provisions shall be interpreted to first
provide for the greatest safety of the property and citizens
of the community, and second to provide as nearly as
possible for the accomplishment of the intent of the
"International Fire Code." (Ord. 2004-15, 10-20-04);
(Ord. 95-04, 05-19-95)
3-3-5. Amendments made in the "International Fire
Code."
Applications for permits made under Section 105 of
the "International Fire Code" shall be made to the Tooele
City Engineering Department. (Ord. 2004-15, 10-20-04);
(Ord. 95-04, 05-19-95)
3-3-6. Establishment of limits of districts in which
storage of flammable or combustible liquids in outside
aboveground tanks is prohibited.
The limits referred to in Section 7902 of the
"International Fire Code" in which the storage of
flammable or combustible liquids is restricted are hereby
established as follows: in M-D and M-G zoning districts
by permitted use, and in C-G zoning districts by
conditional use only. (Ord. 2004-15, 10-20-04); (Ord.
95-04, 05-19-95)
3-3-7. Establishment of limits in which storage of
liquefied petroleum gases is to be restricted.
The limits referred to in Sections 8204 and 8212 in
which the storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted
are hereby established as follows: in M-D and M-G
zoning districts by permitted use, and in C-G zoning
districts by conditional use only. (Ord. 95-04, 05-19-95)
3-3-8. Establishment of limits of districts in which
storage of explosive materials is to be prohibited.
The limits referred to in Section 7702 of the
"International Fire Code" in which storage of explosive
materials is prohibited are hereby established as follows:
in M-D, M-G, and C-G zoning districts by conditional use
only. (Ord. 2004-15, 10-20-04); (Ord. 95-04, 05-19-95)
3-3-9. Flammable and combustible liquids.
Section 7901.1.1 of the "International Fire Code" is
amended by adding the following: "No flammable or
combustible liquid shall be dispensed from, transported
in, or stored in any glass, crockery, or similar breakable
container." (Ord. 2004-15, 10-20-04); (Ord. 95-04, 05-
19-95)
3-3-10. Fires on paved streets prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to build, maintain, or
assist in building or maintaining any fire upon any paved
street. (Ord. 95-04, 05-19-95)
(December 3, 2009) 3-6
3-3-11. Appeals.
Whenever the chief disapproves an application or
refuses to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed
that the provisions of this chapter or the "International
Fire Code" do not apply or that their true intent and
meaning have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted,
the applicant may appeal from the decision of the chief to
the board of appeals created under authority of Section
103.1.4 of the "International Fire Code." (Ord. 2004-15,
10-20-04); (Ord. 95-04, 05-19-95)
3-3-12. New materials, processes, or occupancies
which may require permits.
The chief of the fire department shall determine and
specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be
heard, any new materials, processes, or occupancies for
which permits are required in addition to those now
enumerated in the "International Fire Code." The fire
chief shall post a list of such new materials, processes, or
occupancies in a conspicuous place at the fire department
and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. (Ord.
2004-15, 10-20-04); (Ord. 95-04, 05-19-95)
3-3-13. Penalties.
(1) Any person who violates or fails to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter, the "International
Fire Code", or the "International Fire Code Standards," or
who violates or fails to comply with any order made
thereunder, or who builds in violation of any detailed
statement of specifications or plans submitted and
approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued
thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or
who fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or
modified by the board of appeals or by a court of
competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall
severally for each and every such violation and
noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a class C
misdemeanor. The imposition of one penalty for any
violation shall not excuse the violation or permit the
violation to continue. All such persons shall be required
to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a
reasonable time. When not otherwise specified, each day
that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute
a separate offense.
(2) The application of the penalty identified in
Subsection (1) of this Section shall not be held to prevent
the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. (Ord.
2004-15, 10-20-04); (Ord. 95-04, 05-19-95)
3-3-14. Internal Coaxial Antennas
All new Type II (Fire Resistive) and Type II (Noncombustible)
construction over 25,000 square feet and all
buildings of “Unlimited Area” construction will require
the installation of an “Internal Coaxial Antenna” which
supports the Tooele County Public Safety radio
communications system. Implementation of this
ordinance shall be pursuant to an Administrative Policy
recommended by the fire chief and approved by the
Mayor. (Ord. 2006-12, 04-27-2006); (Ord. 2001-26, 08-
15-2001); (Ord. 2001-21, 06-20-2001)
3-3-15. Smoke and Heat Vents.
(1) All new commercial and rebuilt commercial roofceiling
assemblies that are not exempted by this
ordinance, which are constructed of lightweight
unprotected or non-rated metal, and/or wood framed roof
systems utilizing wood panels, and/or trussed combustible
construction systems, require the installation of approved
“Smoke and Heat Vents” to provide for automatic
ventilation of structures in the event of a fire. The word
“rebuilt” shall mean and apply to any existing structure
which undergoes more than fifty percent (50%) structural
framing renovation of the roof.
(2) One (1) 2 foot by 4 foot (2’ X 4’) “Smoke and
Heat Vent” shall be installed for every zero to fifteen
hundred (0’-1500’) square feet of the top floor’s floor
space in non-sprinkled buildings, or one (1) skylight type
4-foot by 4-foot (4’ X 4’) “Smoke and Heat Vent” for
every zero to three-thousand (0’-3000’) square feet of the
top floor’s floor space. “Smoke and Heat Vents” shall
have a minimum nominal unobstructed opening of two
feet by four feet (2' x 4') or four feet by four feet (4’ x 4’),
respectfully. Approved fusible link “Smoke and Heat
Vents” with unobstructed openings of four feet by four
feet (4’ x 4’) for every three-thousand (3000’)square feet
of the top floor’s floor space are also acceptable. The
“Smoke and Heat Vents” shall be evenly separated with
one (1) “Smoke and Heat Vent” every fifteen-hundred or
three-thousand (1500’ or 3000’) square feet depending on
the installation preference. The interior termination points
shall penetrate rated or non-rated ceiling structures and be
located in common areas of the top floor. The “Smoke
and Heat Vents” shall be installed with a minimum of a 1-
hour fire rated chase. The opening must be unobstructed
by structural elements. In the event there is no enclosed
attic, “Smoke and Heat Vents” shall be installed without
a rated chase. Security screening may be installed which
does not significantly decrease the area of the
unobstructed opening. The screening may not hamper
more than 10% of the opening.
(3) Exemptions.
(a) Single-family dwellings and multiple-family
dwellings of four (4) units or less are exempt from these
requirements.
(b) Multiple-family apartment/condominium/
town-house type buildings with each apartment having an
exterior egress with no common interior hallways are
exempt from these requirements.
(c) Multiple-family dwellings not exempt that
have common hallways shall have at least one (1) twofoot
by four-foot (2’ x 4’) approved skylight in each
apartment/condominium/townhouse as specified above.
These dwellings shall also be required to meet the
requirements of this Section for installation of “Smoke
and Heat Vents” as applied to common areas of the top
floor’s floor space.
(d) Unoccupied storage units with individual
exterior openings are exempt from these requirements.
(e) Occupancies/Buildings that have engineered
and designed smoke and heat removal systems, which
meet the intent of this ordinance, are exempt from these
(December 3, 2009) 3-6.1
requirements. The Fire Department Chief or designated
representative will determine and approve any such
exemption.
(Ord. 2003-22, 07-15-03); (Ord. 2001-27, 8-15-2001)
3-3-16. Key Lock Box System.
(1) As a condition of any building permit approval,
the following structures shall be equipped with a key lock
box at or near the main entrance or such other location
required by the Tooele City Fire Chief:
(a) non-residential structures protected by an
automatic alarm system or automatic suppression system,
or that are secured in a manner that restricts access during
an emergency; and,
(b) multi-family residential structures that have
restricted access through locked doors and have a
common corridor for access to the living units.
(2) All newly constructed structures subject to this
Section shall have a key lock box installed and
operational prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit.
All existing structures subject to this Section that are
required to obtain a building permit for any purpose shall
have a key lock box installed and operational prior to the
final City building inspection.
(3) The Fire Chief shall designate the type of key
lock box system to be implemented within the City and
shall have the authority to require all structures to use the
designated system.
(4) The owner or operator of a structure required to
have a key lock box shall, at all times, keep a key in the
lock box that will allow for access to the structure.
(5) The Fire Chief shall be authorized to implement
rules and regulations for the use of the lock box system.
(Ord. 2009-17, 11-18-09)
(December 3, 2009) 3-6.2
(PAGE 3-6.2 RESERVED)
3-7 (December 11, 2020)
CHAPTER 4. FIREWORKS
3-4-1. Short title.
3-4-2. Definitions.
3-4-3. Sale or use of unauthorized fireworks
unlawful.
3-4-4. Enforcement - Seizure of fireworks sold
unlawfully - Revocation of license.
3-4-5. Time for sale of fireworks.
3-4-6. Dates and time for use of fireworks.
3-4-6.1. 2002 Winter Olympics
3-4-7. Business license required.
3-4-8. Business license application.
3-4-9. License approval or denial.
3-4-10. Display of business license and sales tax
license.
3-4-11. General requirements.
3-4-12. Indoor sales.
3-4-13. Temporary stands and trailers.
3-4-14. Repealed. (Ord. 97-05, 02-05-97)
3-4-15. Display Fireworks.
3-4-16. Permits for display fireworks or
pyrotechnic displays inside public buildings.
3-4-17. Appeal
3-4-18. Limitation.
3-4-1. Short title.
This act shall be known and may be cited as the
"Tooele Fireworks Act." (Ord. 1988-24, 08-03-1988)
3-4-2. Definitions.
The definitions in Utah Code §53-7-202, as
amended, apply to this act.
(Ord. 2010-13, 10-06-2010) (Ord. 1988-24, 08-03-
1988)
3-4-3. Sale or use of unauthorized fireworks
unlawful.
Except as provided hereafter, it is unlawful for any
person or entity to sell, offer for retail sale, or discharge
within the limits of Tooele City any fireworks other
than Class C common state approved explosives. Any
person or entity who is found in violation of this section
is guilty of a class B misdemeanor
(Ord. 2011-12, 06-15-2011) (Ord. 2010-13, 10-06-
2010) (Ord. 1997-05, 02-04-1997) (Ord. 1988-24, 08-
03-1988)
3-4-4. Enforcement - Seizure of fireworks sold
unlawfully - Revocation of license.
(1) Every Tooele City officer charged with the
enforcement of state and municipal laws including all
fire enforcement officials and the division of public
safety is charged with responsibility to enforce this act.
(2) Fireworks sold or offered for sale in violation
of this chapter may be seized and destroyed and the
license of the person selling or offering fireworks for
sale may be revoked, without refund of license fee or
bond. (Ord. 1988-24, 08-03-1988)
3-4-5. Time for sale of fireworks.
Class C common state approved explosives may be
sold each year beginning on June 24 and ending on July
25; beginning on December 29 and ending on
December 31; and two days before and on the Chinese
New Year’s eve.
(Ord. 2018-09, 07-18-2018) (Ord. 2012-14, 05-16-
2012) (Ord. 2011-12, 06-15-2011) (Ord. 2010-13, 10-
06-2010) (Ord. 88-24, 08-03-1988)
3-4-6. Time for use of fireworks.
(1) Dates. Fireworks authorized by this act may be
discharged each year beginning on July 2 and ending on
July 5; beginning on July 22 and ending on July 25; on
January 1 and December 31; and on the Chinese New
Year’s eve.
(2) Times. Fireworks authorized by this act shall
not be discharged before 11 a.m. or after 11 p..m. on
any given day, except that fireworks may be displayed
(A) on December 31 after 11 p.m. through
1:00 a.m. on January 1,
(B) from 11 a.m. on the Chinese New Year’s
eve through 1:00 a.m. on the following day,
(C) on July 4, from 11 a.m. to midnight, and
(D) on July 24, from 11 a.m. to midnight.
(3) Violation. A person discharging or displaying
fireworks in violation of this section is guilty of an
infraction.
(Ord. 2018-09, 07-18-2018) (Ord. 2012-14, 05-16-
2012) (Ord. 2011-15, 08-17-2011) (Ord. 2011-12, 06-
15-2011) (Ord. 2010-13, 10-06-2010) (Ord. 88-24, 08-
03-1988)
3-4-6.1. 2002 Winter Olympics. Repealed.
(Ord. 2010-13, 10-06-2010) (Ord. 2002-04, 01-23-
2002)
3-4-7. Business license required.
No person shall offer for sale or sell at retail any
fireworks authorized by this act without first having
obtained a Tooele City Business License pursuant to
section 3-4-8.
(Ord. 2010-13, 10-06-2010) (Ord. 1988-24, 08-03-
1988)
3-4-8. Business license application.
All applications for a license to sell, store or handle
fireworks authorized by this act shall:
(1) be made in writing accompanied by a fee of
$350 per stand, per year, which fee shall apply to
business operations maintained for the sale of fireworks,
and which fee shall be paid in addition to any and all
3-8 (December 11, 2020)
other required business license fees;
(2) set forth the proposed location of the fireworks
stand;
(3) include for delivery to the Department
insurance certificates evidencing public liability
coverage in favor of the applicant or the licensee in the
amount of $1,000,000 per injury, $3,000.000 per
incident, and which designate Tooele City as an
additional insured, and which include a minimum of
$1,000,000 product liability coverage;
(4) include a statement that the applicant agrees to
comply strictly with the terms of the license and to
furnish any additional information upon request.
(Ord. 2020-48, 12-02-2020) (Ord. 2010-13, 10-06-
2010) (Ord. 1990-04, 04-12-1990)
3-4-9. License approval or denial.
After a review by the Business License Specialist
and Building Inspector, applicants for a license shall be
notified of approval or denial of a license applicant no
later than ten days after the application is originally
made.
(Ord. 2020-48, 12-02-2020) (Ord. 1988-24, 08-03-
1988)
3-4-10. Display of business license and sales tax
license.
The license to sell fireworks and the sales tax
permit shall be displayed in a prominent place in the
fireworks stand.
(Ord. 1988-24, 08-03-1988)
3-4-11. General requirements.
(1) All fireworks retail sales locations shall be
under the direct supervision of a responsible person
who is 18 years of age or older. A salesperson shall
remain at the sales location at all times unless suitable
locking devices are provided to prevent the
unauthorized access to the merchandise by others, or
unless the merchandise is removed.
(2) Fireworks shall not be sold to any person
under the age of 16 years unless accompanied by an
adult.
(3) Buildings and temporary stands or trailers for
the retail sales of fireworks shall be constructed in
compliance with local rules, or if none, in accordance
with nationally recognized good practice.
(4) All retail sales locations shall be kept clear of
dry grass or other combustible material for a distance of
at least 25 feet in all directions.
(5) Storage of fireworks for sale shall not be
located in residential areas.
(6) Smoking shall not be permitted within 25 feet
of any fireworks either on display for retail sale or being
stored. "Smoking prohibited within 25 feet" (or similar
wording) signs shall be conspicuously posted at all sales
and storage locations. Sign lettering shall be not less
than 2" high with a minimum 3/8" stroke on a
contrasting background.
(7) A sign, clearly visible to the general public,
shall be posted at all fireworks sales locations,
indicating the legal dates for discharge of fireworks.
Sign lettering shall be not less than 1" high with a
minimum 3/16" stroke on a contrasting background.
(8) All retail sales locations shall be equipped with
an approved, portable fire extinguisher having a
minimum 2A rating.
(Ord. 1988-24, 08-03-1988)
3-4-12. Indoor sales.
Fireworks shall be permitted inside permanent
buildings subject to the following regulations:
(1) Up to 250 pounds of fireworks (gross weight),
display of fireworks is unrestricted.
(2) From 251 to 500 pounds of fireworks (gross
weight), display of fireworks must be within constant
visual supervision.
(3) Above 500 pounds of fireworks (gross weight),
display of fireworks must be constantly attended by a
sales person.
(4) The area where fireworks are displayed or
stored shall be at least 50 feet from any flammable
liquid or gas, or other highly combustible material.
Fireworks shall not be stored (including stock for sale)
near exit doorways, stairways or in locations that would
impede egress.
(5) Fireworks shall be stored, handled, displayed
and sold only as packaged units.
(Ord. 1988-24, 08-03-1988)
3-4-13. Temporary stands and trailers.
Retail sales of fireworks shall be permitted from
temporary stands and trailers, and shall be subject to the
following regulations:
(1) Each stand less than 24 feet in length must
have at least two exits. Each stand in excess of 24 feet
in length must have three exits. Exits shall swing out
and be located at opposite ends of the stand. Door
locking devices, if any, shall be easily released from the
inside without special knowledge, key, or effort.
(2) Each stand or trailer shall have a minimum
three feet wide unobstructed aisle, running the length of
the stand or trailer, inside and behind the counter.
(3) The passthrough openings for sales of
fireworks in stands or trailers shall be arranged to
permit the customer to view the merchandise for sale
but prevent the touching or handling of non-prepackaged
fireworks by the customer.
(4) Temporary stands or trailers for the sale of
fireworks shall be located in properly zoned areas, at
least 50 feet from other fireworks stands or trailers,
liquid propane gas, flammable liquid or gas storage and
dispensing units.
(5) If the stand or trailer is used for the overnight
storage of fireworks, it shall be equipped with suitable
locking devices to prevent unauthorized entry.
3-9 (December 11, 2020)
(6) Stands or trailers shall not be illuminated or
heated by any device requiring an open flame or
exposed heating elements. All heaters and lighting
devices shall be approved by the Building Inspector.
(7) The general public shall not be allowed to
enter a temporary stand or trailer.
(8) A sign prohibiting the discharge of fireworks
within 100 feet of the stand or trailer shall be
prominently displayed.
(9) No vehicles shall be permitted to park closer
than 25 feet of the stand.
(10) All stands must be e rected upon p rivate
property.
(11) Fireworks stands shall be removed no later
than 15 days after the holiday designated in section 3-4-
6. No stand shall be erected more than 15 days prior to
holidays designated in section 3-4-6.
(12) Pr io r to the issuance o f a license , each
applicant shall file with the Department a cash deposit,
certificate of deposit, or surety bond made payable to
the City in the amount of $250.00 to assure compliance
with the provisions of this section, including, but not
limited to, the removal of the stand and the cleaning of
the site. In the event the permittee does not comply or
remove the stand and clean the site, the City may do so,
or cause the same to be done by other persons, and the
reasonable cost shall be a charge against the permittee
and his deposit or surety bond.
(13) No person(s) shall sleep in a fireworks stand.
(14) A receipt of sale shall be provided with each
sale of fireworks.
(Ord. 2020-48, 12-02-2020) (Ord. 1988-24, 08-03-
1988)
3-4-14. Repealed. (Ord. 97-05, 02-05-97)
(Ord. 1988-24, 08-03-1988)
3-4-15. Display Fireworks.
No person shall discharge any display fireworks
without first obtaining a display operator license from
the State Fire Marshal Division pursuant to Utah Code
§53-7-223 and securing a permit from the Fire Chief
pursuant to Section 3-4-16. Any person or entity found
in violation of this Section is guilty of a class B
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2010-13, 10-06-2010)
3-4-16. Permits for display fireworks or pyrotechnic
displays inside public buildings.
(1) Any display operator desiring a permit to
discharge display fireworks or persons or entities
desiring to discharge pyrotechnic displays in public
buildings must submit an application to the fire
department no later than thirty (30) days prior to the
planned event. A separate permit is required for each
public display. The fee for a single permit shall be set
forth in the City fee schedule.
(2) Application for each permit shall be in writing
on an application form supplied by the fire department
which at a minimum shall:
(a) Include the name, address, and telephone
number of the display operator or person or entity
desiring to discharge a pyrotechnic display in a public
building;
(b) Include the name, address, and telephone
number of each sponsor of the event;
(c) Describe the precise location of the
discharge, display, fallout, and spectator locations;
(d) Include evidence of commercial general
liability insurance in an amount not less than One
Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and
Two Million Dollars ($2,000,000.00), aggregate
insuring the display operator, with the sponsors and the
City as additional entities insured;
(e) Describe a plan for monitoring weather
conditions, crowds, and contingency plans for medical
emergencies and changing conditions;
(f) Include any other information reasonably
required by the City.
(3) The fire department shall give a copy of the
permit application to the chief of police and to the
Mayor’s office no later than two working days after
receiving the application.
(4) The fire department shall review the
information in the application, the display operator’s
permit, and all applicable fire and safety standards. The
fire department shall also confer with the police
department to ensure that there shall be sufficient public
safety personnel available to ensure the health and
welfare of all persons attending the event.
(5) The fire department shall approve or disapprove
the application no later than fifteen (15) days after
receiving the application. The fire department may
approve the application as submitted or approve the
application subject to reasonable conditions relating to
the safety of the event. If the fire department
disapproves the application, it shall do so in writing,
stating the grounds for disapproval, including reference
to the specific fire or safety standards or public safety
considerations applicable to the event.
(6) Governmental subdivisions and governmental
entities are exempt from the permit fee requirements of
this section. However, an application must be timely
submitted and a permit obtained prior to the planned
discharge of display fireworks by governmental
subdivisions.
(Ord. 2010-13, 10-06-2010)
3-4-17. Appeal.
Any person or entity aggrieved by a decision of the fire
department regarding the approval or denial of a permit
under Section 3-3-16 may appeal such decision in
writing to the Mayor within five (5) days of the fire
department’s denial. The appeal shall specifically state
the basis upon which the appellant believes that the fire
department is in error. The Mayor shall render a
3-10 (December 11, 2020)
decision on the appeal within five (5) days. The
Mayor’s decision shall be final.
(Ord. 2010-13, 10-06-2010)
3-4-18. Limitation.
This act does not apply to class A, class B, and
class C explosives that are not for use in Utah, but are
manufactured, stored, warehoused, or in transit for
destinations outside of Utah.
(Ord. 2010-13, 10-06-2010)
3-10.1
CHAPTER 5. LOCAL FIRE OFFICER
3-5-1. Purpose.
3-5-2. Definitions.
3-5-3. Local fire officer orders.
3-5-4. Areas affected.
3-5-5. Public notice.
3-5-6. Penalty.
3-5-7. Enforcement.
3-5-8. City Council ratification.
3-5-1. Purpose.
This ordinance authorizes the Tooele City fire chief,
as the local fire officer for Tooele City, to prohibit open
fires and the use of any ignition source when hazardous
environmental conditions necessitate controlling the use
thereof.
(Ord. 2012-16, 08-15-2012)
3-5-2. Definitions.
(1) “Hazardous environmental conditions” means
extreme dryness or lack of moisture, windy conditions, the
presence of dry weeds and other vegetation, and any
combination thereof.
(2) “Ignition source” means fireworks, lighters,
matches, smoking materials, and similar means used to
ignite fire either intentionally or accidentally.
(3) “Fireworks” shall have the same meaning as
found in U.C.A. Chapter 53-7.
(Ord. 2012-16, 08-15-2012)
3-5-3. Local fire officer orders.
The local fire officer is hereby authorized to issue
orders prohibiting open burning, open fires, and the use of
any ignition source in any area of the municipality when
the local fire officer determines that hazardous
environmental conditions necessitate controlling or
prohibiting the use thereof.
(Ord. 2012-16, 08-15-2012)
3-5-4. Areas affected.
The local fire officer shall determine what areas of
the City are subject to prohibition and the extent of the
prohibition and shall identify the same in a written order.
The order may also include a map outlining the areas
affected by the order.
(Ord. 2012-16, 08-15-2012)
3-5-5. Public notice.
The local fire officer shall cause copies of the order
to be
(1) posted in at least three public places within the
City,
(2) posted on the official City website, and
(3) delivered to the local news media outlets.
(Ord. 2012-16, 08-15-2012)
3-5-6. Penalty.
Any person who knowingly violates an order of the
local fire officer issued pursuant to this Chapter is guilty
of a class B misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2012-16, 08-15-2012)
3-5-7. Enforcement.
Every officer charged with enforcement of State and
local laws within Tooele City is hereby charged with the
responsibility to enforce this Chapter.
(Ord. 2012-16, 08-15-2012)
3-5-8. City Council ratification.
Every order issued under this Chapter shall be subject
to ratification by the City Council at the next city council
meeting.
(Ord. 2012-16, 08-15-2012)
3-10.2
(PAGE 3-10.2 RESERVED)
(November 2, 2017) 3-11
CHAPTER 3-6. FIRE CODE: ENFORCEMENT
AND ABATEMENT
3-6-1. Purpose.
3-6-2. Declaration regarding violations of the Fire
Code.
3-6-3. Definitions.
3-6-4. Notice of violation: content, extension.
3-6-5. Notice of violation: service.
3-6-6. Notice of violation: monetary penalties.
3-6-7. Notice of violation: appeal.
3-6-8. Notice of violation: default judgment.
3-6-9. Notice of compliance.
3-6-10. Fire Code order: authority.
3-6-11. Fire Code order: enforcement.
3-6-12. Fire Code order: appeal.
3-6-13. Stipulation agreement.
3-6-14. Recordation.
3-6-15. Withholding permits; appeal.
3-6-16. Abatement: emergency.
3-6-17. Abatement: non-emergency.
3-6-18. Recovery of Monetary Penalties and Costs.
3-6-1. Purpose.
The purposes of this Chapter include the protection
of the public life, health, safety, and general welfare,
and the implementation of City administrative
procedures for the protection of the public life, health,
safety, and general welfare through the enforcement of
this Title 3 (Fire) and of the International Fire Code and
through the abatement of violations of this Title 3 and
of the International Fire Code.
(Ord. 2017-24, 10-18-2017)
3-6-2. Declaration regarding violations of the Fire
Code.
It is hereby declared that violations of the Fire
Code operate contrary to the purposes of this Chapter
and constitute a threat to the public life, health, safety,
and general welfare.
(Ord. 2017-24, 10-18-2017)
3-6-3. Definitions.
(1) The definitions of the Fire Code are
incorporated herein.
(2) In the event of a conflict between the
definitions of the Fire Code and the definitions in this
Section, the Fire Code definitions shall govern.
(3) Subject to subsection (2), the following terms
shall have the following definitions.
“Abatement” means any action or proceeding
commenced or pursued by the City to remove, alleviate,
enforce, or correct a violation of Title 3 or the Fire
Code.
“Abatement costs” means actual costs incurred by
the City to accomplish an abatement, but not including
monetary penalties.
“Abatement period” means the 14-day period,
beginning upon service of a notice of violation, within
which the violation described in a notice of violation is
required to be corrected.
“Administrative hearing officer” means an
administrative hearing officer appointed under Chapter
1-28.
“Association” means any business entity, including,
without limitation, a corporation, partnership, limited
liability company, or business, but not an individual.
“Compliance inspection” means an inspection
conducted by a Fire Department inspector to determine
compliance with Title 3 or the Fire Code through the
correction of the violation described in a notice of
violation.
“Department” means the Tooele City Fire
Department.
“Fire Chief” means the chief of the Tooele City
Fire Department.
“Fire Code” means the International Fire Code as
adopted by Tooele City pursuant to Section 3-3-1.
“Fire Code order” means an order issued by an
administrative hearing officer pursuant to this Chapter.
“Fire Code performance bond” means a cash bond
required by an administrative hearing officer and posted
by a responsible person to gain compliance with Title
3, the Fire Code, or a Fire Code order.
“Fire Code tax lien” means a lien recorded with the
Tooele County Recorder and County Treasurer, as
applicable, to facilitate the collection of all monetary
penalties and abatement costs, including administrative
fees, filing fees, and other reasonable and related costs.
“Fire Department inspector” means those persons
authorized by the Fire Code, the Fire Chief, and Title 3
to perform compliance inspections.
“Good cause” means incapacitating illness or
accident, death of a parent, sibling, or child, lack of
proper notice, or unavailability due to unavoidable and
non-preventable emergency or circumstance.
“Imminent fire hazard” means any condition that
creates a present and immediate fire danger to the
public life, health, safety, or welfare.
“Inspection” means a compliance inspection.
“Monetary penalties” means the civil fines accrued
for failure to complete an abatement. Monetary
penalties do not include appeal filing fees, compliance
reinspection fees, or abatement costs.
“Notice of compliance” means a document issued
(November 2, 2017) 3-12
by the City confirming that a responsible person has
corrected the violations described in a notice of
violation, has paid all fees, penalties, and costs
associated with the notice of violation, and otherwise
has fully complied with the requirements of Title 3 and
the Fire Code, all as determined by an officer or
inspector.
“Notice of violation” means a document prepared
and issued by an officer that informs a responsible
person of a violation of Title 3 or the Fire Code, and
that contains an order to correct the violation.
“Officer” means a fire code officer as defined in
the Fire Code, to include the Fire Chief, authorized
delegates, and fire department inspectors.
“Penalty” means monetary penalties, abatement
costs, and other costs related to an abatement.
“Responsible person” means any property owner,
occupant, or other person or association with control
over property who allows, permits, causes, or maintains
a violation of Title 3 or the Fire Code to exist upon the
property owned, occupied, or controlled. “Responsible
person” includes the Fire Code definition of “owner.”
Use of the singular “person” in this Chapter includes
the plural “persons.”
“Violation” means any violation of Title 3 or the
Fire Code.
(Ord. 2017-24, 10-18-2017)
3-6-4. Notice of violation: content, extension.
(1) An abatement is commenced by the service of
a notice of violation.
(2) Content. A notice of violation shall indicate
the following:
(a) the nature of the violation;
(b) the street address and parcel number for
the property upon which the violation exists;
(c) the name of the property owner of record
according to the records of the Tooele County
Recorder;
(d) the date of the violation;
(e) the monetary penalties associated with the
violation;
(f) the corrective action required;
(g) the abatement period;
(h) the contact information for the officer
with whom the notice of violation may be discussed;
(i) the procedure for obtaining a notice of
compliance; and,
(j) the procedure for filing an appeal.
(3) Extension. A responsible person may request
an extension of the abatement period by submitting a
written request to the Department during the abatement
period. An officer may approve an extension of up to
30 days if doing so does not appear to create an
imminent fire hazard. An approved extension shall
result in an amended notice of violation which
establishes a new abatement period. An extension
request shall state and affirm the following:
(a) the responsible person understands that
the extension is conditioned upon the responsible
person’s waiver of the right to appeal the notice of
violation;
(b) the responsible person is actively engaged
in the corrective action required by the notice of
violation; and,
(c) the responsible person is unable to
complete the corrective action during the abatement
period due to circumstances that are unusual,
extraordinary, or outside the responsible person’s
control.
(Ord. 2017-24, 10-18-2017)
3-6-5. Notice of violation: service.
(1) A notice of violation shall be served by one or
more of the following methods:
(a) regular U.S. mail, first-class postage
prepaid, to both
(i) the last known address of a
responsible person as found in the records of the Tooele
County Recorder; and,
(ii) the address of the property subject to
the notice of violation; or,
(b) certified U.S. mail, return receipt
requested, to the last known address of a responsible
person as found in the records of the Tooele County
Recorder; or,
(c) personal delivery to a responsible person;
or,
(d) posting of the notice of violation upon the
property or premises which is the subject of the notice
of violation.
(2) Service by regular U.S. mail shall be deemed
made on the third day after the date of mailing.
(Ord. 2017-24, 10-18-2017)
3-6-6. Notice of violation: monetary penalties.
(1) The monetary penalties associated with an
abatement shall be established by resolution of the
Tooele City Council.
(2) The monetary penalties associated with a
notice of violation shall accrue daily until the earlier of
the following occurs:
(a) the abatement period ends;
(b) a notice of compliance is issued by an
officer;
(c) a Fire Code order halting, modifying, or
(November 2, 2017) 3-13
suspending the monetary penalties is issued.
(3) Accrued monetary penalties (but not
abatement costs) associated with a notice of violation
shall be suspended upon:
(a) the responsible person causing the
violation described in the notice of violation to be
corrected during the abatement period;
(b) the responsible person requesting a
compliance inspection from the City during the
abatement period; and,
(c) a notice of compliance being issued in
response to the request for inspection.
(4) The suspension of monetary penalties
associated with a notice of violation shall continue and
become permanent if during the 12 months immediately
following the date of the notice of compliance there is
no recurrence of substantially the same violation at the
same property.
(5) If a responsible person fails to correct the
violation described in a notice of violation during the
abatement period, or if the responsible person commits
or allows substantially the same violation to occur
during the 12 months immediately following the date of
a notice of compliance, all monetary penalties that
began to accrue daily on the date of the original notice
of violation shall be owed in full to the City and shall
continue to accrue for each and every subsequent day of
continuing violation for a new abatement period.
(6) In the event of multiple responsible persons
associated with a notice of violation, default judgment,
or Fire Code order, all responsible persons shall be
jointly and severally liable for correction of violations,
for compliance with any Fire Code orders, and for
payment of any monetary penalties, abatement costs,
and other associated costs.
(Ord. 2017-24, 10-18-2017)
3-6-7. Notice of violation: appeal.
(1) A responsible person served with a notice of
violation may appeal to the administrating hearing
officer.
(2) An appeal resulting in a Fire Code order that
upholds some but not all of the violations described in
a notice of violation shall have the effect of amending
the notice of violation and resetting the date of the
notice of violation and the abatement period.
(3) A Fire Code order that amends a notice of
violations pursuant to this Section is not appealable to
the administrative hearing officer.
(Ord. 2017-24, 10-18-2017)
3-6-8. Notice of violation: default judgment.
(1) A responsible person who fails to request a
compliance inspection during the abatement period and
who does not timely appeal the notice of violation is
deemed to have waived any administrative appeal rights
associated with a notice of violation and shall be
subject to the entry of default judgment upholding the
notice of violation. The default judgment shall direct
the abatement and impose the monetary penalties, fees,
and costs associated therewith.
(2) A default judgment shall be issued by the
administrative hearing officer upon officer affidavit that
a responsible person both failed to request a timely
compliance inspection and failed to make a timely
appeal.
(3) A copy of a signed default judgment shall be
served on all affected responsible persons by any
method of service allowed for a notice of violation.
(4) A responsible person adversely affected by a
default judgment may appeal the default judgment to
the administrative hearing officer. The administrative
hearing officer may set aside a default judgment only
upon a written finding of good cause shown by the
appealing responsible person.
(5) Following the issuance of a default judgment
and the failure to timely appeal the default judgment, or
following the issuance of a Fire Code order upholding
the default judgment, the City may forthwith proceed to
abate the violation described in the default judgment,
and may forthwith proceed to collect all accrued
monetary penalties and costs associated with the
abatement.
(Ord. 2017-24, 10-18-2017)
3-6-9. Notice of compliance.
(1) It shall be the duty of a responsible person
served with a notice of violation to request a City
compliance inspection when the described violation has
been abated, weather during or after the abatement
period.
(2) It is prima facie evidence that the violation is
continuing if no compliance inspection is requested.
(3) An officer shall perform the requested
compliance inspection. If an officer finds that the
violation for which the notice of violation was issued
has been abated fully, an officer shall issue a notice of
compliance to the responsible person requesting the
compliance inspection.
(4) A notice of compliance shall be deemed
effective upon the day of the inspection that determined
full compliance. No further monetary penalties shall
accrue after this date unless the same or a similar
violation occurs within the 12 months immediately
following the notice of compliance.
(5) If, following a request for compliance
(November 2, 2017) 3-14
inspection, the City declines to issue a notice of
compliance due to a continuing violation, it remains the
duty of the responsible person to request a compliance
reinspection once abatement is completed.
(6) The first compliance inspection shall not
require the payment of a fee. All compliance
reinspections shall require the payment of a fee
established by the City Council.
(7) If the City declines to issue a notice of
compliance, an officer shall provide a written
explanation to the responsible party requesting the
compliance inspection.
(8) A responsible person may appeal the denial of
a notice of compliance to the administrative hearing
officer.
(9) A request for compliance inspection or
reinspection shall toll the accrual of monetary penalties
until the issuance of written reasons for the denial of a
notice of compliance or until the occurrence of
substantially the same or violation with the 12 months
immediately following the notice of violation.
(Ord. 2017-24, 10-18-2017)
3-6-10. Fire Code order: authority.
In addition to the authority granted under Chapter
1-28 of this Code, the administrative hearing officer
shall have authority to do the following:
(1) upon appeal, to uphold, modify, or reject a
notice of violation, and to issue a Fire Code order to
that effect;
(2) upon appeal, to uphold, modify, or reject a
notice of compliance, and to issue a Fire Code order to
that effect;
(3) upon officer affidavit, to issue a default
judgment;
(4) upon appeal, to uphold, modify, or reject a
default judgment, and to issue a Fire Code order to that
effect;
(5) upon appeal, to uphold, modify, suspend,
dismiss, or order the payment of monetary penalties
associated with a notice of violation, and to issue a Fire
Code order to that effect;
(6) upon appeal, to establish a payment plan for
payment of monetary penalties and abatement costs
associated with a notice of violation, and to issue a Fire
Code order to that effect;
(7) to make written findings of fact and
conclusions of law associated with a Fire Code order;
(8) to issue a Fire Code order requiring a
responsible person to post a cash Fire Code
performance bond and to sign an associated bond
agreement;
(9) to issue a Fire Code order for the return of all
or a portion of the cash Fire Code performance bond to
the posting responsible person;
(10) to incorporate a stipulation agreement into
a Fire Code order;
(11) to declare a Fire Code tax lien fully
satisfied, and to issue a Fire Code order to that effect;
and,
(12) to issue any other lawful Fire Code order
regarding any aspect of abatement.
(Ord. 2017-24, 10-18-2017)
3-6-11. Fire Code order: enforcement.
The City may use all lawful means to enforce a Fire
Code order and to recover all abatements costs
associated with such enforcement.
(Ord. 2017-24, 10-18-2017)
3-6-12. Fire Code order: appeal.
A responsible person subject to a Fire Code order
may appeal to the administrative hearing officer.
(Ord. 2017-24, 10-18-2017)
3-6-13. Stipulation agreement.
The City may enter into a stipulation agreement
with a responsible person to resolve a notice of
violation. A signed stipulation agreement shall be
delivered to the administrative hearing officer, who
shall issue a Fire Code order incorporating the
stipulation agreement. By entering into a stipulation
agreement, a responsible person waives all
administrative and judicial appeals associated with the
notice of violation. The form of the stipulation
agreement shall be approved by the City Attorney.
(Ord. 2017-24, 10-18-2017)
3-6-14. Recordation.
(1) If a violation continues to exist after the
abatement period, and the notice of violation has not
been appealed, an officer may record the notice of
violation, together with any default judgment and Fire
Code order, with the office of the Tooele County
Recorder. This recordation is not a lien against
property, but a notice concerning any continuing
violation found upon the property.
(2) If a notice of compliance or Fire Code order
finding compliance is issued after a notice of violation,
default judgment, or Fire Code order has been recorded,
the officer shall cause the notice of compliance or Fire
Code order finding compliance to be recorded with the
office of the Tooele County Recorder. This recordation
shall have the effect of updating and nullifying a
previously recorded notice of violation, default
judgment, or Fire Code order to which it relates.
(November 2, 2017) 3-15
(3) Notice of any recordation shall be mailed to
the owners of the real property against which a
recordation has been made in the same manner as
provided for the mailing of a notice of violation. The
failure to serve such notice shall not be grounds to void
the recordation or the documents recorded.
(Ord. 2017-24, 10-18-2017)
3-6-15. Withholding permits; appeal.
(1) During the pendency of any unresolved notice
of violation or Fire Code order, the City may withhold
from a responsible person subject to the notice or order
any permit, license, or land use approval associated
with the property upon which the violation continues.
The withholding shall continue until the issuance of a
notice of compliance or Fire Code order finding
compliance.
(2) The withholding of a permit, license, or land
use approval pursuant to authority of this Section may
be appealed to the administrative hearing officer.
(Ord. 2017-24, 10-18-2017)
3-6-16. Abatement: emergency.
(1) The City is authorized to summarily abate an
imminent fire hazard.
(2) Whenever the Fire Chief determines that an
imminent fire hazard exists, the Fire Chief or delegate
may issue a written emergency order directing one or
more of the following actions:
(a) order the immediate vacation of any
owners, tenants, and occupants, and prohibit occupancy
until all imminent fire hazards have been abated;
(b) post the property or premises as unsafe,
substandard, or dangerous;
(c) board, fence, and otherwise secure any
property or premises;
(d) raze, grade, and otherwise remove
structures and objects on the property to the extent
necessary to remove any imminent fire hazard;
(e) make emergency repairs; and,
(f) take any other reasonable action to
eliminate an imminent fire hazard or to protect the
public from an imminent fire hazard.
(3) A notice of violation shall be served upon a
responsible person associated with an imminent fire
hazard. The notice shall describe the nature of the
imminent fire hazard. Service is not required prior to
taking steps to abate an imminent fire hazard.
(4) City personnel and agents may enter property
or premises without a warrant to the extent necessary to
abate an imminent fire hazard.
(5) The City shall pursue only the minimum level
of abatement necessary to abate an imminent fire hazard
under this Section. Once an imminent fire hazard is
abated sufficiently to constitute a violation that is not an
imminent fire hazard, the City shall follow the
procedures of this Chapter for non-emergency
abatement.
(6) A responsible person shall be liable for all
abatement costs and other costs associated with the
abatement of an imminent fire hazard.
(7) Promptly after an emergency abatement, an
officer shall notify a responsible person of the
abatement actions taken, the itemized costs for those
actions, and the location of any seized and removed
personal property.
(8) A responsible person may appeal the costs of
an emergency abatement to the administrative hearing
officer.
(Ord. 2017-24, 10-18-2017)
3-6-17. Abatement: non-emergency.
(1) If a responsible person fails to abate a
violation within the abatement period or within the
deadline established in a Fire Code order, the
Department is authorized to abate the violation.
(2) The Department and its officers and agents
have authority to enter upon any property or premises
as may be necessary to abate a violation. Such entry
onto a private property or premises shall be
accompanied by a warrant, be done in a reasonable
manner, and be based upon probable cause. However,
no warrant shall be required where a responsible
person’s consent is voluntarily given.
(3) A responsible person shall be liable for all
abatement costs associated with the abatement. If the
Department undertakes preparatory or other steps to
perform an abatement, but the responsible person
completes the abatement before the Department begins
or completes the abatement, the responsible person
shall remain responsible for the City’s preparatory and
other costs.
(4) Promptly after an abatement, an officer shall
notify a responsible person of the abatement actions
taken, the itemized costs for those actions, the deadlines
for paying those costs, and the location of any seized
and removed personal property.
(5) A responsible person may appeal the costs of
an abatement to the administrative hearing officer.
(Ord. 2017-24, 10-18-2017)
3-6-18. Recovery of Monetary Penalties and Costs.
(1) As provided in U.C.A. Sections 10-11-3 and
-4, as amended, and after established deadlines for the
payment of monetary penalties and abatement costs
have passed, an officer may file and record with the
(November 2, 2017) 3-16
Tooele County Recorder and Treasurer a Fire Code tax
lien and an itemized statement of all such penalties and
costs.
(2) Upon full payment of all amounts owing under
a Fire Code tax lien, or upon the entry of a Fire Code
order or judicial order declaring the lien amount
satisfied, the City shall file and record an appropriate
notice of satisfaction and/or lien release.
(3) The City may pursue all lawful means to
recover all penalties, fees, and costs imposed or
incurred pursuant to this Chapter.
(Ord. 2017-24, 10-18-2017)
(November 16, 2017) 3-17
CHAPTER 3-7. FIRE ALARMS
3-7-1. Purpose and scope.
3-7-2. Definitions.
3-7-3. Maintenance, testing, and inspection.
3-7-4. Fire alarm system activation and response.
3-7-5. Intentional false alarm - penalty.
3-7-6. Notice and fees for repeated false alarms.
3-7-7. Disconnection of fire alarm system -
occupancy - fire watch - reconnection.
3-7-8. Fire watch.
3-7-9. Appeals.
3-7-10. Collection of fees and costs
3-7-11. Government immunity.
3-7-1. Purpose and scope.
(1) The purpose of this Chapter is to require
owners to properly use and maintain the operational
effectiveness of fire alarm systems in order to improve
their reliability and eliminate or reduce false fire alarms
and nuisance fire alarms. The requirements of this
Chapter shall be in addition to, and not in place of, any
requirements imposed by the international fire code as
adopted by the city.
(2) This Chapter governs fire alarm systems
designed to summon the Tooele City fire department,
notices and orders regarding such alarms, the
establishment of a fire watch, and the assessment of fees
and costs.
(Ord. 2017-25, 11-15-2017)
3-7-2. Definitions.
As used in this Chapter, the following words and
terms shall have the following meanings:
Adopted Codes - The codes adopted by Tooele
City pursuant to Chapter 3-3 and Title 4 of this Code.
Disconnection, and Disconnect - The
disconnection, deactivation, or taking out of service of
a fire alarm system.
Enforcement Official - The fire chief and his or her
designated representatives.
Fees and costs - Monetary charges, payable to
Tooele City, to defray the expenses associated with
responding to false fire alarms, nuisance fire alarms,
inspections, testing, and fire watch.
Fire Alarm, False - The activation of any fire alarm
system that results in a response by the fire department
and that:
(1) is caused by the negligence or intentional
misuse of the fire alarm system by the owner, tenant, or
occupant of a premises, or an employee or agent
thereof; or
(2) is not caused by heat, smoke, fire, or water
flow.
Fire Alarm, Habitual - The occurrence of 6 or more
nuisance fire alarms or false fire alarms, or a
combination of the two, in any 365-day period.
Fire Alarm, Nuisance - The activation of any fire
alarm system, which results in a fire department
response and that:
(1) is caused by mechanical failure, lack of
maintenance, malfunction, or improper installation; or,
(2) for which emergency officials cannot
determine the cause of the alarm.
Fire Alarm System - A system, or a portion of a
system or combination system, consisting of
components and circuits arranged to monitor and/or
annunciate the status of a fire alarm, suppression system
activation, or signal initiating device that initiate a
response.
Fire Department - The Tooele City fire department.
Fire Watch - An enforcement program whereby an
enforcement official is assigned to a premises for the
purpose of protecting a building or structure, or its
occupants, from an emergency fire-related situation. A
fire watch may involve special actions beyond routine
fire department staffing. A special action may include
persons trained in fire prevention and detection, the use
of fire extinguishing systems, or the activation of fire
alarms.
Owner - Any person who owns the premises in
which a fire alarm system is installed. In the event such
premises are leased to a third party, the term Owner
shall mean both the owner of the property and the
tenant in possession of the premises, and any
responsibilities for the fire alarm system and fees
assessed hereunder shall be joint and several for both
the owner and the tenant.
Premises - Any building or structure, or
combination of buildings and structures, in which a fire
alarm system is installed. For purposes of this Chapter,
the term Premises shall not mean single-family or
two-family residential buildings.
Reconnection, and Reconnect - The reconnection,
reactivation, or return to service of a fire alarm system.
Serve, or Service - Personal delivery or delivery
via regular U.S. mail to both the physical address of the
premises and to the address of the record owner of the
premises if different than the physical address of the
premises. Service is deemed effective upon personal
delivery or 3 days after mailing.
(Ord. 2017-25, 11-15-2017)
3-7-3. Maintenance, testing, and inspection.
(November 16, 2017) 3-18
(1) The owner of a premises shall ensure that all
fire alarm systems on a premises are periodically
maintained as dictated by the manufacturer's
specifications and the adopted codes.
(2) The owner shall ensure that all fire alarm
systems on a premises are tested and inspected at least
once per year and in accordance with the adopted
codes.
(Ord. 2017-25, 11-15-2017)
3-7-4. Fire alarm system activation and response.
(1) The owner of a premises shall be responsible
for all activations of a fire alarm system thereon.
(2) A fire department response to the activation of
a fire alarm system shall be deemed to result when any
officer or member of the fire department is dispatched
to the premises where the fire alarm system has been
activated.
(Ord. 2017-25, 11-15-2017)
3-7-5. Intentional false alarm - penalty.
A person who, knowingly or intentionally, makes
a false report of a fire, activates a false fire alarm, or
tampers with or removes any part of a fire alarm system
is guilty of a class B misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2017-25, 11-15-2017)
3-7-6. Notice and fees for repeated false alarms.
(1) The first and second fire alarm system
activations in any 365-day period, deemed by the
enforcement official to be nuisance fire alarms and/or
false fire alarms, shall result in the enforcement official
serving a Notice of False Alarm to the owner of the
premises where the fire alarm system has been
activated. The notice will indicate the fire alarm system
activation, direct the owner to correct the cause of the
false or nuisance fire alarm, and provide a warning that
subsequent alarms may result in the assessment of fees.
(2) More than 2 fire alarm system activations
within any 365 day period, deemed by the enforcement
official to be nuisance fire alarms and/or false fire
alarms, shall result in the enforcement official serving
a Notice of Repeated False Alarms to the owner of the
premises where the fire alarm system has been
activated. The notice will indicate the assessment of
fees against the owner in the amounts stated in the
Tooele City fee schedule.
(3) Should any fee assessed pursuant to this
Section remain unpaid in excess of 60 days from the
date of the Notice of Repeated False Alarms, a late
payment penalty shall be imposed equal to 10% of the
amount due. In addition, for each calendar month
beyond the due date that a payment is late, compound
interest of 2% shall accrue monthly until the fees, plus
penalties and interest, are paid in full.
(Ord. 2017-25, 11-15-2017)
3-7-7. Disconnection of fire alarm system -
occupancy - fire watch - reconnection.
(1) At the discretion of the enforcement official,
and in the event that a premises experiences habitual
fire alarms, a written Order to Disconnect may be
served upon the owner specifying the date on which the
owner shall be required to disconnect the fire alarm
system. An Order to Disconnect must have the
concurring signature of the Mayor.
(2) Each premises affected by the disconnection of
the fire alarm system shall be required to establish a fire
watch that meets the requirements of the enforcement
official until the fire alarm system has been
reconnected.
(3) The enforcement official shall have the
authority to temporarily suspend the occupancy
certificate of a premises under fire watch until all
repairs are made to the fire alarm system or if the fire
watch is not maintained to the satisfaction of the
enforcement official. Suspended occupancy shall have
the effect of temporarily closing a premises to the
public and to employees but will allow restricted
occupancy as detailed in the fire watch.
(4) A fire alarm system may be reconnected upon
a finding by the enforcement official that the owner of
the premises has taken necessary corrective action to
remedy the cause of the habitual fire alarms at the
premises. The owner shall have the burden of showing
that adequate corrective action has been taken by
making a request for reconnection.
(5) The owner shall be responsible for all
inspection and/or testing fees and costs incurred in
determining whether the fire alarm system is ready for
reactivation. The enforcement official shall not
authorize or approve of reconnection until the owner
has paid such fees and costs in full.
(6) Follow service of an Order to Disconnect,
reconnection of a fire alarm system shall be pursuant to
an Authorization to Reconnect issued by the
enforcement official.
(Ord. 2017-25, 11-15-2017)
3-7-8. Fire watch.
(1) In the event the enforcement official orders a
fire watch instituted as a result of a fire alarm system
being disconnected, pursuant to an Order to Disconnect,
such a fire watch may be at the following levels or may
(November 16, 2017) 3-19
provide specific fire watch requirements at the
discretion of the enforcement official:
(A) Level I: Continuous monitoring of the
premises for signs of smoke or fire for purposes of
notifying the fire department. This may be effectively
carried out through one or more approved employees of
the building owner, security guards, or fire department
personnel, at the discretion of the enforcement official.
(B) Level II: Continuous monitoring of the
premises for signs of smoke or fire for the purpose of
notifying the fire department and assisting with
evacuation. This may be effectively carried out through
one or more approved employees of the building owner,
security guards, or fire department personnel, in the
discretion of the enforcement official. These
individuals must be familiar with the exiting fire alarm
systems, fire protection systems, fire suppression
systems, water systems, and evacuation plans relative to
the premises.
(C) Level III: Continuous monitoring of the
premises for signs of smoke or fire for the purpose of
notifying the fire department, assisting with evacuation,
and fire extinguishment/hazard mitigation. One or
more fire department personnel shall be required, and
an emergency action plan may also be required, in the
discretion of the enforcement official.
(2) The owner shall be responsible for paying all
fees and costs associated with establishing a fire watch.
(Ord. 2017-25, 11-15-2017)
3-7-9. Appeals.
(1) An owner may appeal any of the following to
the enforcement official:
(A) a Notice of Repeated False Alarms;
(B) an Order to Disconnect;
(C) the refusal to issue an Authorization to
Reconnect;
(D) the costs associated with an Authorization
to Reconnect or a fire watch.
(2) All appeals shall be in writing and shall set
forth the reasons for the appeal.
(3) All appeals shall be filed with the City
Recorder within 10 days of service of the Notice or
Order being appealed. Appeals filed after this deadline
are untimely and shall not be heard.
(4) All appeals shall be accompanied with the
payment of an appeal fee as set forth in the Tooele City
fee schedule. Appeal fees will be returned to the owner
if the Notice or Order being appealed is not upheld on
appeal.
(5) The appeal of a Notice of Repeated False
Alarms stays the assessment of fees until the
enforcement official makes a final written decision
upholding the Notice. The appeal of an Order to
Disconnect stays the requirement to disconnect until the
enforcement official makes a final written decision
upholding the Order.
(6) An appeal decision of the enforcement officer
may be appealed, with 10 days of service of the
decision, to the Administrative Hearing Officer
pursuant to Chapter 1-28 of this Code. Appeals filed
after the appeal deadline are untimely and shall not be
heard.
(Ord. 2017-25, 11-15-2017)
3-7-10. Collection of fees and costs.
Tooele City is authorized to use all lawful means to
collect fees, costs, penalties, and interest assessed under
this Chapter, including requiring payment through the
City utility bill.
(Ord. 2017-25, 11-15-2017)
3-7-11. Government immunity.
The inspection of fire alarm systems, the
establishment of fire watches, or any other action
provided for in this Chapter is not intended to, nor will
it, create a contract, duty, or obligation, either
expressed or implied, of fire department response, nor
create a special relationship between an owner and the
fire department. Any and all liability and damages
resulting from the failure to respond to a notification or
to take any other action as provided for herein is hereby
disclaimed, and governmental immunity as provided by
law is hereby retained. Tooele City, its officers,
employees, and agents, shall not assume any duty or
responsibility for the installation, operation, repair,
effectiveness, or maintenance of any fire alarm system
or the maintenance of a fire watch, those duties or
responsibilities belonging solely to the owner of the
premises.
(Ord. 2017-25, 11-15-2017)
(February 22, 2018) 4-1
TITLE 4. BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1. Building Official.
Chapter 2. Sign Code.
Chapter 3. Building Code.
Chapter 4. Electrical Code.
Chapter 5. Plumbing Code.
Chapter 6. Residential Housing.
Chapter 7. Mechanical Code.
Chapter 8. Road and Bridge Construction
Standards.
Chapter 9. Street Excavation.
Chapter 10. Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code.
Chapter 11. Sidewalks.
Chapter 11a. Residential Park Strip Landscaping
Requirements.
Chapter 12. Municipal Improvement District Act.
Chapter 13. Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance.
Chapter 14. Abatement of Dangerous Buildings
Code.
Chapter 15. Development Impact Fees.
Chapter 16. Uniform Administrative Code.
Chapter 17. APWA Ma n u a l of S t a n d a r d
Specifications and Manual of Standard
Plans Adopted.
CHAPTER 1. BUILDING OFFICIAL
4-1-1. Responsibility.
4-1-2. Permits.
4-1-3. Powers and duties.
4-1-4. Approval of public improvements by city
engineer.
4-1-5. Definition of public improvements.
4-1-6. Repealed.
4-1-7. Surveying and engineering performed by city
engineer.
4-1-8. Amendment of fees by resolution.
4-1-9. Building permits required for public
improvements.
4-1-1. Responsibility.
Administration and enforcement of this Title shall be
the responsibility of the Building Official, under the direct
supervision of the Director of Community Development,
who shall direct the Building Official as to the
performance of his duties as provided in this Title, but the
Mayor may from time to time entrust the administration
and enforcement of some part or the whole of this Title to
any other officer without amendment to this Chapter. All
departments, officials, and public employees who are
vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or
licences shall conform to the provisions of this Code and
shall issue no such permits or licences for uses, buildings
or purposes where the same would be in conflict with the
provisions of this Title. Any such permits or licences, if
issued in conflict with the provisions of this Title, shall be
null and void.
(Ord. 2018-04, 02-21-2018) (Ord. 1999-11, 04-21-1999)
(Ord. 1975-28, 12-08-1975) (Ord. 1967-03, 08-14-1967)
4-1-2. Permits.
The construction, alteration, repair, removal, or
occupancy of any structure or part thereof as provided or
as restricted in this Title, shall not be commenced or
proceeded with except after the issuance of a written
permit for same by the Building Official; provided, that no
permit shall be necessary where the erection, construction,
reconstruction, or alteration is minor in character as
defined herein, or as determined by the Building Official.
Permits are required for temporary uses incidental to
construction. Such permits are limited to the duration of
the construction work. The maximum time for such a
permit is one year. However, another permit may be
issued if cause is shown. All applications for building
permits shall be accompanied by a plan, drawn to scale,
showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon,
the size and location of the existing buildings, buildings to
be erected and buildings existing on adjacent property,
and such other information as may be necessary to provide
for the enforcement of this Code.
A careful record of such applications and plats shall
be kept in the office of the Building Official or other
officer charged with administration and enforcement. No
yard or other open space provided about any building for
the purpose of complying with the provisions of this Code
shall be used as a yard or open space for another building.
(Ord. 2018-04, 02-21-2018) (Ord. 1999-11, 04-21-1999)
(Ord. 1967-03, 08-14-1967)
4-1-3. Powers and duties.
It shall be the duty of the Building Official to inspect
or cause to be inspected all buildings in the course of
construction or repair. The Building Official shall enforce
all of the provisions of this Code, entering actions on the
court when necessary. The failure to do so shall not
legalize any violation of such provisions. The Building
Official shall not issue any permit unless the plans of and
for the proposed erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, or use fully conform to all zoning regulations
then in effect.
The Building Official is authorized to order
disconnection and approve connection or re-connection of
utility services, including water, sewer, natural gas, and
electric power, to any structure or service regulated by the
construction codes as adopted by this jurisdiction or the
State of Utah. Upon written order from the building
Official, any serving utility shall immediately terminate
such service. The Building Official shall not authorize
any termination or refuse connection without reasonable
cause, as detailed in the order.
(Ord. 2018-04, 02-21-2018) (Ord. 1999-11, 04-21-1999)
(Ord. 1967-03, 08-14-1967)
4-1-4. Approval of public improvements by city
engineer.
The construction of all public improvements within
Tooele City shall not be commenced or proceeded with
except after the approval of the City Engineer. All
preliminary and final plats, plans, and specifications for
public improvements shall be submitted to the City
Engineer for review and approval prior to submission to
the Planning Commission or the City Council. A plan
(February 22, 2018) 4-2
checking fee shall be collected by the City when the said
plans, plats, and specifications are submitted for review
and approval. The fees shall be as established in the
Tooele City Fee Schedule adopted by Resolution of the
City Council. (Ord. 2018-04, 02-21-2018) (Ord. 1998-27,
08-05-1998) (Ord. 1975-27, 12-08-1975)
4-1-5. Definition of public improvements.
“Public improvements” shall have the meaning given
in Section 7-1-5 of this Code, and shall be interpreted
inclusively, not exclusively.
(Ord. 2018-04, 02-21-2018) (Ord. 1975-27, 12-08-1975)
4-1-6. Repealed. (Ord. 1987-16, 11-05-1987)
4-1-7. Surveying and engineering performed by city
engineer.
The City Engineer, in his discretion, may do
preliminary surveying, engineering, and construction
surveying of public improvements for minor
improvements to property for curb and gutter
replacements or initial installation, where none previously
existed and the property owner requests the same at his
own expense, or when a special improvement district is
created for the purpose of providing public improvements
within the district. When the City Engineer performs such
labor, the City shall charge fees consistent with the
prevailing rate for such services as may be available in the
private sector as determined by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 2018-04, 02-21-2018) (Ord. 1980-11, 04-10-1980)
(Ord. 1975-27, 12-08-1975)
4-1-8. Amendment of fees by resolution.
The fees provided by Sections 1, 8, and 9 of this
Chapter may be amended from time to time by resolution.
(Ord. 1975-27, 12-08-1975)
4-1-9. Building permits required for public
improvements.
All public improvements within Tooele City, except
those public improvements installed pursuant to the
subdivision process covered under Title 7 of this Code,
shall be required to be done with a building permit, and
fees collected therefore shall be according to the fee
schedule for building permits then in effect. Such fees
shall be payable prior to issuance of the permit. A
separate building permit shall not be required for public
improvements where a building permit for any given
structure is obtained in connection with doing the same
improvement, provided that the valuation of the public
improvement shall be included in the computation of the
permit fee. A failure to comply with this Section shall
result in the same penalties as are applicable for building
permits under the International Building Code as may be
adopted and amended from time to time. (Ord. 2018-04,
02-21-2018) (Ord. 2004-15, 10-20-2004) (Ord. 1980-11,
04-10-1980)
4-3 (July 19, 2012)
CHAPTER 2. SIGN CODE.
(Repealed. Ordinance 2012-19, 07-18-2012)
(November 5, 2004) 4-4
CHAPTER 3. BUILDING CODE
4-3-1. International Building Code.
4-3-1.1. Building Permit Fees
4-3-1.2. Building Valuation Schedule
4-3-2. Building permit issuance contingent upon
adequate water and sewer service.
4-3-3. Penalties.
4-3-1. International Building Code.
The most recent edition of the International
Building Code (IBC), as adopted by the Utah Division
of Occupational and Professional Licensing, is
incorporated by reference as part of the Tooele City
Code, subject to amendments and modifications set
forth in the Utah Building Standards Act Rules, together
with standards incorporated into the IBC by reference,
including but not limited to the International Energy
Conservation Code and the International Residential
Code.
(Ord. 2002-01, 01-09-2002); (Ord. 98-04, 01-21-98)
4-3-1.1. Building Permit Fees.
Table 1-A of the 1997 edition of the Uniform
Building Code is incorporated by reference as the
building fee schedule to be applied in the calculation of
all construction related fees assessed by the City.
(Ord. 2002-01, 01-09-2002)
4-3-1.2. Building Valuation Schedule.
The most current building valuation data table
published by the International Conference of Building
Officials in the periodical “Building Standards” shall
serve as the basis for establishing the value of building
projects within Tooele City.
(Ord. 2002-01, 01-09-2002)
4-3-2. Building permit issuance contingent upon
adequate water and sewer service.
(1) A building permit may not be issued until the
applicant provides acceptable evidence, if requested,
that the premises for which the building permit is
requested will be supplied with potable culinary water
supply of at least 20 pounds per square inch.
(2) A building permit may not be issued until such
time as the applicant provides acceptable evidence, if
requested, that the premises for which the building
permit is desired will be supplied with sanitary sewer
collection service in compliance with the Tooele City
Code. (Ord. 91-09, 11-14-91)
4-3-3. Penalties.
(1) Any person who violates any of the provisions
of the " Building Code" or the "International Building
Code Standards" or fails to comply therewith, or who
violates or fails to comply with any order made
thereunder, or who builds in violation of any detailed
statement of specifications or plans submitted and
approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued
thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken,
or who fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or
modified by the board of appeals or by a court of
competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein,
shall severally for each and every such violation and
noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a class C
misdemeanor. The imposition of one penalty for any
violation such not excuse the violation or permit to
continue; and all such persons shall be required to
correct or remedy such violations or defects within a
reasonable time. When not otherwise specified, each
day that prohibited conditions are maintained shall
constitute a separate offense.
(2) The application of the penalty identified in
Subsection (1) shall not be held to prevent the enforced
removal of prohibited conditions.
(Ord. 2004-15, 10-20-04); (Ord. 91-09, 11-14-91)
4-5 (May 15, 2003)
CHAPTER 4. ELECTRICAL CODE
4-4-1. National Electric Code.
Tooele City recognizes that the State of Utah has
adopted the National Electric Code, as amended and/or
revised, as law governing the State of Utah and all
political subdivisions thereof. To the extent that Tooele
City is not preempted by the law of the State of Utah
from adopting the National Electric Code as an
ordinance of Tooele City, its most current edition is so
adopted. (Ord. 2003-04, 02-05-03); (Ord. 98-04, 01-21-
98); (Ord. 97-10, 03-19-97); (Ord. 94-34, 05-24-94)
4-4-2. Penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any
provision of the National Electrical Code shall be
deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor and shall be
subject to a fine under Section 76-3-301, Utah Code
Annotated, or by imprisonment in the Tooele County
jail for a period not exceeding 90 days, or by both such
fine and imprisonment." (Ord. 94-34, 05-24-94)
(September 30, 2002) 4-6
CHAPTER 5. PLUMBING CODE
4-5-1. International Plumbing Code.
4-5-2. Penalties.
4-5-1. International Plumbing Code.
The most recent edition of the International
Plumbing Code (IPC), as adopted by the Utah Division
of Occupational and Professional Licensing, is
incorporated by reference as part of the Tooele City
Code, subject to amendments and modifications set
forth in the Utah Building Standards Act Rules.
(Ord. 2002-01, 01-09-2002); (Ord. 98-04, 01-21-98);
(Ord 91-12, 11-19-91)
4-5-2. Penalties.
(1) Any person who violates any of the provisions
of the "International Plumbing Code," or its appendices,
or fails to comply therewith, or who violates or fails to
comply with any order made thereunder, or who builds
in violation of any detailed statement of specifications
or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any
certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which
no appeal has been taken, or who fails to comply with
such an order as affirmed or modified by the board of
appeals or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within
the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every
such violation and noncompliance, respectively, be
guilty of a class C misdemeanor. The imposition of one
penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation
or permit such to continue, and all such persons shall be
required to correct or remedy such violations or defects
within a reasonable time. Each day or any portion
thereof during which any violation of this section
occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(2) The application of the penalty identified in
Subsection (1) shall not be held to prevent the enforced
removal of prohibited conditions. (Ord. 2002-06, 04-
03-02); (Ord. 91-12, 11-19-91)
(November 5, 2004) 4-7
CHAPTER 6. RESIDENTIAL HOUSING
4-6-1. Title.
4-6-2. Construction of terms.
4-6-3. Definitions.
4-6-4. Purpose and scope.
4-6-5. Alternate materials and methods of
construction.
4-6-6. Authority.
4-6-7. Right of entry.
4-6-8. Notices and orders.
4-6-9. Vacating and closing to occupancy.
4-6-10. Removal of placards and posted notices.
4-6-11. Violation - Penalty.
4-6-12. Certificate of compliance.
4-6-13. Housing advisory and appeals board.
4-6-14. Appeals.
4-6-15. Substandard building.
4-6-16. Minimum exterior standards.
4-6-17. Minimum environmental or sanitary
standards.
4-6-18. Minimum interior standards.
4-6-19. Exterior and interior doors, trim, and
hardware.
4-6-20. House addressing.
4-6-21. Space and occupancy standards.
4-6-22. Light and ventilation.
4-6-23. Fire safety egress.
4-6-24. Plumbing.
4-6-25. Mechanical.
4-6-26. Electrical.
4-6-27. Energy conservation requirements.
4-6-28. Guidelines for Manufactured Housing
Installation Adopted.
4-6-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the Tooele City
Housing Ordinance. (Ord. 94-13, 03/15/94)
4-6-2. Construction of terms.
(1) Whenever the words "apartment house,"
"building," "dormitory," "dwelling unit," "habitable
room," "hotel," "housing unit" or "structure" are used in
this chapter such words shall be construed as if followed
by the words "or any portion thereof."
(2) References to codes, ordinances, chapters,
sections, or subsections shall include any successor to
such code, ordinance, chapter, section, or subsection.
(Ord. 94-13, 03/15/94)
4-6-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
(1) "Agent" means any person, firm, partnership,
association, joint venture, corporation, or other entity
who acts for or on behalf of others.
(2) "Apartment house" means any building
which contains three or more dwelling units and, for the
purpose of this code, includes residential
condominiums.
(3) "Approved" as to a given material, mode of
construction or repair, piece of equipment, or device
means approved by the building official as the result of
investigation and tests conducted by the building
official, or by reason of accepted principles or tests by
recognized authorities or technical or scientific
organizations.
(4) "Attic" means that portion of a building
included between the upper surface of the topmost floor
and the ceiling or roof above.
(5) "Basement" means any floor level below the
first story in a building, except that a floor level in a
building having only one floor level shall be classified
as a basement unless such floor level qualifies as a first
story as defined herein.
(6) "Bathroom" means a room containing at least
one of each of the following fixtures: lavatory, toilet,
and tub or shower.
(7) "Bedroom" means any space designed or
used for sleeping.
(8) "Building" means any structure which is
used, designed, or intended to be used for human
habitation or an accessory structure thereto.
(9) "Building closure," "closed to entry," "closed
to unauthorized entry" or "boarded building" means a
building which has been closed to occupancy.
(10) "Building envelope" means the space defined
by existing floors, walls, ceiling structures, basement
and attic.
(11) "Building official" means the officer or other
designated authority charged with the administration
and enforcement of this chapter, or the officer's duly
authorized representative.
(12) "Ceiling height" means the vertical distance
from the finish floor to finish ceiling or to the lowest
point of the ceiling framing members. Where
projections below the ceiling exist, the height shall be
measured from the projection to the finish floor.
(13) "Certificate of occupancy" means a
certificate issued by the building official authorizing
occupancy of a building which has previously been
closed to occupancy by the City.
(14) "Common room" means a room available for
the joint use of occupants of two or more housing units
other than common hallways and exit passages. These
shall include cooking facilities, and game rooms.
(15) "Condominium" means property or portions
thereof conforming the definition set forth in Section
57-8-3, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended.
(16) "Congregate housing" means any building
which contains facilities for living, sleeping and
sanitation, as required by this code, and may include
facilities for eating and cooking, for occupancy by other
than a family. A congregate residence includes an SRO,
a convent, monastery, dormitory, fraternity or sorority
house but does not include shelters, jails, hospitals,
nursing homes, hotels or lodging houses.
(November 5, 2004) 4-8
(17) "Corridor" means a hall or hallway.
(18) "Cross connection" means any connection or
arrangement, physical or otherwise, between a potable
water supply system and any plumbing fixture or any
tank, receptacle, equipment or device, through which
unclean or polluted water or other substances may
contaminate such potable water supply system.
(19) "Dwelling unit" means any building which
contains living facilities, including provisions for
sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation, as required by
this chapter, for no more than one family, or a
congregate residence for ten or fewer persons.
(20) "Efficiency dwelling unit" means a dwelling
unit containing only one habitable room.
(21) "Existing" means in existence prior to
adoption of this chapter and the certificate of occupancy
having been issued.
(22) "Exit" means a continuous and unobstructed
means of egress to a public way and includes any
intervening aisles, doorways, gates, corridors, exterior
exit balconies, ramps, stairways, smokeproof
enclosures, horizontal exits, exit passageways, exit
courts and yards as these terms are defined in the IBC.
(23) "Family" means the same as defined in
Chapter 4 of the IBC.
(24) "Fire resistance or fire-resistive construction"
means construction that resists the spread of fire, as
specified in the IBC.
(25) "Garage" means a building or portion thereof
designed, used, or intended to be used for parking or
storage of a motor vehicle containing flammable or
combustible liquids or gas in its tank.
(26) "Guest" means any person occupying a guest
room pursuant to a rental agreement.
(27) "Guest room" means a room or rooms used
or intended to be used by a guest for living and sleeping
and which may share common bathrooms and cooking
facilities.
(28) "HAAB" means the City's Housing Advisory
and Appeals Board.
(29) "Habitable room" means a room in a building
for living, sleeping, eating, or cooking. Bathrooms,
toilet rooms, closets, corridors, storage or utility space,
and similar areas are not habitable rooms.
(30) "Hazard" means a substandard condition that
exposes any person to the risk of illness, bodily harm, or
loss of or damage to possessions.
(31) "Headroom clearance" for stairs means the
vertical distance from the leading edge of each tread to
the lowest projection of any construction, piping,
fixture, or other object above such tread.
(32) "Historic building" means any building or
structure which has been designated for preservation by
official action of the legally constituted authority of this
jurisdiction as having special historical or architectural
significance, or has been listed on the National Register
of Historic Places or on the Utah State Register of
Historic Places.
(33) "Hotel" means any building containing
guest rooms intended or designed to be used, rented or
hired out to be occupied, or which are occupied for
sleeping purposes by guests on a daily basis.
(34) "IBC" means the edition of the International
Building Code currently adopted by the City.
(35) "IMC" means the edition of the
International Mechanical Code.
(36) "IPC" means the edition of the International
Plumbing Code.
(37) "Infestation" means the presence of insects,
rodents, or other pests in or around a building in
numbers that are or may be detrimental to the health,
safety, or general welfare of the occupants.
(38) "Kitchen" means a space or room used,
designed, or intended to be used for the preparation of
food, which includes a permanently installed sink,
cooking range with oven and/or microwave oven, and a
refrigerator.
(39) "Listed" and "listing" are terms referring to
equipment and materials which are shown in a list
published by an approved testing agency qualified and
equipped for experimental testing and maintaining an
adequate periodic inspection of current productions
and which listing states that the material or equipment
complies with accepted national standards which are
approved, or standards which have been evaluated for
conformity with approved standards.
(40) "Monumental stairs" means a stairway,
exceeding four feet in width, at the main entrance on
the exterior of a building.
(41) "Multiple-family structure" means a
residential building containing three or more dwelling
units.
(42) "NEC" means the edition of the National
Electrical code currently adopted by the City and the
State of Utah.
(43) "Occupant" means a person occupying or
having possession of a dwelling unit.
(44) "Opening" means an exterior glazed
opening capable of being closed to the weather,
including a window, a glazed door, and an openable
glazed skylight, which opens upon a yard, court, street,
alley, or recess from a court.
(45) "Owner" means any person, firm,
partnership, association, joint venture, or corporation,
who has title or interest in any building, with or
without accompanying actual possession, and including
any person who as agent or executor, administrator,
trustee, or guardian of an estate has charge, care, or
control of any building.
(46) "Pattern of circulation" means any area in a
room or group or rooms where the occupant is likely to
walk because of the location of doors, fixtures, or
furniture placement when size of room restricts
furniture placement. Pattern of circulation does not
(November 5, 2004) 4-9
include room corners, areas adjacent to walls, or
permanently mounted fixtures near walls or near other
features of the room. Fixtures, pipes, and ducts
projecting from the ceiling which are located near the
middle of the room are within the pattern of circulation.
(47) "Person" means any individual, firm,
corporation, association, or partnership and its agents or
assigns.
(48) "Plumbing system" means any potable water
distribution piping, and any drainage piping within or
below any building, including all plumbing fixtures,
traps, vents, and devices appurtenant to such water
distribution or drainage piping and including potable
water treating or using equipment, and any lawn
sprinkling system.
(49) "Premises" means a lot, plot or parcel of land
including the buildings or structures thereon.
(50) "Private guardrail" means a railing serving
one dwelling unit with no direct access by the public.
(51) "Public guardrail" means a railing other than
a private guardrail.
(52) "Public way" means any street, alley or
similar parcel of land essentially unobstructed from the
ground to the sky which is deeded, dedicated or
otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for
public use and having a clear width of not less than ten
feet.
(53) "Rise" means the vertical portion of a stair
step.
(54) "Run" means the horizontal portion of a stair
step measured from the leading edge of the stair tread to
a point directly beneath the leading edge of the step
directly above.
(55) "SRO" means a single room occupancy
dwelling unit within congregate housing with one
combined sleeping and living room and which may
include a kitchen and/or a separate private bathroom.
(56) "Secured building" means a building where
all windows and doors are intact and locked against
unauthorized entry.
(57) "Smoke detector" means an approved, listed
device which senses visible or invisible particles of
combustion.
(58) "Story" means that portion of a building
included between the upper surface of any floor and the
upper surface of the floor next above. If the finished
floor level directly above a usable or unused under-floor
space is more than six feet above grade as defined
herein for more than 50% of the total perimeter or is
more than twelve feet above grade as defined herein at
any point, such usable or unused under-floor space shall
be considered as a story.
(59) "Story, first" means the lowest story in a
building which qualifies as a story, as defined herein,
except that floor level in a building having only one
floor level shall be classified as a first story, provided
such floor level is not more than four feet below grade,
as defined herein, for more than 50% of the total
perimeter, or not more than eight feet below grade, as
defined herein, at any point.
(60) "Structure" means anything that is built or
constructed, an edifice or building of any king, or any
piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts
jointed together.
(61) "Substandard" means that condition of a
premises set forth at Section 4-6-14 of this chapter.
(62) "Toilet room" means a room containing a
toilet and may contain a lavatory, but does not contain
a tub or shower.
(63) "UCADB" means the edition of the Uniform
Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings.
(64) "Unfit for human occupancy" means a
condition of a premises which as been found by the
building official to be an unsafe structure or because of
the degree in which it is in disrepair or lacks
maintenance, fails to meet the sanitation requirements
of the Tooele County Health Department, contains filth
and contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination,
sanitary facilities, or heating facilities or other essential
equipment, is dangerous to life, health, property, or the
safety of occupants.
(65) "Unsafe structure" means one in which all
or part thereof is found to be dangerous to life, health,
property, or the safety of the public or occupants by
not providing minimum safeguards for protection from
fire as required by the IBC or because such structure
contains unsafe equipment or is so damaged,
dilapidated, or structurally unsafe that partial or
complete collapse is likely.
(66) "Ventilation, natural" means any exterior
door, window, or skylight which opens upon a yard,
court, street, or alley.
(67) "Washable surface" means a surface which
is not adversely affected by moisture.
(68) "Yard" means an open space, other than a
court, unoccupied by any structure on the lot on which
a building is situated, unobstructed from the ground to
the sky except as specifically permitted by the IBC.
(Ord. 2004-15, 10-20-04); (Ord. 94-13, 03/15/94)
4-6-4. Purpose and scope.
(1) The purpose of this chapter is to provide for
the health, safety, and welfare, and promote the
prosperity, peace and good order, comfort,
convenience, and aesthetics of Tooele City and its
present and future inhabitants and businesses, to
protect the tax base, to protect both urban and nonurban
development, and to protect property values
within the city, as provided by Section 10-9-102, Utah
Code Annotated, and other applicable state statutes.
This purpose shall be accomplished by regulating the
maintenance, repair, and remodeling of all residential
structures existing as of the date of enactment of the
ordinance codified by this chapter by:
(November 5, 2004) 4-10
(a) establishing minimum housing standards
for all buildings or portions thereof used, or designed or
intended to be used, for human habitation;
(b) establishing minimum standards for safety
from fire and other hazards;
(c) promoting maintenance and improvement
of structures by permitting distinctions in the
application of standards based on the year a structure
was built as long as an equivalent level of safety can be
achieved;
(d) avoiding the closure or abandonment of
housing and the displacement of occupants where such
can be done without sacrificing the public health, safety,
and welfare; and
(e) providing for the administration,
enforcement, and penalties for this chapter.
(2) This chapter is intended to replace and supplant
any and all references to the Uniform Housing Code
within the city code.
(3) The scope of housing standards covered by this
chapter includes residential structures existing as of the
date of enactment of the ordinance codified by this
chapter, equipment, and facilities for light, ventilation,
space, heating, sanitation, and protection from the
elements, and for safe and sanitary maintenance.
(4) This chapter shall apply to remodeling,
renovation, or repair of all residential buildings existing
as of the date of enactment of this chapter, regardless of
the valuation of the repairs or renovations and
regardless of the date of such remodelling, renovation
or repair, unless otherwise noted in this chapter. Unless
otherwise noted in City housing and building codes, all
external additions to an existing building envelope shall
comply with the city's standards for new construction.
(5) With regard to residential buildings which were
constructed in compliance with the code in effect at the
time of construction, this chapter shall not lessen such
requirements.
(6) Residential buildings which pose such a danger
as to fall within the scope of Section 302 of the
UCADB shall be governed by the UCADB and not by
this chapter. If any conflict exists between this chapter
and the UCADB, the UCADB shall be controlling.
(7) Any building undergoing a change in use as
defined in the IBC and the Code for Building
Conservation shall comply with the provisions of the
IBC.
(8) No building or structure regulated by this code
shall be erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired,
moved, improved, removed, converted, or demolished
unless a separate permit for each building or structure
has first been obtained from the building official.
(9) The requirements of the IBC notwithstanding,
permits are not required for the following:
(a) floor covering installation;
(b) painting and attaching wall coverings, and
similar finish work;
(c) replacement of glazing except where
safety glazing is required by the IBC;
(d) patching wall surfaces;
(e) replacement of light fixtures;
(f) replacement of electrical wall outlets and
switches;
(g) replacement of faucets, washers, and
traps (when the trap is replaced with like installation
and the trap arm and the existing vents and drain liens
are not disturbed);
(h) repair of irrigation pipelines where the
backflow preventers exist or are not being replaced;
(i) addition to a forced air heating system of
no more than two ducts with no more than one register
per duct;
(j) replacement of filters, belts, and motors
in mechanical systems;
(k) installation of any number of battery
operated smoke detectors or one 120 volt smoke
detector;
(l) replacement of sidewalks on private
property; or
(m) installation of one ventilation fan.
(Ord. 2004-15, 10-20-04); (Ord. 94-13, 03/15/94)
4-6-5. Alternate materials and methods of
construction.
The provisions of this chapter are not intended to
prevent the use of any material or method of
construction not specifically prescribed by this chapter
and the IBC, provided any such alternate has been
approved and its use authorized by the building official
in conformance with Section 105 of the IBC, nor is it
the intention of this chapter to exclude any sound
method of structural design or analysis not specifically
provided for in this chapter. Materials, methods of
construction, or structural design limitations provided
for in this chapter are to be used unless an exception is
granted by the building official.
(Ord. 2004-15, 10-20-04); (Ord. 94-13, 03/15/94)
4-6-6. Authority.
(1) The building official is hereby authorized and
directed to enforce all the provisions of this chapter.
For such purposes, the building official may issue and
deliver criminal citations as provided by state law.
(2) The building official shall have the power to
render interpretations of this chapter and to adopt and
enforce rules and supplemental regulations in order to
clarify the application of its provisions. Such
interpretations, rules, and regulations shall be in
conformance with the intent and purpose of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2004-15, 10-20-04); (Ord. 94-13, 03/15/94)
4-6-7. Right of entry.
(November 5, 2004) 4-11
(1) Whenever it becomes necessary to make an
inspection to enforce any provisions of this chapter, or
whenever the building official has reasonable cause to
believe there exists in any building or upon any
premises a code violation which makes such building or
premises unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous, the building
official may, upon obtaining permission of the owner or
other person having charge or control of the building or
premises, or upon obtaining a warrant, enter a
residential property or premises to inspect it or to
perform the duties imposed by this chapter. If such
building or premises be occupied, the building official
shall first present proper credentials and request entry.
If such building or premises be unoccupied, the building
official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the
owner or other persons having charge or control of the
building or premises and request entry. If such entry is
refused, the building official shall have recourse to
every remedy provided by law to secure entry.
(2) If an unoccupied dwelling unit is open and
unattended and the owner or other person having charge
or control of the building or premises cannot be located
after reasonable effort, the building official or an
authorized representative may, upon obtaining a
warrant, enter the building. The official shall issue a
notice and order that the dwelling unit be immediately
secured or boarded against the entry of unauthorized
persons.
(3) In non-emergencies or when authorization to
enter has not previously been granted by a tenant, the
owner shall give the tenant a minimum of 24 hours
notification of an inspection of the tenant's premises by
the building official. (Ord. 94-13, 03/15/94)
4-6-8. Notices and orders.
(1) All buildings or portions thereof which are
determined to be substandard are hereby declared to be
public nuisances and shall be abated by repair,
rehabilitation, demolition, or removal in accordance
with the procedures specified in this chapter.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair,
move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish, equip,
use, occupy, or maintain any building or structure or
cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this
chapter.
(3) (a) Whenever the building official has
inspected a building and found it to be substandard, the
building official shall commence action to cause the
repair, rehabilitation, vacation, or demolition of the
building.
(b) The building official shall notify the
owner or the owner's agent of the existence of the
violations in writing, giving the section number and a
description of each violation.
(c) This notice shall be informal and shall set
a period of not less than 24 hours nor more than 30 days
in which the violations are to be corrected, and may set
priority of the items to be corrected, depending upon the
urgency of such violations. A formal notice which shall
include an order shall be issued in the following
instances:
(i) when a structure is found unfit for
human occupancy or when violations pose a serious lifesafety
danger to occupants and require correction;
(ii) when a building poses an immediate
threat to the safety of the public and must be demolished
immediately; or
(iii) when an owner has not complied with
an informal notice.
(d) All notices and orders shall be directed to
the owner of record and authorized or acting manager or
agent of any building. The formal notice and order shall
contain:
(i) the street address and legal
description of the parcel upon which the building is
located;
(ii) the action required to be taken by the
owner;
(iii) the date or dates by which the work is
to be accomplished;
(iv) actions the building official is
empowered to take if the order is not obeyed in the time
allotted; and
(v) an explanation of the owner's right to
appeal.
(4) (a) Service of the formal notice and order
shall be made upon all persons designated therein either
personally or by mailing a copy of such notice and order
by certified mail, return receipt requested, and by
regular mail, with postage prepaid on both mailings, to
each such person at the address as it appears on the last
equalized assessment roll of the county or as known to
the building official. If no address of any such person
so appears or is known to the building official, then a
copy of the notice and order shall be so mailed,
addressed to such person, at the address of the building
involved in the proceedings. Service by certified mail
in the manner herein provided shall be effective on the
date of mailing.
(b) Proof of the notice and order shall be
certified to at the time of service by a written
declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the
person effecting service, declaring the time, date, and
manner in which service was made, including service by
regular mail. The declaration, together with any receipt
card returned in acknowledgement of receipt by
certified mail shall be affixed to the copy of the notice
and order retained by the building official.
(c) A notice shall be posted on the property
stating that a formal notice and order has been issued
against the property.
(d) Formal notices and orders to vacate shall
be posted on the property and on every dwelling unit
(November 5, 2004) 4-12
door affected thereby.
(5) Extensions of time may be granted by the
building official. Time extensions may not exceed one
year. (Ord. 94-13, 03/15/94)
4-6-9. Vacating and closing to occupancy.
(1) When a structure is found by the building
official to be unsafe to occupy or unfit for human
occupancy or use, the building official may require the
building and/or the premises immediately vacated and
closed to entry. At the discretion of the building
official, a portion of a vacated building may be
occupied if the occupied portion meets the standards for
habitable buildings specified in this chapter and the
vacated and closed portion complies with the City's
standards for vacant buildings.
(2) When the building official orders the
termination of the occupancy of a dwelling unit, the
owner shall remove the bathroom and kitchen plumbing
fixtures and all cooking appliances, except that when
the kitchen and/or bathroom is incorporated into a unit
allowed by this code, the kitchen and/or bathroom
fixtures may remain.
(3) The building official shall post on the premises
or structure a placard bearing the words:
DO NOT ENTER
UNSAFE TO OCCUPY
It is a misdemeanor to occupy
this building, or to remove
or deface this notice.
______ _______________________________
Date: Building Official
Tooele City Corporation
(4) It shall be unlawful for any person to use or
occupy, or cause or permit any person to use or occupy
any portion of any building which portion has been
declared unsafe to occupy after the vacation date until
the building official certifies that the conditions
described in the vacation order have been corrected.
(5) The building official may stay enforcement for
buildings that are and remain vacated and secured,
provided the lot is kept free of debris and weeds as
prescribed by Section 4-6-15 of this code. Such stay of
enforcement may continue so long as the building
remains vacant and secured and does not pose a further
danger.
(6) Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the
building official from enforcing the UCADB with
respect to any structure which is found by the building
official to be unsafe to occupy or unfit for human
occupancy or use. (Ord. 94-13, 03/15/94)
4-6-10. Removal of placards and posted notices.
The building official shall remove the placard when
the violation upon which the closure was based has been
corrected. Any person who defaces or removes a
closure placard without the approval of the building
official shall be subject to penalties provided by this
chapter. (Ord. 94-13, 03/15/94)
4-6-11. Violation - Penalty.
(1) If, after any formal notice and order of the
building official or the HAAB made pursuant to this
chapter has become final, the person to whom such
order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey
such order, the building official may pursue one or more
of the following remedies:
(a) cause such person to be prosecuted under
subsection 2 of this section;
(b) institute any appropriate action to abate
such building as a public nuisance.
(2) Failure of any person to comply with the
requirements of this chapter or to comply with any
vacation order or any notice and order shall constitute a
class C misdemeanor. The imposition of one penalty
for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit
to continue. When not otherwise specified, each day
that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable by law. (Ord. 94-13,
03/15/94)
4-6-12. Certificate of occupancy.
Following correction of the deficiencies and prior
to re-occupying of any structure closed to occupancy,
the building official shall issue a certificate of
occupancy. (Ord. 94-13, 03/15/94)
4-6-13. Housing advisory and appeals board.
(1) There is hereby established a Housing Advisory
and Appeals Board (HAAB). The HAAB shall have the
authority and power to:
(a) interpret the provisions of this chapter;
(b) hear and decide appeals where it is alleged
there is an error on any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by an administrative
official in the enforcement of this chapter;
(c) modify the impact of specific provisions of
this chapter which create practical difficulties in
their enforcement, so long as the means by which the
mitigation is employed accomplish the purposes of the
original requirements;
(d) extend time deadlines provided in this
chapter, for good cause;
(e) recommend new procedures to the
building official and new ordinances regulating
housing to the city council; and
(f) conduct abatement hearings pursuant to
chapter 4-6-2 of this code.
(2) The HAAB shall consist of five members who
are not employees of the City who shall be appointed by
(November 5, 2004) 4-13
the mayor with the advice and consent of the city
council. Members shall hold office for a term of three
years and may be appointed for only one additional
term. Terms shall be staggered so that the regular terms
of no more than four members shall terminate in any
one year. Members shall serve until their duly
appointed successors are appointed. Any successor
appointed to fill a vacancy on the board shall serve out
the original term, and may be eligible to serve two
additional three-year terms, not to exceed a total of
eight years.
(3) The HAAB shall adopt reasonable rules and
regulations for conducting hearings and other business
consistent with the procedures for appeals and
abatement hearings as set forth herein. All decisions
shall be reflected in the minutes and reduced to writing
in an abstract of findings and order which shall be filed
with the building official and a copy mailed to the
appellant or parties-in-interest. Records of decisions
shall be maintained by the building official in a form
freely accessible to the public.
(4) The concurring vote of a majority or of a
majority of a quorum of the HAAB shall be necessary
to reverse any order, requirement, or determination of
the building official, or to decide in favor of an
appellant on any matter it is required to determine.
(Ord. 94-13, 03/15/94)
4-6-14. Appeals.
(1) Any property owner or his agent affected by
any formal notice and order which has been issued in
connection with the enforcement of any provision of
this chapter, or of any rule or regulation adopted
pursuant thereto, shall have the right to appeal the
matter before the HAAB, provided that the appeal is
filed within 30 days of the service of the formal notice
and order, except that appeals of formal notices and
orders to vacate must be filed within ten days of service.
(2) Appeals shall be submitted on an appeal form
provided by the city recorder. The appellant shall state
the specific order or action protested and a statement of
the relief sought, along with the reasons why the order
or action should be reversed, modified, or otherwise set
aside.
(3) Failure of any person to file an appeal in
accordance with the provisions of this section shall
constitute a waiver of that person's right to an appeal.
(4) The timely filing of an appeal shall stay
further action by the building official to enforce
correction of the specific violations being appealed,
except there shall be no stay of enforcement when the
building official determines that the condition of the
premises poses an immediate danger to the occupants or
to public safety. When such cases arise, the building
official shall convene a special HAAB hearing as soon
as possible which shall consider possible ratification,
reversal or modification of the building official's action.
(5) Before any hearing is held before the HAAB,
the HAAB shall inspect the building or premises
involved. Prior notice of such inspection shall be given
to the owner who shall be given an opportunity to be
present at such inspection. Upon completion of the
inspection, the chairperson shall state for the record the
material facts observed at the inspection, which facts
shall be read at the initiation of the hearing. Failure of
the owner to provide access without good cause shall
not constitute a reason for the hearing to be postponed.
(6) Written notice of the time and place of all
HAAB inspections shall be mailed to the appellant at
least ten days prior to the date of such inspection or
hearing, except for vacation orders where the appellant
shall be notified at least two days in advance.
(7) The owner may represent himself or be
represented by someone having legal authority to act in
the owner's behalf. Each party may call and examine
witnesses on any relevant matter, introduce
documentary and physical evidence, and cross-examine
opposing witnesses. Any relevant evidence shall be
admitted.
(8) A record of the entire proceeding of all
hearings before the HAAB shall be made by tape
recording or by any other means of permanent recording
determined to be appropriate by the HAAB. The record
shall be retained on file in accordance with the city
recorder's retention schedule.
(9) The decision of the HAAB shall be effective
upon issuance of the board's written decision.
(10) Any person aggrieved by any decision of the
HAAB made under this section may appeal such
decision to the mayor within ten days of the written
decision of the HAAB. The mayor may consider
testimony from any interested party and shall render a
written decision within 30 days of the filing of the
appeal to the mayor. If the mayor determines that the
decision of the HAAB is supported by the evidence and
is not arbitrary or capricious, the mayor shall affirm the
decision.
(11) An appeal from a decision of the mayor shall
be made to a court of competent jurisdiction no later
than 30 days from the date of issuance of such decision.
(Ord. 94-13, 03/15/94)
4-6-15. Substandard buildings.
Any building covered by this chapter shall be
deemed substandard if there exists a condition which
places the safety of the occupants or the public at risk.
A building shall be deemed substandard if it does not
meet the minimum housing and maintenance standards
of this chapter. (Ord. 94-13, 03/15/94)
4-6-16. Minimum exterior standards.
(1) Sidewalks and driveways on private property
shall have hard, even surfaces with cracks or differential
settlement not exceeding one inch elevation difference,
(November 5, 2004) 4-14
except legally installed gravel driveways shall be
permitted to remain.
(2) Loose bricks in chimneys shall be repaired
and missing chimney caps shall be replace.
(3) All roofs, floors, walls, chimneys,
foundations, and other structural components shall be
repaired when they no longer retain their structural
integrity.
(4) Exposed materials that require weather
protection and exterior surfaces that are deteriorating
shall be sealed to the extent necessary to keep cold,
wind, water, or dampness from the interior of the
structure.
(5) All surface water shall drain away from the
structure.
(6) Windows that are required by this chapter for
light and ventilation are to be glazed with approved
glazing as specified in the IBC. Window openings not
required to meet light and ventilation standards may be
sealed.
(7) Rain gutters and downspouts, when provided,
shall be kept in good repair and clear of debris.
(Ord. 2004-15, 10-20-04); (Ord. 94-13, 03/15/94)
4-6-17. Minimum environmental or sanitary
standards.
(1) Garbage and refuse storage and removal shall
meet the requirements of the Tooele County Health
Department.
(2) There shall be no insect or rodent infestation
in violation of Tooele County Health Department
regulations. (Ord. 94-13, 03/15/94)
4-6-18. Minimum interior standards.
(1) In kitchens and bathrooms, floors and walls
adjacent to sinks, lavatories, toilets, and tubs shall be
finished with a material that is not adversely affected by
moisture, except in single-family dwellings carpet may
be installed on kitchen and bathroom floors.
(2) All floor and stair coverings shall be
maintained so that tripping hazards are minimized.
(3) All wall and ceiling coverings shall be
maintained so that they are secure and substantially
intact. (Ord. 94-13, 03/15/94)
4-6-19. Exterior and interior doors, trim, and
hardware.
(1) All doors, trim, and hardware shall be kept in
good working condition. Each dwelling unit shall have
approved locks for exterior doors which are keyed from
the exterior and are operable from the interior without
the use of a key or other special equipment or
knowledge.
(2) Hinges for out-swinging doors shall be
equipped with non-removable hinge pins or a
mechanical interlock to preclude removal of the door
from the exterior by removing the hinge pins. (Ord. 94-
13, 03/15/94)
4-6-20. House addressing.
House numbers and other identifying data shall be
displayed as follows:
(1) All buildings used for human occupancy shall
display a house number in a prominent location of the
street side of the building in such a position that the
number is easily visible to approaching emergency
vehicles. The numerals shall be no less than four inches
in height and shall be of a contrasting color to the
background to which they are attached.
(2) Each individual unit within any multiplefamily
structure shall display a prominent identification
number, not less than two inches in height, which is
easily visible to approaching vehicular or pedestrian
traffic. (Ord. 94-13, 03/15/94)
4-6-21. Space and occupancy standards.
(1) (a) Existing and reconstructed stairways
shall have a minimum headroom clearance height of six
feet four inches, except there shall be no minimum
requirement for stairs to non-habitable rooms or areas.
(b) The minimum ceiling height for all
habitable rooms shall be six feet four inches, except
projections shall be allowed to six feet zero inches when
the projection is not in the pattern of circulation,
projections are not greater than 20 percent of the floor
area of the room, the window requirements of this
chapter for light and ventilation are met, and a 120 volt
electrical powered smoke detector is installed in such
room, with the exception of a kitchen.
(c) The minimum ceiling height for
nonhabitable rooms shall be six feet four inches, except
storage rooms or storage areas shall have no minimum
ceiling height requirement.
(d) Bathrooms shall have a minimum ceiling
height of six feet four inches with no projections. The
bathroom ceiling height at the back of a lavatory, toilet,
or tub without shower may be sloped to a minimum
height of five feet zero inches at the wall when the
ceiling height is no less than six feet five inches at a
point 18 inches from said wall.
(e) In any room with a sloping ceiling, at least
one-half the floor area shall have a minimum ceiling
height as required by Subparagraph (b) of this Section.
No portion of the room with a ceiling height below five
feet zero inches may be used in the floor area
computation.
(f) A ceiling height of six feet four inches
shall be required in corridors, and the minimum width
of corridors shall be 36 inches, except in dwelling units
constructed prior to 1983, a minimum corridor width of
thirty inches shall be permitted.
(g) Additions made to the exterior of an
existing building envelope shall meet the requirements
of the IBC. New construction within the existing
(November 5, 2004) 4-15
building envelope shall meet the requirements of this
chapter.
(2) (a) Dwelling units and congregate housing
shall have at least one room with not less than one
hundred 20 square feet of floor area. Other habitable
rooms except kitchens shall have an area not less than
70 square feet. Habitable rooms other than a kitchen
shall not be less than seven feet in length or width.
(b) Every room used for sleeping shall have
not less than 70 square feet of floor area. Where more
than two persons occupy a room used for sleeping, the
required floor area shall be increased at the rate of 50
square feet for each occupant in excess of two.
(c) No portion of a room with a ceiling height
below five feet zero inches may be used in the floor
area computation.
(3) An efficiency dwelling unit shall:
(a) have a living room of not less than 190
square feet of floor area, with an additional 100 square
feet of floor area for each occupant in excess of two;
(b) be provided with a closet;
(c) be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking
range with oven and/or microwave oven, and
refrigeration facilities each having a clear working
space of not less than 30 inches in front;
(d) be provided with a bathroom containing a
toilet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.
(4) An SRO room shall have an area of not less
than 70 square feet. For SRO rooms less than 120
square feet, a common room shall be provided of at
least 120 square feet serving no more than ten units,
with a minimum of one common room per floor. The
common room may be a common kitchen when separate
rooms are not provided with cooking facilities.
(5) As long as cooking facilities for individual
units in hotels, motels, and congregate housing do not
encroach into the required floor area, each individual
unit may have cooking and eating facilities, provided all
of the following items are supplied:
(a) a cooking range with oven and/or
microwave oven, but hot plates, electric fry pans, and
similar heating units shall not meet this requirement;
(b) an approved kitchen sink, with a minimum
dimension of twelve inches by twelve inches by four
inches deep;
(c) a minimum of four square feet of counter
space; and
(d) a refrigerator.
(6) When cooking facilities are not provided
within individual units, congregate housing shall have
provided a common kitchen area which shall contain the
following minimum facilities: a sink for each 20 tenants
or portion thereof, a range and oven for each 20 tenants
or portion thereof, and a refrigerator for each ten
tenants or portion thereof. The minimum kitchen area
shall be 70 square feet for the first ten occupants or
portion thereof, and an additional 30 square feet for
each additional ten persons or portion thereof.
(7) Each dwelling unit shall have a kitchen and
bathroom within the dwelling unit. The bathroom shall
have a tight-fitting door when the entry to the room is
through a kitchen. Every bathroom shall be provided
with a means to ensure privacy.
(8) All cooking appliances shall be maintained in
good working condition.
(Ord. 2004-15, 10-20-04); (Ord. 94-13, 03/15/94)
4-6-22. Light and ventilation.
(1) (a) Every habitable room shall have at least
one window facing directly to the outdoors to provide
natural light. The minimum total window area shall
equal one-twentieth or more of the floor area, with a
minimum of three square feet.
(b) The glazed area of an exterior door may
be used for purposes of computing window size for
natural light when an appropriate size window is
installed in the door.
(c) For the purpose of meeting light or
ventilation requirements, as well as emergency egress, a
room may be considered as a portion of an adjoining
room when one-half of the area of the common wall is
open and unobstructed and provides an opening of not
less than one-tenth of the floor area of the interior room
or 25 square feet, whichever is greater.
(2) (a) (i) Except as provided in Subsections
(2)(a)(ii) and (iii), all habitable rooms shall be provided
with natural ventilation by means of openings to the
exterior which have the capability of being closed to the
weather. Total openings shall have an area at least
1/20th of the floor area or three square feet, whichever
is greater.
(ii) Habitable rooms containing a
mechanical ventilation system shall be allowed in lieu of
openings for natural ventilation. Such system shall
create a positive pressure in the room and the air intake
shall be connected directly to the outside and be capable
of two air exchanges per hour. The air intake source
shall be located at least three feet above any vent, or
exhaust fan outlet which is with ten feet of the air
intake. Intake source is not permitted where it will pick
up objectionable odors, fumes, flammable vapors, or
less than ten feet above the surface of any abutting
public way.
(iii) Exterior doors may be used for the
purpose of natural ventilation. When used as such, a
screen shall be installed thereon.
(b) (i) Except as provided in Subsection
(b)(ii), (iii) and (iv), all bathrooms, toilet rooms,
laundry, and similar rooms shall be provided with
natural ventilation by means of openings to the exterior
which have the capability of being closed to the
weather. Such openings shall have a total area not less
than one-twentieth of the floor area of the room, with a
minimum of one and one-half square feet.
(November 5, 2004) 4-16
(ii) Bathrooms and laundry rooms
containing a mechanical exhaust system connected
directly to the outside shall be allowed if such system is
capable of providing five air exchanges per hour. The
exhaust air shall discharge at least three feet above or
ten feet away from any air intake source. Toilet rooms
may be ventilated with an approved recirculation fan or
similar device designed to remove odors from the air.
(iii) Mechanical venting of bathrooms into
the attic shall be acceptable as long as provisions of
Section 3205(c) of the IBC are met.
(iv) Bathrooms constructed prior to 1970
vented with gravity vent openings extending to the
outside shall meet the ventilation requirement as long as
the walls, ceiling and floor are not adversely affected by
moisture.
(Ord. 2004-15, 10-20-04); (Ord. 94-13, 03/15/94)
4-6-23. Fire safety egress.
(1) All buildings, premises, equipment, and
apparatus shall be in a condition such that no hazard of
fire exists.
(2) (a) Every dwelling unit or guest room shall
have a safe, continuous, and unobstructed means of
egress of a minimum height of six feet four inches and a
minimum width of thirty inches directly to the public
way.
(b) Every sleeping room located below the
fourth story shall have at least one openable window or
exterior door approved for emergency egress or rescue.
The opening shall have a minimum of three square feet
of openable space or clear opening dimensions of at
least 18 inches high and 24 inches wide, except either
height or width may be reduced to a minimum of 16
inches when the corresponding dimension is increased
by three inches or each one inch the first dimension is
diminished.
(c) There shall be a maximum window sill
height of 44 inches for at least one window in all
bedrooms or other rooms used for sleeping. If the
distance from the floor to the window sill is more than
44 inches for such window, a permanent platform of
substantial construction attached to the floor or wall
may be installed to meet the maximum height
requirement. The minimum dimensions of such
platform shall be twelve inches deep and the same width
as the openable portion of the window, but in no case
less than 24 inches in width.
(i) if minimum light and ventilation
requirements are met, the requirements of Subsection
(2)(c) shall not apply if there are two approved exit
doors from the room leading to separate exit-ways.
(ii) if minimum light and ventilation
requirements are met, there is no minimum sill height
requirement in bedrooms of dwelling units constructed
before 1970 except for bedrooms in basement areas.
(d) For windows that are below grade, a
window well shall be provided whose length is the
width of the window and which extends at least 18
inches out from the exterior of the building. When the
distance from the top of the window well to its bottom
exceeds 48 inches, it shall have a permanently mounted
platform or ladder. Grates are permitted over window
wells if hinged to pivot away from the structure and not
weighing over 15 pounds per section of the grate.
(e) Bars, grills, grates, or similar devices may
be installed on emergency escape or rescue windows or
doors, provided such devices are equipped with
approved release mechanisms which are operable from
the inside without the use of a key or special knowledge
or effort.
(3) Stairs and handrails shall meet the
requirements of Chapter 33 of the IBC with the
following modifications:
(a) Handrails are required for all public stairs
with four or more risers. Two handrails shall be
required when the width of the stairs is 48 inches or
more.
(b) Handrails shall be placed not less than 30
inches nor more than 38 inches above the outermost
edge of the tread.
(c) Existing interior stairs and exterior stairs
constructed before 1970 shall have a minimum width of
30 inches.
(d) Existing interior and exterior stairs shall
have a rise of no more than eight inches and a run of not
less than nine inches. Within any flight of stairs, the
greatest riser height shall not exceed the smallest by
more than 3/4 inch, nor shall the largest tread run
exceed the smallest by more than 3/4 inch.
(i) Notwithstanding Subsection (d), on
winder, circular, or spiral stairs the width of the tread
may be less than six inches on the inside edge, if six
inches are maintained at a distance no less than 30
inches from the outside edge of the stairs.
(ii) There shall be no minimum rise or run
requirement not maximum variation in the rise and run
for stairs leading only to mechanical, storage, and utility
rooms provided the stairs are structurally sound and
handrail is installed.
(e) Stairs in the interior or exterior of an
existing building which are completely rebuilt shall
meet the IBC requirements for new stairs.
(4) (a) Guardrails shall be required for all
balconies, porches, patios, and open stairs more than 30
inches above or below grade. Guardrails shall also be
required for any grade change more than 30 inches next
to a walking surface. Guardrails shall not be less than
42 inches in height, except for guardrails serving private
dwelling units which shall have a minimum height of 36
inches.
(i) Public guardrails may have a
minimum height of 36 inches if the building was built
before 1970.
(November 5, 2004) 4-17
(ii) Guardrails having a height less than
36 inches shall be allowed if they were installed as part
of the building's original construction and are not a
replacement.
(b) Open guardrails shall have intermediate
rails or an ornamental pattern such that there is no open
area in excess of four inches in diameter. The foregoing
notwithstanding, the diameter of such open space may
be nine inches for buildings built before 1985 and six
inches for those built between 1985 and 1991.
(5) (a) Smoke detectors shall be required in all
dwelling units. Such detectors shall be mounted on the
ceiling or wall at a point centrally located in the
corridor or area giving access to rooms used for
sleeping. In efficiency dwelling units, hotel sleeping
rooms and hotel suites, the detector shall be centrally
located on the ceiling or wall of the main room or hotel
sleeping room.
(b) Where sleeping rooms are on an upper
level, the detector shall be placed at the ceiling or wall
directly above the stairway immediately outside the
bedrooms. Wall mounted detectors shall be mounted as
near to the ceiling as possible, but no detector shall be
mounted within twelve inches of any corner formed by
the meeting of walls, ceilings, beams, or structure.
When activated, the detector shall provide an alarm in
the dwelling unit or guest room.
(c) When repairs to a structure are made
which exceed $1,000.00 or when one or more sleeping
rooms are added or created to a structure, smoke
detectors shall be installed in compliance with Section
1210 of the IBC.
(6) Except as provided herein, any wall or ceiling
separating dwelling units shall be maintained in its
original condition with all penetrations sealed or
covered with an approved material. Walls and ceilings
separating a garage or carport from a dwelling unit or
common area shall be maintained in their original
condition with all penetrations sealed or covered with
an approved material as specified by the IBC, except
when 50% or more of a wall or ceiling is removed for
any reason, the entire wall or ceiling shall be
reconstructed to meet the requirements of the IBC for
one-hour occupancy separation.
(Ord. 2004-15, 10-20-04); (Ord. 94-13, 03/15/94)
4-6-24. Plumbing.
(1) (a) Unless provided otherwise in this chapter,
plumbing, piping and fixtures shall be in accordance
with the code in effect at the time of installation.
(b) Plumbing, piping and fixtures shall not
contain leaks. All waste lines must be connected to an
approved sewer system and shall be maintained in good
condition. All waste lines shall be connected to an
approved sewer system.
(c) The minimum plumbing fixtures required
for congregate housing are a lavatory, toilet, and tub or
shower for each ten occupants or portion thereof and a
kitchen sink.
(d) There shall be cold running water plumbed
to each toilet and hot and cold running water plumbed
to each lavatory, tub, shower, laundry and kitchen sink.
(e) The minimum plumbing fixtures for
dwelling units are a lavatory, toilet, tub or shower, and
kitchen sink.
(f) There shall be a space without obstruction
from floor to ceiling of not less than 16 inches in front
of all toilets. Toilets shall be located in a space without
obstruction from floor to ceiling of not less than 22
inches in width. No encroachments of these dimensions
are permitted.
(g) Where vents do not exist for plumbing
fixtures meeting the applicable codes in effect at the
time of their installation, vents need not be installed
when the plumbing fixture or trap and trap arm is
replaced providing the drainage line is not altered.
(h) Every motel and hotel that does not
provide private toilets, lavatories, bathtubs, or showers
shall have on each floor, accessible from a public
hallway, at least one toilet, one lavatory, and one
bathtub with shower or one separate shower for each ten
occupants or portion thereof. For each additional ten
occupants, or portion thereof, and additional one toilet,
one lavatory and one bathtub or shower accessible from
a public hallway shall be provided.
(2) Water heaters and boilers shall have an
approved combination temperature and pressure relief
valve and relief valve discharge pipe. All new
installations of water heaters and boilers, when located
above an occupied space, shall include a safety pan with
a drain piped to an approved drainage system. Existing
water heaters and boilers shall have a temperature and
pressure relief valve. The valve shall have a discharge
pipe which discharges no more than six inches above
the floor, and drains to an approved floor drain, except a
temperature and pressure relief valve shall be required
for all tank-type storage water heaters only, or when
other types of water heaters are designed for a valve.
(3) In order to protect against contamination of
the water supply through cross connections, all water
inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located above the
flood level rim of the fixture as defined in the UPC.
Hoses or hand-held shower heads shall not be attached
in any manner that would permit water contamination
during reverse pressure.
(a) Water supply pipes provided with an
approved backflow preventer or anti-syphon device as
regulated in the UPC are permitted.
(b) Hand-held shower heads are permitted
when provided with a permanently mounted holder
attached to the wall or shower pipe or when an antisiphon
device is installed.
(c) For dwelling units built before 1970, water
faucet outlets below the overflow rim of the fixture shall
(November 5, 2004) 4-18
be permitted until the faucet is replaced. A new fixture
shall not be installed where it would create a cross
connection.
(4) (a) Drain traps shall meet standards of the
UPC, except for dwelling units built prior to 1970,
existing traps shall be allowed as originally designed
unless there is evidence of trap siphonage or trap seal
failure. If the trap has been modified it shall be
replaced with an approved trap, and a vent shall be
added as required by the UPC.
(b) All open untrapped sewer lines and
unused trapped outlets shall be capped with an
approved permanent or substantial cap.
(5) (a) All showers shall be finished to a height of
at least 70 inches above the fixture drain outlet with
nonabsorbent material, except freestanding tubs with
shower risers may utilize a shower curtain that totally
encloses all sides of the tub.
(b) Every kitchen sink, laundry, lavatory, tub,
and shower shall be provided with hot water of at least
120o Fahrenheit and with cold water.
(c) Every kitchen sink, lavatory, tub, shower,
and toilet shall be provided with a minimum of 18 psi of
water pressure.
4-6-25. Mechanical.
(1) (a) All mechanical equipment shall be in
accordance with the code in effect at the time of
installation.
(b) All mechanical equipment shall be
properly maintained and shall be operated in a safe
manner.
(2) (a) Heating is to be provided by a
permanently installed heating system capable of heating
all habitable rooms and bathrooms to a minimum of 68o
Fahrenheit at a point three feet zero inches off the floor
and three feet zero inches in from the outside wall.
(b) A return air duct shall not be permitted
which serves more than one dwelling unit, except a
common air return shall be permitted if the heating
system was installed prior to 1960. A common air
return shall be permitted for equipment installed after
1959 and before 1969 and for furnace replacements
using existing ducting if a listed smoke detector is
installed in the return air vent which will shut down the
furnace fan in the event of fire.
(3) (a) Gas furnaces and water heaters shall not
be permitted in bedrooms, bathrooms or in closets with
access only from a bedroom or a bathroom.
(b) Gas shut-off valves are required on all gas
appliances. Shut-off valves shall be installed in
accordance with the UMC.
(c) All fireplaces, wood-burning stoves and
all other appliances producing combustible gas byproducts
shall be connected to an operating chimney or
approved flue. All flues and vents shall be installed per
requirements of the UMC in effect at the time of
installation.
(d) All fuel burning appliances shall be
provided with combustion air per the requirements of
their listing and in compliance with the UMC.
(e) All fuel burning appliances shall be
provided with listed clearances and maintained in good
working condition and in accordance with their listing.
(f) All ventilation fans shall be installed
according to their listing and maintained in good
working condition.
(g) All ducts and vents shall be maintained
according to original installation requirements.
(4) Asbestos, regardless of the date of installation,
shall meet the requirements of the Tooele County
Health Department. (Ord. 94-13, 03/15/94)
4-6-26. Electrical.
(1) (a) Unless provided otherwise in this chapter,
all electrical wiring and equipment shall be in
accordance with the code in effect at the time of
installation.
(b) All electrical panels, boxes, and outlets are
to have proper covers. Every habitable room, including
an SRO room, shall contain at least two electrical
receptacles or one receptacle and one electric light
fixture. Every toilet room, bathroom, laundry room,
furnace room, and public hallway shall contain at least
one electric light fixture. Public hallways must be
illuminated at all times the building is occupied with
light having the intensity of one foot candle at floor
level. Electrical equipment shall not exceed the load
capacity of the service, and branch circuits shall be
properly fused.
(c) Grounding type receptacles shall only be
used when connected to a grounding system. Existing
non-grounding type receptacles may be replaced with
grounding type receptacles where protected by a
ground-fault circuit-interrupter as specified in NEC
Section 210.7(d).
(2) Existing dwelling units with electrical services
less than 60 amps per dwelling unit which have no
special electrical service loads, such as air conditioners,
stoves, heating units, and refrigerators may continue to
be operated without upgrading. However, in structures
built in 1970 or after, residential units that are
remodeled at a cost exceeding $3,000.00 per unit,
excluding cabinets, painting, and carpet, shall have their
electrical systems upgraded to meet the requirements of
the NEC.
(3) Circuits supplying air conditioners, cooking
stoves and heating appliances shall meet the
requirements of the NEC.
(4) Electrical outlets and switches may be
replaced without upgrading electric wiring which was
installed in accordance with the applicable code at the
time of installation. Ground-fault circuit-interrupter
protected receptacles shall be provided where
(November 5, 2004) 4-19
receptacles are replaced at outlets that are required to be
GFCI protected by the NEC.
(5) When new circuits, outlets, switches, wiring
and service panels are being installed, all work shall
meet the NEC requirements.
(6) Lighting in common areas of apartment
structures, congregate housing, hotels and motels shall
meet the following:
(7) (a) Aisles, passageways, stairwells, corridors,
entry ways, and recesses related to and within the
building complex shall be illuminated with a minimum
of a 40 watt light bulb or equivalent for each 200 square
feet of floor area, provided that the spacing between
lights shall not be greater than 30 feet. However,
structures containing no more than three dwelling units
shall not be required to provide exit lighting when no
lighting outlet has been previously provided.
(b) Open parking lots and carports shall be
provided with a minimum of one foot candle of light on
the parking surface during the hours of darkness.
Lighting devices shall be protected by weather resistant
covers.
(8) All lighting fixtures, switches, outlets, and
other electrical fixtures and appliances shall be
maintained according to their listing and approval.
(9) All electric branch circuits shall be properly
installed according to the requirements of the NEC.
(10) Flexible cords, as defined in the NEC, shall be
used only according to their listing and shall not be
installed as permanent wiring strung through partitions,
walls, doorways or across exit-ways. (Ord. 94-13, 03-
15-94)
4-6-27. Energy conservation requirements.
(1) Existing residential units shall be required to
have their structures upgraded according to the
following:
(a) Whenever wallboard, plaster, or other
finish material is removed which exposes wall cavities
of foundations, exterior walls, floors, or ceilings, these
spaces shall be insulated to the degree it is practical.
Where attic and crawl space areas are insulated, the
space shall be ventilated as per the IBC.
(b) Where insulation increases the
accumulation of snow, and the snow load capacity of
the roof structure is exceeded, the roof members shall
be upgraded to withstand the additional loads.
(c) When new habitable space is created
within an existing building envelope, all such spaces
shall be insulated to the current Utah State Energy Code
standards.
(d) All replacement windows shall be double
pane with thermal break.
(e) All door replacements shall be insulated
doors.
(f) New mechanical equipment installed shall
meet a minimum of 80% efficiency.
(g) Except for the other applicable
requirements of this chapter, when a new addition is
made to an existing residential structure, only the
addition shall be made to comply with current Utah
State Energy Code standards.
(2) (a) Doors and windows shall be weather tight.
All panes shall be replaced if broken with glazing
complying with the IBC.
(b) All doors and windows shall be properly
caulked and weatherproofed.
(Ord. 2004-15, 10-20-04); (Ord. 94-13, 03-15-94)
4-6-28. Guidelines for Manufactured Housing
Installation adopted.
The booklet, "Guidelines for Manufactured
Housing Installation," 1991 Edition, copyrighted by the
International Conference of Building Officials, is hereby
adopted as a code of Tooele City. Appendices A and B
of such "Guidelines" are specifically adopted hereby.
Each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions
and terms thereof are hereby referred to and made a part
hereof as if fully set out here. (Ord. 94-31, 05-12-94)
(September 30, 2002) 4-20
CHAPTER 7. MECHANICAL CODE
4-7-1. International Mechanical Code.
4-7-2. Penalties.
4-7-1. International Mechanical Code.
The most recent edition of the International
Mechanical Code (IMC), as adopted by the Utah
Division of Occupational and Professional Licensing, is
incorporated by reference as part of the Tooele City
Code, together with all applicable standards set forth in
the International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC), and subject to
amendments and modifications set forth in the Utah
Building Standards Act Rules.
(Ord. 2002-01, 01-09-2002); (Ord. 98-04, 01-21-98);
(Ord. 95-09, 06-03-95); (Ord. 91-14, 11-19-91)
4-7-2. Penalties.
(1) Any person who erects, constructs, enlarges,
alters, repairs, moves, improves, removes, converts or
demolishes, equips, uses or maintains mechanical
systems or equipment or causes or permits the same to
be done in violation of the "International Mechanical
Code" shall severally for each and every such violation
and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a class C
misdemeanor. The imposition of one penalty for any
violation shall not excuse the violation or permit such to
continue; and all such persons shall be required to
correct or remedy such violations or defects within a
reasonable time. Each day that prohibited conditions
are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
(2) The application of the penalty identified in
Subsection (1) shall not be held to prevent the enforced
removal of prohibited conditions. (Ord. 2002-06, 04-
03-2002); (Ord. 91-14, 11-19-91)
(January 22, 2021)
CHAPTER 8. ROAD AND BRIDGE
CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
4-8-1. Specifications Adopted - Amendments.
4-8-2. Street Design.
4-8-2.1. Infill Overlay District Street Design.
4-8-3. Street Widths.
4-8-4. Street Improvements.
4-8-5. Fire Hydrants.
4-8-6. Street Lighting.
4-8-7. Alleys.
4-8-8. Blocks.
4-8-9. Street Names and Signage.
4-8-10. Building Address Numbers.
4-8-11. Bridge Standards and Design.
4-8-1. Specifications Adopted - Amendments.
The most recent edition of the Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, as
adopted, updated, revised, and published by The Utah
Department of Transportation, is herewith adopted by
reference as the standard specifications for road and
bridge construction, in its entirety, including all
requirements for bidding, award of contract, scope of
work, control of work, control of material, legal
regulations and responsibility to the public,
prosecution and progress of work, measurement and
payment for work, and all other provisions therein
contained with the following amendments thereto:
(1) The following definitions are amended:
(a) Commission: Tooele City Corporation.
(b) Department: Tooele City Community
Development and Public Works Department, inclusive
of Engineering.
(c) Director: The Director of the
Community Development and Public Works
Department.
(d) Engineer: The Tooele City Engineer or
consulting engineer assigned to the project in question,
as designated by the Director.
(e) State: The State of Utah and its political
subdivisions acting through their authorized
representatives.
(2) In all instances where the context of said
specifications may be interpreted in more than one
manner, said specifications shall be interpreted so as
to apply to Tooele City Corporation rather than the
State of Utah, its road commission, or other agencies,
and shall be interpreted in such a manner as to validate
the provision in question.
(Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-2015) (Ord. 1997-09, 03-05-
1997) (Ord, 1974-16, 12-09-1974)
4-8-2. Street Design.
(1) All streets shall be subject to topographical
conditions, public safety, and the relation to the
proposed uses of land to be served by such streets.
Where uses of land are not shown on a land use plan
or plat approved by the City, the arrangement of streets
in a subdivision and elsewhere shall either:
(a) provide for the continuation or
appropriate projection of existing streets in
surrounding areas; or
(b) conform to a plan for the area or
neighborhood approved or adopted by the City
Council to meet a particular situation where
topographical and other conditions make continuance
or conformance to existing streets impracticable.
(2) Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as
nearly as possible at right angles and no street shall
intersect any other street at less than 60 degree angles.
(3) The following functional classifications and
details shall apply to all street rights-of-way within
Tooele City:
(a) (i) Functional Classification - Arterial
street.
(ii) Definition - A large street with
medium traffic speeds generally designed to
efficiently convey high volumes of traffic through the
community. Direct access from arterial streets to
adjacent properties is limited and controlled and
widely spaced. Residential properties shall not have
driveway access directly onto an arterial street.
(iii) Cross section:
(b) (i) Functional Classification - Major
collector street.
(ii) Definition - A larger street with
medium traffic speeds generally designed to convey
regional traffic between areas of the community
containing lower classification roads to arterial streets.
Direct access from arterial streets to adjacent
properties is limited and widely spaced.
(iii) Cross Section:
(January 22, 2021)
(c) (i) Functional Classification – Minor
collector street.
(ii) Definition - A medium-sized street
intended to be the primary traffic conveyor through
neighborhood or non-residential areas to feed traffic to
larger classification streets for regional travel.
(iii) Cross Section:
(d) (i) Functional Classification – Local
street.
(ii) Definition - A smaller street
designed primarily for localized neighborhood traffic
at slower speeds and providing direct access to
adjacent properties.
(iii) Cross section:
(e) (i) Functional Classification – Alleys.
(ii) Definition - A narrow street
designed and intended for minimal vehicular traffic
that provide secondary access to adjacent properties or
access to properties that would otherwise be
inaccessible. Alley streets generally do not provide for
pedestrian traffic as an encouragement to utilize more
visible routes.
(iii) Cross section:
(f) Curb and Gutter, Parkstrip and Sidewalk.
(i) Cross Section:
(January 22, 2021)
(ii) Curb and Gutter.
(A) Curbs and gutters shall be
constructed on all streets and shall be not less than 30” in
overall width. Curbs may be constructed integrally with
the Portland cement concrete pavement. Three ⅝”
reinforcing bars 10” long shall be installed in all curb and
gutter, centered over each sewer and water trench crossed
by the curb and gutter.
(B) Curbs shall be APWA Type “A”
high-back design unless approved otherwise by the Public
Works Director, or their designee.
(C) Adequate provision shall be made
at all crosswalks and intersections for wheelchairs to cross
the curb and gutter and drive approaches. The Cityadopted
specifications for such crossings shall be
complied with in regard thereto. The Community
Development and Public Works Department Director or
their designee may approve alterations to the standards in
instances necessary to comply with ADA requirements.
(D) Curb and gutters, driveway
approaches, and all appurtenances thereto shall be
constructed of class 4000 psi (6.5 sack) mix Portland
cement concrete. Unless allowed otherwise by the
Community Development and Public Works Department
Director, the amount of cement in the mix design shall be
increased to 7.5 sack mix between October 1 and March
1. All driveway approaches, waterways and other
appurtenances shall be subject to the weight of vehicles on
any occasion.
(E) An expansion joint shall be
placed no greater than every 50 lineal feet with contraction
joint control strikes placed no greater than every ten lineal
feet.
(F) Curbs, gutters, driveway
approaches and other appurtenances shall have a slump of
not less than two inches and not more than four inches.
Maximum slump is eight inches after the addition of a
high range water reducer (super plasticizer) at site.
Entrained air shall be 5% to 7%.
(iii) Sidewalks.
(A) Sidewalks and all appurtenances
thereto shall be constructed of class 4000 psi (6.5 sack)
mix Portland cement concrete. Unless allowed otherwise
by the Community Development and Public Works
Department Director, the amount of cement in the mix
design shall be increased to 7.5 sack mix between October
1 and March 1. All driveway approaches, waterways and
other appurtenances shall be subject to the weight of
vehicles on any occasion.
(B) Sidewalks and other
appurtenances shall have a slump of not less than two
inches and not more than four inches. Maximum slump
is eight inches after the addition of a high range water
reducer (super plasticizer) at site. Entrained air shall be
5% to 7%.
(C) For all sidewalks an expansion
joint shall be placed no greater than every 50 lineal feet
with contraction joint control strikes spaced no greater
than that equal to the width of the sidewalk.
(D) Sidewalks in newly-created
subdivisions shall serve the present and future pedestrian
traffic of the vicinity. Such sidewalks shall be located in
accordance with proper land planning procedures,
principles, and with due regard for public safety. Unless
otherwise approved by the Community Development and
Public Works Department Director, sidewalks shall be
constructed parallel to the curb, and generally located five
feet distant therefrom so as to provide a park strip between
the curb and the sidewalk.
(E) Sidewalks in residential areas
shall have a minimum depth of four inches and six inches
where crossed as part of a driveway. Sidewalks in nonresidential
areas shall have a minimum depth of six
inches. The maximum slope of any sidewalk shall be 2%
or compliant with ADA standards.
(F) All one- and two-family
residential development sidewalks shall have a minimum
width of five feet, and all multi-family, commercial
properties and industrial properties which require
sidewalks shall have a minimum width of six feet. All
rebuilt sidewalks less than five feet wide shall be widened
to five feet in width for a distance of five feet at least every
200 feet. Sidewalks constructed adjacent to or as an
integral part of the curb shall be a minimum of seven feet
in width and provide a means of installing street signs,
traffic control signs, and mailboxes that does not impede
pedestrian traffic, visibility of signage or access to
mailboxes.
(iv) Parkstrips. The Community
Development and Public Works Department Director
may modify the width of the park strip and/or allow for
placement of the sidewalk directly adjacent to the curb and
(January 22, 2021)
gutter with the recommendation of the City Engineer in
order to accommodate available right-of-way limitations,
match existing conditions, consider unique design criteria,
or other unusual field related considerations.
(4) Dead end streets, including cul-de-sacs,
where permitted, shall not be more than 250 feet in
length measured from the centerline of the last
intersecting street to the centerpoint of the turnaround
area. Cul-de-sacs shall have a minimum outside rightof-
way radius of 50 feet at the closed end, unless the
street ends at a point where the subdivider or developer
intends to extend a street pursuant to a preliminary
plan submitted and approved by the City, in which
case the turnaround may be a minimum radius of 40
feet and constructed of a temporary nature acceptable
to the Tooele City Fire Department. Cul-de-sacs may
be extended beyond 250 feet with written findings from
the Public Works Director that:
(a) doing so is necessary to reasonably
develop properties adjacent to the cul-de-sac;
(b) doing so is necessary to provide vehicular
safe access and utility service to the properties adjacent
to the cul-de-sac;
(c) no other option exists for providing access
to the properties adjacent to the cul-de-sac;
(d) the cul-de-sac turnaround radius at the
closed end, as required in this Section, is increased by
not less than ten feet; and,
(e) doing so will not violate applicable
provisions of the building or fire codes.
(5) No more than two cross streets shall intersect
at any one intersection.
(6) Street grades shall be:
(a) more than 1.0% without written findings
from the Public Works Director establishing that the
grade must be less, but in no case shall be less than
0.5%;
(b) less than 10% for minor collector streets,
local streets, and alleys; and
(c) less than 7% for major collector and
arterial streets.
(7) Streets shall be leveled, whenever possible,
to a grade of less than 4% for a distance of at least 100
feet approaching all intersections, and shall be a
maximum grade of 3% at the intersection.
(8) All crests and sags shall have a vertical curve
pursuant to the following table:
Design Speed, MPH 20 30 40 50 60
Stopping Sight Distance 150 200 275 350 475
Stopping Distance, feet 16 28 55 85 160
K* Value for: 24 35 55 75 105
Crest Vertical Curve
Sag Vertical Curve
1100 1500 1800 2100
Passing Sight Distance
Passing Distance, feet: 365 686 985 1340
2-Lane
K* Value for:
Crest Vertical Curve
*K value is a coefficient by which
the algebraic difference in grade may
be multiplied to determine the length
in feet of the vertical curve which
will provide minimum sight distance.
(9) Minimum radii of horizontal curvature along
the center line shall be:
(a) 300 feet for arterial class streets;
(b) 250 feet for major collector class streets;
(c) 200 feet for minor collector class streets;
and
(d) 100 feet for local class streets and alleys.
(10) Between reversed curves there shall be a
tangent at least 100 feet long.
(11) Intersecting right-of-way boundaries and
improvements for street, alley, and pavement
intersections shall be rounded by an arc, the minimum
radius of which shall be:
(a) 20 feet for arterial class streets;
(b) 20 feet for major collector class streets;
(c) 15 feet for minor collector class streets;
(d) 15 feet for local class streets; and
(e) five feet for alleys;
(f) 20 feet for pavement edges where the
existing right-of-way improvements do not include
curb and gutter.
When streets of different classes intersect, the greater
radius requirement shall be the requirement.
(12) Whenever a street adjacent to a proposed
development is not fully improved, excluding
sidewalk and parkstrip on the opposite side of the
street, the subdivider or developer shall be responsible
for construction of the entire width of the street, except
for sidewalk and parkstrip on the opposite side of the
street, for the entire length of the development project
including tapered transitions, as necessary, beyond the
length of the development project, as outlined in
(January 22, 2021)
Section 4-8-4(4) and (5).
(13) No new half-streets shall be permitted.
(14) If development plans call for peripheral
streets to be constructed, the subdivider or developer
shall be responsible for construction of the entire
width of the street, except for sidewalk and parkstrip
on the opposite side of the street, as outlined in Section
4-8-4(4) and (5).
(15) All streets proposed or intended to be built,
owned, or maintained as private streets shall be
designed and constructed to the same standards and
specifications outlined in this Chapter for public local
class or larger streets. Private streets may not be
reduced in width narrower than 30 feet of asphalt with
curb and gutter on each side. Any private street
proposed to be narrower than 34 feet of asphalt shall
be required to prevent on-street parking through the
provision of adequate off-street parking as outlined in
Chapters 7-4 and 7-11a and through private
enforcement. Land use applications that include
proposed private streets that are narrower than 34 feet
of asphalt shall include, as a part of the application, a
mechanism by which perpetual private enforcement
preventing on-street parking is assured. Applications
that include private streets narrower than 34 feet in
asphalt width shall be subject to review and approval
of the proposed private street design and private
parking enforcement mechanism by the designated
approval authority for the type of land use application,
following recommendation from the Tooele City Fire
Chief, Community Development Department, Public
Works Department, and the City Engineer. The City
Attorney shall review the proposed private parking
enforcement mechanism and provide a
recommendation to the approval authority on that
proposed mechanism. Land use applications may
propose alterations to the cross section for the street
regarding sidewalks and parkstrips but shall maintain
pedestrian access of at least a 5-foot width throughout
the development and in compliance with requirements
of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
(Ord. 2021-03, 01-20-2021) (Ord. 2019-01, 02-13-
2019) (Ord 2015-07, 03-18-2015) (Ord. 1994-56, 01-
31-1995) (Ord. 1991-04, 06-11-1991)
4-8-2.1. In-Fill Overlay District Street Design.
(1) Intermediate Local Class Streets within the
In-Fill Overlay District, as identified in Section 7-14-
1.2, shall be required to maintain a minimum asphalt
width of 30 feet with curb and gutter on each side.
Parkstrips and sidewalks shall not be required.
(2) Secondary Local Class Streets within the In-
Fill Overlay District, as identified in Section 7-14-1.2,
shall be required to provide a minimum right-of-way
width of 26 feet. Asphalt, curb and gutter, parkstrips,
and sidewalk improvements shall not be required.
(3) Except as provided in this Section, street
improvement standards for Local Class Streets, as
outlined in Section 4-8-4, shall be applicable to all
Intermediate Local Class Streets and Secondary Local
Class Streets within the In-Fill Overlay District.
Required minimum asphalt widths for Intermediate
Local Class Streets and Secondary Local Class Streets
within the In-Fill Overlay District shall be provided
within a dedicated public right-of-way.
(Ord. 2020-26, 06-17-2020) (Ord. 2017-27, 11-01-
2017)
4-8-3. Street Widths.
Street widths shall conform to the provisions of
Section 7-19-17 of this Code and this Chapter. Street
design and construction standards and specifications
shall conform to the provisions of this Chapter.
(Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-2015) (Am. Ord. 1998-32, 10-
07-1998)
4-8-4. Street Improvements.
As a general rule, the arrangement of streets in a new
development shall provide for the continuation of existing
streets in adjoining areas at the same or greater widths,
unless altered by the Planning Commission and City
Council following a recommendation of the Community
Development and Public Works Department Director.
Partial streets shall not be permitted within a development,
adjacent to a development, leading to a development, or
otherwise. All developments shall be adjacent to a
dedicated street that complies with the following:
(1) The full width of the right-of-way shall be
graded to the required section.
(2) All unsuitable sub-base material shall be
removed and shall be replaced with stable, compacted
material in conformance with generally accepted
engineering practices.
(3) Pavement sections shall be of the following
minimum thicknesses and materials:
(a) residential areas:
(i) standard reinforced Portland cement
pavement having a uniform thickness of ten inches.
Concrete for such pavement shall have a minimum 14-day
compressive strength of three thousand pounds per square
inch, shall contain not less than 6% entrained air. Slump
shall be not less than two inches nor more than four inches.
(ii) eight inch thick pozzolanic base
course and wearing surface of a bituminous concrete
binder and surface course having a minimum compacted
thickness of three inches.
(iii) eight inch thick bituminous aggregate
mixture base course and a wearing surface of bituminous
concrete binder and surface course having a minimum
compacted thickness of three inches.
(iv) ten inch thick gravel or crushed stone
base course (aggregate base course, type B) having a
(January 22, 2021)
wearing surface of bituminous concrete binder and
surface course, Class 1, having a minimum compacted
thickness of three inches.
(b) commercial and industrial areas:
(i) standard reinforced Portland cement
pavement having a uniform thickness of ten inches.
Concrete for such pavement shall have a minimum 14-day
compressive strength of three thousand pounds per square
inch, shall contain not less than 6% entrained air. Slump
shall be not less than two inches nor more than four inches.
(ii) ten inch thick pozzolanic base course
and wearing surface of a bituminous concrete binder and
surface course having a minimum compacted thickness of
four inches.
(iii) ten inch thick bituminous aggregate
mixture base course and a wearing surface of bituminous
concrete binder and surface course having a minimum
compacted thickness of four inches.
(iv) ten inch thick gravel or crushed stone
base course (aggregate base course, type B) having a
wearing surface of bituminous concrete binder and
surface course, Class 1, having a minimum compacted
thickness of four inches.
(4) Street improvements required to be installed
along the frontage of the property under a land
development or construction application shall be as
follows:
(a) undeveloped alleys, for the purposes of this
section determined to be alleys without hard-surface
paving and curb and gutter, shall not be required to install
right-of-way improvements unless the alley provides
primary access to a dwelling unit created by the land
development or construction application;
(b) curb, gutter, sidewalk, and parkstrip
landscaping; and
(c) hard-surface asphalt paving for vehicular
traffic with a minimum width of 30 feet.
(5) When tying-in to existing asphalt pavement, a
minimum two foot “T-cut” shall be performed. When
widening or tying-in to existing asphalt, tapers shall be
provided within the right-of-way to existing asphalt
beyond the property under land development or
construction, as approved by the Community
Development and Public Works Department Director
following a recommendation from the City Engineer.
(Ord 2015-07, 03-18-2015) (Ord. 2014-09, 09-03-
2014) (Ord. 1977-26, 12-19-1977)
4-8-5. Fire Hydrants.
Fire hydrants shall be installed along all streets with
spacing determined by the currently adopted fire code.
All placement locations and any adjustment to spacing
shall be by approval of the Tooele City Fire Chief as a part
of a preliminary plan or site plan.
(Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-2015)
4-8-6. Street Lighting.
(1) Street lighting shall be installed to serve all
properties within a subdivision as well as all
commercial and industrial development projects.
Such improvements shall be of the individual service
or of the multiple circuit type and shall consist of
standards, liminaires, cable conduit under driveways
and/or streets, controllers, hand holes, and all other
miscellaneous work and equipment necessary for an
integrated system of street lights.
(2) Locations. There shall be at least one street
light at each intersection and interior of each cul-desac
turnaround area, and spaced not greater than 300
feet in between in residential areas. In non-residential
areas, spacing shall be not greater than 400 feet.
(Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-2015) (Ord. 1977-26, 12-19-
1977)
4-8-7. Alleys.
(1) In commercial and industrial districts,
provisions shall be made for service access, separate
from customer travel and parking areas, for such
purposes as off-street merchandise loading, unloading,
and parking consistent and adequate for the uses
proposed.
(2) Alleys in residential areas shall not be
permitted.
(3) Dead-end alleys shall be avoided, but if
unavoidable, they shall be provided with adequate
turnaround facilities at the closed end, with a
minimum outside radius of 50 feet at the closed end.
(Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-2015) (Ord. 1977-26, 12-19-
1977)
4-8-8. Blocks.
(1) The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks
shall be determined with due regard to:
(a) Provision for adequate building sites
suitable to the special needs of the type of use
contemplated.
(b) Zoning requirements as to lot size and
dimensions.
(c) Needs for convenient access, circulation,
control and safety of street traffic.
(2) Block lengths shall not exceed 1,000 feet, and
shall not be less than 300 feet in length, except that the
Planning Commission may approve adjustments to
this requirement when it finds that:
(a) the block layout does not cause adverse
travel distance for pedestrians or vehicles; or
(b) topography or some other factor of the
property necessitate such for safety concerns that
cannot otherwise be addressed or accommodated
through design of the development.
(3) Pedestrian crosswalks not less than ten feet
wide shall be required at all intersections and at mid(
January 22, 2021)
block locations deemed appropriate by the Planning
Commission, upon recommendation of the Chief of
Police and the Director, to provide for pedestrian
circulation or access to schools, playgrounds,
shopping centers, and transportation and other
community facilities, and shall be provided
approximately half way between the ends of blocks
approved to be longer than 1,000 feet in length.
(Ord 2015-07, 03-18-2015) (Ord. 1977-26, 12-19-
1977)
4-8-9. Street Names and Signage.
(1) Street signs of a material and construction
approved by the City shall be installed at locations and
of a type determined the City. Streets signs shall be
installed at each intersection using the coordinate
system outlined in Section 4-8-10 herein to identify
streets. Street names shall be identified on the final
plat for the subdivision. All street signs shall be in
conformance with the Manual of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices (MUTCD) and shall be installed at
the subdivider’s or developer’s sole expense.
(2) The City Council shall approve the names of
streets within the city as a part of preliminary plat or
site plan review.
(3) Street names shall be assigned in accordance
with the following:
(a) All street coordinates shall end in zero
and shall generally end in “50” or “00”.
(b) Streets running north-south or east-west
shall be assigned a numeric coordinate, i.e. 500 North.
(c) Streets that curve shall be assigned
names. Street signs with names shall include
appropriate numeric coordinates.
(d) Streets that back track, loop, or are
longer than 600 feet and curve more than 30 degrees
from the original heading shall be assigned at least two
separate street names.
(e) Circles shall be addressed as part of the
main street.
(f) Names of streets shall not continue in
more than one primary bearing. The bearing may
either be north-south or east-west, but not both.
(g) Street names shall be verified with
Tooele County by the applicant before being proposed
for a development project in order to avoid
duplication.
(Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-2015) (Ord. 1994-03, 02-19-
1994)
4-8-10. Property Address Numbers.
(1) Property address numbers shall be proposed
by the applicant for any preliminary plat or site
development plan. The Building Official shall
determine the final property address of any dwelling,
building, or structure within Tooele City.
(2) Addresses shall be assigned according to the
following:
(a) The baselines for all addresses in Tooele
City shall be:
(i) Vine Street for north and south
addresses;
(ii) Main Street for east and west
addresses south of the railroad tracks; and
(iii) Berra Boulevard for east and west
addresses north of the railroad tracks and 1000 North.
(b) No home or business addresses will end
in “00” without first requesting in writing and receiving
approval for such in writing from the Building Official
after consideration of at least the following:
(i) the relationship of existing addresses
in the vicinity to the requested address;
(ii) the relationship of the requested
address to the existing street grid coordinates; and
(iii) potential implications of the requested
address on public safety response, any anticipated future
road and its anticipated coordinates, and the potential
complications of addressing undeveloped neighboring
properties.
(c) Addresses shall coincide to the front of
the building. Corner properties shall have two
addresses assigned to them until a building permit is
issued, at which time one of those addresses will
become the permanent address, as determined by the
Building Official.
(d) Addresses of properties on generally
parallel, nearby streets shall not coincide.
(e) All dwellings or primary buildings shall
display the assigned address for such dwelling or building
in a position as to be plainly visible and legible from the
street or road fronting the property. The displayed address
shall contrast with the background upon which it is affixed
and shall conform to any other requirements set forth in
the building and fire codes adopted by the City.
(f) Odd and even addresses shall be assigned
according to Figure 4-8-10-1 below and generally when
facing away from any one of the baselines identified in
Section 4-8-10(2)(a) herein:
(i) even address numbers shall be on the
right-hand side of the street; and
(ii) odd address numbers shall be on the
left-hand side of the street.
(January 22, 2021)
Figure 4-8-10-1
(3) All dwellings or buildings shall display the
assigned address for such dwelling or building in a
position as to be plainly visible and legible from the
street or road fronting the property. The displayed
address shall contrast with the background upon which
it is affixed and shall conform to any other
requirements set forth in the building and fire codes
adopted by the City.
(Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-2015) (Ord. 1994-03, 02-19-
1994)
4-8-11. Bridge Standards and Design. Any bridge
to be constructed for vehicular or pedestrian traffic
shall be designed according to the adopted standards
for the same as implemented by the Utah Department
of Transportation.
(Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-2015)
4-25 (March 9, 2015)
CHAPTER 9. STREET EXCAVATION
4-9-1. Excavation permits required.
4-9-2. Applications.
4-9-3. Fees.
4-9-4. Licensed contractor required.
4-9-5. Approved contractors.
4-9-6. Manner of excavating.
4-9-7. Sidewalks.
4-9-8. Restoring surfaces.
4-9-9. Supervision.
4-9-10. Protective measures and routing of traffic.
4-9-11. Clearance of vital structures.
4-9-12. Protection of traffic.
4-9-13. Relocation and protection of utilities.
4-9-14. Abandonment of substructures.
4-9-15. Protection of adjoining property.
4-9-16. Care of excavated material.
4-9-17. Cleanup procedure.
4-9-18. Protection of water courses.
4-9-19. Breaking through pavement.
4-9-20. Depth of structures.
4-9-21. Backfilling.
4-9-22. Trenches in pipe laying.
4-9-23. Prompt completion of work.
4-9-24. Urgent work.
4-9-25. Emergency work.
4-9-26. Noise, dust and debris.
4-9-27. Preservation of monuments.
4-9-28. Inspections required.
4-9-29. Location records.
4-9-30. Violation and penalty.
4-9-1. Excavation permits required.
It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
tunnel under, or to make any excavation in any street, alley,
or other public place or right of way within the limits of
Tooele City without having first obtained a permit as
required herein or without complying with the provisions of
this Chapter or in violation or variance of and from the
terms of any such permit. For the purposes of this Chapter,
the term “Department” shall refer to the Community
Development and Public Works Department and the term
“Director” shall refer to the Department’s Director.
(Ord. 2015-08, 03-04-2015) (Ord. 1976-15, 08-19-1976)
4-9-2. Applications.
Applications for such permits shall be made to the
Tooele City Department and shall describe the location of
the intended excavation, including boring, the size and
scope of the excavation, the purpose for the excavation,
and the person, firm or corporation doing the actual
excavation work, and the name of the person, firm or
corporation for whom or which the work is being done.
The application shall contain an agreement that must be
signed by the applicant stating that the applicant and all
contractors will comply with all ordinances and laws
relating to the work to be done.
(Ord. 76-15, 08-19-76)
4-9-3. Fees.
The fee for each such permit shall be based upon
the number of inspections required for the project at a
rate per inspection established in the Tooele City Fee
Schedule. The minimum permit fee will be the amount
of a single inspection. Should any person fail to secure
such permit prior to commencement of any excavation
for which the sum is required pursuant to this Chapter,
an investigation fee shall be assessed equal to the
amount of and in addition to the permit fee. The
investigation shall not apply to the case of emergency
work as outlined in Section 4-9-25.
(Ord. 2015-08, 03-04-2015) (Ord. 1976-15, 08-19-
1976)
4-9-4. Licensed contractor required.
There shall be no excavation of City streets, alleys,
or other public places or rights-of-way except that any
such work shall be done by authorized employees of
Tooele City, Tooele County, or the State of Utah, or any
of its agencies, or by a contractor licensed by the State
of Utah to perform street excavation. Prior to the
commencement of any such work by a licensed
contractor, said contractor shall deposit a cash bond
with Tooele City in an amount established in the Tooele
City Fee Schedule for excavations where no hard
surface pavement is involved and when the excavation
is in a paved or hard surface area, to insure proper
restoration of the ground, laying of pavement, and
restoration of landscaping, if any. Said deposit is
automatically forfeited by the contractor should the City
be required to undertake, or cause to have undertaken
any work which the contractor is required by the
provisions of this chapter to do. The permittee shall
guarantee the materials and workmanship for a period
of two years from completion of such work, with
reasonable wear and tear expected. Upon completion of
the work by the contractor to the satisfaction of the City
Engineer, the Building Official, or their designee, the
two-year warranty period shall begin. At the successful
completion of the warranty period the deposit shall be
returned to the contractor. In addition, no contractor
shall be allowed to obtain a permit as provided above
unless he shall first provide proof of liability insurance
and sign an indemnity agreement to be prepared by the
Tooele City Attorney and the form approved by the
Tooele City Mayor.
(Ord. 2015-08, 03-04-2015) (Ord. 1976-15, 08-19-
1976)
4-9-5. Approved contractors.
The Director shall institute and maintain a list of
approved contractors for street excavation within
Tooele City.
(1) Any contractor who is licensed by the State of
Utah to perform street excavation may be placed on the
4-26 (March 9, 2015)
approved contractors list provided that they submit to the
Director:
(a) a written request to be placed on the approved
contractors list;
(b) an irrevocable letter of credit or cash bond to
the City in an amount established in the Tooele City Fee
Schedule to secure completion of repairs to the street in a
timely manner;
(c) documentation demonstrating that they are
properly licensed and in good standing to do business as a
contractor within the State of Utah;
(d) a current, valid business license;
(e) a signed indemnity agreement, to be on a
form provided by the City, covering any work performed in
their capacity as a contractor performing excavation work
within a Tooele City right-of-way or on public property;
and,
(f) proof of liability insurance.
(2) Contractors identified on the official approved
contractors list shall not be required to post a bond for
individual excavation permits within a Tooele City right-ofway
or on public property so long as their on-going
approved contractor’s bond remains in full effect at the
time an excavation permit is filed with the Department.
(3) Contractors identified on the official approved
contractors list shall be required to pay only permit fees for
individual excavation permits so long as their on-going
approved contractor’s bond remains in full effect at the
time an excavation permit is filed with the Department.
(4) Failure to meet the conditions and requirements of
this chapter, maintain a state of good standing on the
approved contractors list, failure to properly perform street
excavations, failure to properly complete any street repairs,
or failure to seek and be issued permits for excavation work
shall be grounds for removal from the approved contractors
list at the discretion of the Director.
(5) In the event the Director elects to remove a
contractor from the approved contractors list, the contractor
shall have a right to appeal the removal to the Tooele City
Mayor within ten days of written notice of removal.
(Ord. 2015-08, 03-04-2015) (Ord. 1976-15, 08-19-1976)
4-9-6. Manner of excavating.
It shall be unlawful to make any such excavation or
boring in any way contrary to or at variance with the terms
of the permit therefor. Proper bracing shall be maintained
to prevent the collapse of adjoining ground; and in
excavations, the excavation shall not have anywhere below
the surface any portion which extends beyond the opening
at the surface. No injury shall be done to any pipes, cables
or conduits in the making of such excavations or borings;
and notice shall be given to the person maintaining such
pipes, cables or conduits, or to the City department or
officer charged with the care thereof which are or may be
endangered or effected by the making of any such
excavation or boring before such pipes, cables or conduits
shall be disturbed. It shall be the responsibility of the
applicant to obtain directions from public utility
companies as well as Tooele City, as to the location of
their subsurface conduits, pipes, lines or utility
appurtenances prior to the opening of any tunnel or
excavation. Tooele City shall not be responsible for any
damages caused by the applicant or any party
excavating or tunneling pursuant to a permit issued
herein for damages caused any such pipes, cables,
conduits or appurtenances.
(Ord. 2015-08, 03-04-2015) (Ord. 1976-15, 08-19-
1976)
4-9-7. Sidewalks.
If any sidewalk or pedestrian path or right of way is
blocked by any such work, a temporary sidewalk, path
or right of way shall be constructed or provided which
shall be safe for travel and convenient for the pedestrian
users.
(Ord. 1976-15, 08-19-1976)
4-9-8. Restoring surfaces.
Any person, firm or corporation making any
excavation or boring in or under any public street, alley
or other public place or right of way in Tooele City,
shall restore the surface to the construction standards
and specifications of the City Engineer existing at the
time of the excavation; all such backfill shall comply
with the requirements of the currently adopted edition
of the State of Utah Standard Specifications for Road
and Bridge Construction. Any opening in a paved or
improved portion of the street shall be repaired and the
surface replaced, including crack sealing, by the
applicant within three working days of excavation, in
compliance with the Ordinances of the City and under
the supervision of the Director, or their designee. With
all excavations, the contractor shall guarantee the
materials and workmanship for a period of two years
from completion of such work, with reasonable wear
and tear expected. All landscaping surfaces affected by
excavation work shall also be restored with materials
matching those present before the excavation work to
the greatest degree possible.
(Ord. 2015-08, 03-04-2015) (Ord. 86-17, 10-27-64)
(Ord. 1977-13, 08-11-1977)
4-9-9. Supervision.
The Director shall from time to time inspect or
cause to be inspected all excavation activities being
made in or under any public street, alley, public place or
right-of-way in the City to see to the enforcement of the
provisions of this Chapter. Notice shall be given to the
Department in the form of a scheduled inspection before
the work of backfilling any such excavation
commences.
(Ord. 2015-08, 03-04-2015) (Ord. 1976-15, 08-19-
1976)
4-27 (March 9, 2015)
4-9-10. Protective measures and routing of traffic.
It is the duty of every person cutting or making an
excavation in or upon any public place, street, alley, or
right of way to place and maintain barriers and warning
devices necessary for the safety of the general public.
Barriers, warning signs, lights, etc., shall conform to the
requirements and recommendations of the Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), as a
minimum, and those of the Director. Warning lights shall
be electrical markers or flashers used to indicate a hazard
to traffic from sunset of each day to sunrise of each day.
Reflectors or reflecting material may be used to supplement
but not replace light sources. The permittee shall take
appropriate measures to assure that during the performance
of the excavation work traffic conditions as near as normal
as possible shall be maintained at all times so as to
minimize inconvenience to the general public and the
occupants of the adjoining property. When traffic
conditions permit, the Director may authorize the closing
of a street or alley to all traffic for a period of time
prescribed by him if, in his opinion, it is necessary to
expedite the excavation work or maintain the safety of the
excavation crews or the general public. Such approval
shall be based upon submission and approval of an
appropriate and acceptable traffic control, signage, and
detouring plan and may require the permittee to give
notification to various public agencies and to the general
public in advance of the closing. In such cases, such
approval shall not be valid until such notice has been given.
(Ord. 2015-08, 03-04-2015) (Ord. 1976-15, 08-19-1976)
4-9-11. Clearance of vital structures.
The excavation work shall be performed and
conducted so as not to interfere with the access to fire
hydrants, fire stations, fire escapes, water valves, valve
housing structures, and all other vital equipment as
designated by the Director.
(Ord. 2015-08, 03-04-2015) (Ord. 1976-15, 08-19-1976)
4-9-12. Protection of traffic.
The permittee shall maintain safe crossings for two
lanes of vehicle traffic at all street intersections where
possible and safe crossings for pedestrians at intervals of
not more than 300 feet. If an excavation is made across
any public street, alley or sidewalk, adequate crossings
shall be maintained for vehicles and for pedestrians.
Excavated and repair stock materials shall not be stored on
an adjacent sidewalk, a passageway, or in the curb and
gutter.
(Ord. 2015-08, 03-04-2015) (Ord. 1976-15, 08-19-1976)
4-9-13. Relocation and protection of utilities.
The permittee shall not interfere with any existing
facility without the written consent of the Director and the
owner of the facility. If it becomes necessary to relocate an
existing facility, this shall be done by its owner or under his
direction. No facility owned by the City shall be moved to
accommodate the permittee unless the cost of such work
be borne by the permittee. The cost of moving privately
owned facilities shall be similarly born by the permittee
unless it makes other arrangements with the person
owning the facility. The permittee shall support and
protect by timbers or otherwise all pipes, conduits,
poles, wires or other apparatus which may be in any
way affected by the excavation work, and do everything
necessary to support, sustain and protect them under,
over, along and across said work. The permittee shall
secure approval of method of support and protection
from the owner of the facility. In case any of said pipes,
conduits, poles, wires or apparatus shall be damaged,
and for this purpose, pipe coating or other encasement
or devices are to be considered as part of the
substructure, the permittee shall promptly notify the
owner thereof. All damaged facilities shall be repaired
by the agency or person owning them and the expense
of such repairs shall be borne by the permittee. It is the
intent of this paragraph that the permittee shall assume
all liability for damages to facilities and any resulting
damage or injury to anyone because of such facility
damage, and such assumption of liability is a
contractual obligation of the permittee. The only
exception will be such instances where damage is
exclusively due to the negligence of the owning utility.
The City shall not be made a party to any action because
of this section. The permittee shall inform itself as to
the existence and location of all underground facilities
and protect the same against damage.
(Ord. 2015-08, 03-04-2015) (Ord. 1976-15, 08-19-
1976)
4-9-14. Abandonment of substructures.
Whenever the use of a substructure is abandoned,
except the abandonment of service lines designated to
serve single properties, the owner owning, using,
controlling, or having an interest therein shall within 30
days after such abandonment file with the Director a
statement in writing giving in detail the location of the
substructure so abandoned. If such abandoned
substructure is in the way, or subsequently becomes in
the way of an installation of the City or any other public
body, which installation is pursuant to a governmental
function, the owner shall remove such abandoned
substructure or pay the cost of its removal during the
course of excavation for construction of the facility by
the City or other public body.
(Ord. 2015-08, 03-04-2015) (Ord. 1976-15, 08-19-
1976)
4-9-15. Protection of adjoining property.
The permittee shall at all times and at his own
expense preserve and protect from injury any adjoining
property by providing proper foundations and taking
other measures suitable for that purpose. Where in the
protection of such property it is necessary to enter upon
4-28 (March 9, 2015)
private property for the purpose of taking appropriate
protecting measures, the permittee shall obtain consent
from the owner of such private property for such purpose
and if he cannot obtain such consent he shall, after
consulting with the Director, take such measures as are
possible for the purpose of making the property safe. The
permittee shall, at his own expense, shore-up and protect
all buildings, walls, fences or other property likely to be
damaged during the progress of the excavation work and
shall be responsible for all damaged public or private
property or highways resulting from its failure to properly
protect and carry out the work. Whenever it may be
necessary for the permittee to trench through any lawn area,
said area shall be reseeded or the sod shall be carefully cut
and rolled and replaced after ditches have been backfilled
as required by this chapter. All construction and
maintenance work shall be done in a manner calculated to
leave the lawn area free of dirt and debris and in a
condition as nearly as possible to that which existed prior
to the commencement of the work. The permittee shall not
remove, even temporarily, any tree or shrub which exists in
any parking strip without first obtaining the consent of the
appropriate City department or City official having
supervision of such property.
(Ord. 2015-08, 03-04-2015) (Ord. 1976-15, 08-19-1976)
4-9-16. Care of excavated material.
All material excavated from trenches and piled
adjacent to the trench or in any street shall be piled, and
maintained in such manner as not to endanger those
working in the trench, pedestrians, or users of the streets,
and so that as little inconvenience as possible is caused to
those using the streets and adjoining property. Where the
confines of the area being excavated are too narrow to
permit the piling of excavated material beside the trench,
such as might be the case in a narrow alley, the Director
shall have the authority to require that the permittee haul
the excavated material to a storage site selected by the
Engineer or approved by him and then rehauled to the
trench site at the time of backfilling. It shall be the
permittee's responsibility to secure the necessary
permission and make the necessary arrangements for all
acquired storage and disposal sites. All material excavated
shall be laid compactly and kept trimmed so as to impede
vehicular and pedestrian traffic or as specified by the
Director. Whenever necessary, in order to expedite the
flow of traffic or to abate the dust or dirt, toe board or bins
may be required by the Director to prevent the spreading of
dirt onto traffic lanes.
(Ord. 2015-08, 03-04-2015) (Ord. 1976-15, 08-19-1976)
4-9-17. Cleanup procedure.
As the excavation work progresses, all streets shall be
fairly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock and other
debris resulting from such work. All cleanup operations at
the location of such excavation shall be accomplished at
the expense of the permittee and shall be completed to the
satisfaction of the Director. From time to time, as may
be ordered by the Director and in the event immediately
after the completion of the work, the permittee shall at
his or its own expense clean up and remove all debris,
refuse, and unused material resulting from said work
and upon failure to do so within 24 hours after having
been notified to do so by the Director, said work shall
be done by Tooele City crews and the cost thereof
charged to the permittee and the permittee shall be
liable for the cost thereof under the surety bond
provided hereunder, and shall forfeit his deposit.
(Ord. 2015-08, 03-04-2015) (Ord. 1976-15, 08-19-
1976)
4-9-18. Protection of water courses.
The permittee shall maintain all gutters free and
unobstructed for the full depth of the adjacent curb and
for at least one foot in width from the face of such curb
at the gutter line. Whenever a gutter crosses an
intersection street, an adjacent waterway shall be
provided and at all times maintained. The permittee
shall make provisions to take care of all surplus water,
mud, silt, slickings, or other runoff pumped from
excavations or resulting from sluicing or other
operations and shall be responsible for any damage
resulting from its failure to so provide.
(Ord. 2015-08, 03-04-2015) (Ord. 1976-15, 08-19-
1976)
4-9-19. Breaking through pavement.
(1) Heavy duty pavement breakers may be
prohibited by the Director when the use thereof
endangers existing substructures or other property.
(2) Saw cutting of Portland cement concrete may
be required by the Director when the nature of the work
or the condition of the street warrants. When required,
the depth of the cut shall be not less than one inch in
depth; however, depths greater than one inch may be
required by the Director when circumstances warrant.
Saw cutting may be required by the Director outside of
the limits of the excavation over caveouts, over breaks,
and small floating sections.
(3) Approved cutting of bituminous pavement
surface ahead of excavation may be required by the
Director to confine the pavement damage to the limit of
the trench.
(4) Sections of sidewalks shall be removed to the
nearest scoreline or joint.
(5) Unstable pavement shall be removed over
caveouts and over breaks and the subgrade shall be
treated as a main trench.
(6) Pavement edges shall be trimmed to a vertical
face neatly aligned with the center line of the trench.
(7) Cutouts outside of the trench line must be
normal or parallel to the trench line.
(8) Boring or other methods to prevent cutting of
new pavement may be required by the Director.
4-29 (March 9, 2015)
(9) Permittee shall not be required to repair pavement
damage existing prior to the excavation unless his cut
results in small floating sections that may be unstable, in
which case permittee shall remove and pave the area.
(Ord. 1976-15, 08-19-1976)
4-9-20. Depth of structures.
No person shall, without written permission of the
Director, install any substructure, except manholes vaults,
valve casings, culverts, and catch basins at a vertical
distance less than is necessary to place such substructure
below the frost line if the Director concludes the
substructure must be below the frost line. Nothing in this
section shall impose a duty upon the permittee to maintain
said specifications as required herein upon subsequent
changes of grade in the surface unless the grade in said
substructure interferes with the maintenance of, or travel on
a public street.
(Ord. 2015-08, 03-04-2015) (Ord. 1976-15, 08-19-1976)
4-9-21. Backfilling.
Fine material, free from lumps and stone, selected from
the spoil shall be thoroughly compacted to not less than
95% of the standard Proctor Test around and under the
substructure to the upper level of such substructure. Above
the upper level of the substructure, backfill material shall be
placed to the subgrade of the pavement in lifts of a depth
based upon the type of soil involved and the degree of
consolation specified. Broken pavement, large stones, roots
and other debris shall not be used in the backfill. The
number and size of each lift shall be dependent upon the
type of soil involved. Such backfill shall be done in a
manner so as to meet the 95% standard Proctor Compaction
Test specified above. The Director may require soil tests to
be furnished by a recognized soil testing laboratory or
registered professional engineer specializing in soil
mechanics when, in his opinion, backfill for any excavation
is not being adequately compacted or when he feels the
same necessary. In order for the resurfacing to be
permitted, such tests must show that the backfill material
meets the requirements as prescribed by the currently
adopted edition of the State of Utah Standard Specifications
for Road and Bridge Construction. All expense of such
tests shall be borne by the permittee.
(Ord. 2015-08, 03-04-2015) (Ord. 1976-15, 08-19-1976)
4-9-22. Trenches in pipe laying.
The maximum length of open trench permissible at any
time shall be in accordance with the existing ordinances or
regulations of Tooele City and if none exist, then the
requirements of the Director.
(Ord. 2015-08, 03-04-2015) (Ord. 1976-15, 08-19-1976)
4-9-23. Prompt completion of work.
After an excavation is commences, the permittee shall
prosecute with diligence and expedition all excavation work
covered by the excavation permit and shall promptly
complete such work and restore the street, alley, right-ofway
or other public place to its original condition, or as
near as may be, so as not to obstruct the public place or
travel thereon more than is reasonably necessary.
(Ord. 1976-15, 08-19-1976)
4-9-24. Urgent work.
When traffic conditions, safety or convenience to the
traveling public or the public interest require that the
excavation work be performed as emergency work, the
Director shall have full power to order, at the time the
permit is granted, that a crew of men and adequate facilities
be employed by the permittee on a 24-hour schedule to the
end that such excavation work may be completed as soon as
possible.
(Ord. 2015-08, 03-04-2015) (Ord. 1976-15, 08-19-1976)
4-9-25. Emergency work.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent
the making of such excavations as may be necessary for the
preservation of life and property or for the location of
trouble in conduits or pipes, provided that the person
making such excavation shall apply to the Department for a
permit as soon as practicable and no later than the first
working day after such work is commenced. Nothing in
this section shall absolve the permittee from the
requirements of this chapter. In any emergency at a time
when it is not practical to obtain the necessary permit as
provided above in advance of the excavation work, such
street excavation may be authorized by the Director, or
their designee, or may be performed by a contractor on the
approved contractor list as provided above, provided that
the necessary permit shall be obtained the next business day
after the emergency work is performed. Under no
circumstances shall an excavation be performed without
prior notification through personal contact to the Director
or their designee of the need and location for the work to be
done.
(Ord. 2015-08, 03-04-2015) (Ord. 1976-15, 08-19-1976)
4-9-26. Noise, dust, and debris.
All excavation activities shall comply with all Tooele
City nuisance and noise ordinances and shall take necessary
precautions to minimize the impact on and inconvenience
for neighboring property owners.
(Ord. 2015-08, 03-04-2015) (Ord. 1976-15, 08-19-1976)
4-9-27. Preservation of monuments.
Any monument set for the purpose of locating or
preserving the lines of any street or property subdivision, or
a precise survey reference point, or a permanent survey
benchmark within the City, shall not be removed or
disturbed without first obtaining permission in writing from
the Director and the Tooele County Surveyor’s Office.
Permission to remove or disturb such monuments, reference
points, or benchmarks shall only be granted upon condition
that the person applying for such permit shall pay all
4-29.1 (March 9, 2015)
expenses incident to the proper replacement of the
monument by the City.
(Ord. 2015-08, 03-04-2015) (Ord. 1976-15, 08-19-1976)
4-9-28. Inspections required.
The Director shall cause such inspections to be
completed as are reasonably necessary in the enforcement
of this chapter. The Director shall have the authority to
promulgate and cause to be enforced such rules and
regulations as may be reasonably necessary to enforce and
carry out the intent of this chapter.
(Ord. 2015-08, 03-04-2015) (Ord. 1976-15, 08-19-1976)
4-9-29. Location records.
Every public utility after the enactment of this
ordinance shall maintain records showing the location of all
of its underground facilities, except relatively minor
facilities which connect a particular premise or building,
and except oil or gas gathering or field lines. Every public
utility shall maintain equipment that can locate such
facilities in the field.
(Ord. 1976-15, 08-19-1976)
4-9-30. Violation and penalty.
A person who violates any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor violation of the City Code,
punishable according to Section 1-4-2 of the Tooele City
Code.
(Ord. 2015-08, 03-04-2015) (Ord. 1994-36, 05-24-1994)
4-29.2 (March 9, 2015)
(Page 4-29-2 Reserved)
(November 19, 1991) 4-30
CHAPTER 10. SWIMMING POOL, SPA AND
HOT TUB CODE
4-10-1. "Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa, and Hot
Tub Code" adopted.
4-10-2. Administrative authority.
4-10-3. Safety provisions.
4-10-4. Violation and penalties.
4-10-5. Location, fencing.
4-10-1. "Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa, and Hot
Tub Code" adopted.
(1) The "Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot
Tub Code," 1991 Edition, published by the International
Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, is
hereby adopted as the code of Tooele City for providing
minimum requirements and standards for the protection
of the public health, safety and welfare as applied to the
erection, installation, alteration, addition, repair,
relocation, replacement, maintenance or use of any
swimming pool, spa, or hot tub plumbing system except
as otherwise provided for in that code.
(2) Each and all of the regulations, provisions,
conditions and terms of the "Uniform Swimming Pool,
Spa and Hot Tub Code," 1991 edition, are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully
set out here. (Ord. 91-17, 11-14-91)
4-10-2. Administrative authority.
The Tooele City Engineer and the engineer's
designees are hereby appointed to act as the
administrative authority with power to enforce the
"Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code."
(Ord. 91-17, 11-14-91)
4-10-3. Safety provisions.
No pool within the ambit of the "Uniform
Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code" shall be
constructed or maintained:
(1) within ten feet of any electric utility pole, wire,
other transmission devise or appurtenance, whether the
electrical equipment be below or above grade;
(2) without a permanent nonskid surface on all
hard-surfaced areas installed within six feet of the pool.
(Ord. 91-17, 11-14-91)
4-10-4. Violation and penalties.
The first paragraph of Section 1.7 of the "Uniform
Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code" is amended to
read:
(1) Any person who violates any of the provisions
of the "Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub
Code" or fail to comply therewith, or who violates or
fails to comply with any order made thereunder, or who
builds in violation of any detailed statement of
specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued
thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken,
or who fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or
modified by the board of appeals or by a court of
competent jurisdiction within the time fixed herein,
shall severally for each and every such violation and
noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a class C
misdemeanor. The imposition of one penalty for any
violationsuch not excuse the violation or permit to
continue; and all such persons shall be required to
correct or remedy such violations or defects within a
reasonable time. When not otherwise specified, each
day that prohibited conditions are maintained shall
constitute a separate offense.
(2) The application of the penalty identified in
Subsection (1) shall not be held to prevent the enforced
removal of prohibited conditions.
(3) The issuance or granting of a permit or
approval of plans and specifications shall not be
deemed or construed to be a permit for, or an approval
of, any violation of any of the provisions of the
"Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code."
No permit presuming to give authority to violate or
cancel the provisions of that code shall be valid, except
insofar as the work or use which is authorized is lawful.
(Ord. 91-17, 11-14-91)
4-10-5. Location, fencing.
(1) Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs of
permanent construction shall be set back at least five
feet from all property lines and shall be located not
closer than 30 feet to any dwelling on an adjoining lot.
Where an adjacent lot is vacant, a swimming pool, spa
or hot tub must be located at least 15 feet from any side
lot line of such adjacent lot.
(2) Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs shall be
completely surrounded by a fence or wall having a
height of at least six feet if not enclosed within a
building. Fences shall be designed so that openings will
not permit a 4" diameter sphere to pass through them,
except for gates which shall be equipped with selfclosing
and self-latching devices.
(Ord. 94-22, 05-04-94)
(April 20, 2020)
4-31
CHAPTER 11. SIDEWALKS
4-11-1. Building permits for curb, gutter, sidewalks,
and appurtenances.
4-11-2. Specifications for sidewalks, curb and
gutters, driveway approaches, and
appurtenances.
4-11-3. Supervision.
4-11-4. Definitions. (Repealed.)
4-11-5. Repairs - Engineer's report - Levy.
(Repealed.)
4-11-6. Expense of repairs. (Repealed.)
4-11-7. New sidewalk – Special Improvement
District.
4-11-8. Property owners responsible for sidewalk
repair. (Repealed.)
4-11-9. Sidewalks and trees.
4-11-10. Openings in sidewalks.
4-11-11. Water from roof not to be discharged upon
sidewalks.
4-11-12. Receiving goods.
4-11-13. Driving or riding upon sidewalks.
4-11-14. Games on sidewalks or streets.
4-11-15. Snow to be removed from sidewalks.
4-11-16. Unlawful to clog gutters.
4-11-17. Sidewalks to be swept in front of retail
businesses.
4-11-18. Encroachments.
4-11-19. Obstructions.
4-11-20. Varieties of trees.
4-11-21. Civil Penalties.
4-11-22. Appeals.
4-11-1. Building permits for curb, gutter, sidewalks,
and appurtenances.
It is unlawful for any person to construct any
sidewalk, curb, gutter, or appurtenances within a public
right-of-way without first having grades and lines thereof
reviewed and approved by the City and without first
obtaining a building permit. The acceptance of the permit
shall be deemed an agreement upon the part of the person
accepting the permit to construct the sidewalk, curb,
gutter, and appurtenances in accordance with the
specifications, regulations, and ordinances of Tooele City.
(Ord. 2018-11, 09-05-2018) (Ord. 2006-05, 01-18-
2006) (Ord. 1980-23, 06-12-1980)
4-11-2. Specifications for sidewalks, curb and
gutters, driveway approaches, and appurtenances.
All sidewalks, curb and gutters, driveway
approaches, and all appurtenances thereto shall conform
to the specifications and standards set forth in Title 4
Chapter 8 of the Tooele City Code and the Tooele City
Right-of-Way Specifications Administrative Policy.
(Ord. 2018-11, 09-05-2018) (Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-
2015) (Ord. 2006-05, 01-18-2006) (Ord. 1993-21, 10-
20-1993) (Ord. 1991-04, 06-11-1991)
4-11-3. Supervision.
All public sidewalks shall be constructed under the
inspection and supervision of the Public Works Director
or designee.
(Ord. 2018-11, 09-05-2018) (Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-
2015) (Ord. 2006-05, 01-18-2006) (Ord. 1978-01, 01-
09-1978)
4-11-4. Definitions. (Repealed. Ord. 2018-11, 09-05-
2018)
4-11-5. Repairs. (Repealed. Ord. 2018-11, 09-05-2018)
4-11-6. Expense of repairs. (Repealed. Ord. 2018-11,
09-05-2018)
4-11-7. New sidewalk - Special Improvement
District.
Whenever a report of the Public Works Director, or
designee, regarding any sidewalk finds that the
construction of a new sidewalk is necessary, the City may
elect to give notice pursuant to the provisions of the
special improvement district ordinances of the City or the
statutes of the state of Utah for the construction of new
sidewalk and the removal of the old.
(Ord. 2018-11, 09-05-2018) (Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-
2015) (Ord. 2006-05, 01-18-2006) (Ord. 1978-01, 01-
09-1978)
4-11-8. Property owners responsible for sidewalk
repair. (Repealed. Ord. 2018-11, 09-05-2018)
4-11-9. Sidewalks and trees.
The Director of Community Development shall
review and approve the species and type of trees which
may be placed in the right-of-way park strip or on private
property adjacent to public sidewalks.
(Ord. 2018-11, 09-05-2018) (Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-
2015) (Ord. 2006-05, 01-18-2006) (Ord. 1978-01, 01-
09-1978)
4-11-10. Openings in sidewalks.
It is unlawful to construct or maintain any open holes
or other openings in any sidewalks regardless of whether
they are covered with gateways, doors, or other passages.
This provision shall not be interpreted to prevent the
erection of utility poles, water meter boxes, or mail boxes
within the first 1 foot of property inside the curb line.
(Ord. 2018-11, 09-05-2018) (Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-
2015) (Ord. 1978-01, 01-09-1978)
(April 20, 2020)
4-32
4-11-11. Water from roof not to be discharged upon
sidewalks.
It is unlawful for any person owning, occupying, or
having control of any premises to suffer or permit water
from the roof or eves of any house, building, or structure,
or from any other source under the control of such person,
to be discharged upon the surface of any sidewalk.
(Ord. 2018-11, 09-05-2018) (Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-
2015) (Ord. 1978-01, 01-09-1978)
4-11-12. Receiving goods.
It is unlawful for any person to place or keep, or
suffer to be placed or kept, upon any sidewalk any goods,
wares, or merchandise except as allowed in Section 7-16-
3 Note 4.
(Ord. 2018-11, 09-05-2018) (Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-
2015) (Ord. 2012-22, 12-05-2012) (Ord. 1978-01, 01-
09-1978)
4-11-13. Driving or riding upon sidewalks.
It is unlawful for any person to drive a self-propelled
or motorized vehicle or to lead, drive, or ride any animal
upon any public sidewalk, except to cross the sidewalk at
established street crossings.
(Ord. 2018-11, 09-05-2018) (Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-
2015) (Ord. 2006-05, 01-18-2006) (Ord. 1978-01, 01-
09-1978)
4-11-14. Games on sidewalks or streets.
It is unlawful for any person to obstruct any sidewalk
or street by playing games thereon, or to obstruct the free
travel of any pedestrian or vehicle.
(Ord. 2018-11, 09-05-2018) (Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-
2015) (Ord. 1978-01, 01-09-1978)
4-11-15. Snow to be removed from public sidewalks -
Obstructing right-of-way with snow prohibited -
Failure to comply - Civil penalties.
(1) It is unlawful for any person owning or
exercising control over any real property abutting any
public sidewalk to fail to remove or cause to be removed
from such sidewalk all hail, snow, or sleet falling thereon,
or ice forming thereon, within 24 hours after such hail,
snow, or sleet has ceased falling or ice has formed.
(2) It is unlawful for any person to place or propel,
or cause to be placed or propelled, snow, ice, hail, or sleet
into the public way or in any manner which poses a hazard
to vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(3) Any person who fails to comply with this
Section shall be liable for a civil penalty in the amount of
$50 per violation, which penalty shall be in addition to
other penalties provided by law.
(4) For purposes of this Section:
(a) “person” shall include, but not be limited
to, individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations,
organizations, groups, and other entities; and,
(b) “public way” shall include, but not be
limited to, sidewalks, roadways, alleys, and other courses
traveled by the public.
(Ord. 2018-11, 09-05-2018) (Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-
2015) (Ord. 2014-04, 02-05-2014) (Ord. 2006-05, 01-
18-2006) (Ord. 1997-14, 03-19-97) (Ord. 1978-1, 01-
09-78)
4-11-16. Unlawful to clog gutters.
It is unlawful for any person to deposit dirt, leaves, or
other debris in any gutter so as to prevent or hinder the
flow of water therein or so as to provide for the carriage
of debris by the water flowing therein.
(Ord. 2018-11, 09-05-2018) (Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-
2015) (Ord. 1978-01, 01-09-1978)
4-11-17. Sidewalks to be swept in front of retail
businesses.
It is unlawful for the owner, occupant, lessee, or
agent of any commercial, retail, or professional
establishment within the City of Tooele to fail to cause the
sidewalk abutting the establishment to remain swept
clean.
(Ord. 2018-11, 09-05-2018) (Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-
2015) (Ord. 2006-05, 01-18-2006) (Ord. 1978-01, 01-
09-1978)
4-11-18. Encroachments.
It is unlawful for any fence, building, or other
structure to encroach upon any street or sidewalk within
Tooele City. The City may exercise all legal rights to
require the encroachment to be removed. If the person
responsible for the encroachment is not known, a notice
requiring removal may be posted by the City on the
encroachment and on all major buildings located adjacent
to the encroachment. Should the encroachment, in the
opinion of the Mayor, constitute a hazard to traffic or to
life, health, or property, the same may be removed
immediately by the City and the cost thereof levied upon
the owner. For any encroachment not removed by the
owner pursuant to notice, the City may remove the same
at the owner's expense, levying the cost thereof against the
premises as part of the ad valorum property taxes.
(Ord. 2018-11, 09-05-2018) (Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-
2015) (Ord. 1978-01, 01-09-1978)
4-11-19. Obstructions.
(1) No person shall place or cause to be placed
anywhere upon a public street or sidewalk, and no person
owning, occupying, or having control of any premises
shall, after reasonable notice by the City of Tooele, suffer
to be or remain in front of the sidewalk or the half of the
street next to any premises:
(April 20, 2020)
4-33
(a) any broken ware, glass, filth, dirt, gravel,
rubbish, refuse, garbage, ashes, cans, or other like
substances;
(b) any vehicles, lumber, wood, boxes,
fencing, building material, merchandise, or other thing
which obstructs the public street or sidewalk, or any part
thereof, without the permission of the Mayor; or,
(c) any goods, wares, merchandise for sale or
show, or otherwise beyond the front line of the lot where
goods, wares, or merchandise are sold or offered for sale,
except as allowed in Section 7-16-3 Note 4.
(2) No person shall place or cause to be placed
anywhere upon any street or sidewalk any earthen
materials before, during, or after construction for the
intended or unintended purpose of:
(a) temporary or permanent storage of those
materials;
(b) bridging of the curb and gutter or sidewalk;
(c) blocking clogging, or otherwise hindering
the movement or flow of storm water or the travel of
pedestrian or vehicle traffic; or,
(d) any other purpose that could reasonably
cause any damage or obstruction to public or private
infrastructure.
(3) All obstructions placed anywhere upon a public
street or sidewalk contrary to this Section or to Section 7-
16-3 Note 4 are a threat to the public health and safety and
may be removed, confiscated, and disposed of
immediately by the City.
(4) No person shall place or cause to be placed
anywhere upon a public street, sidewalk, or within a street
right-of-way a dumpster, garbage or refuse collection
container, storage container, or other similar structure or
device before, during, or after construction of a structure
on an adjacent property. All such structures or devices,
when allowed, shall be located on properties adjacent to
the right-of-way for which the structure or device is
serving.
(Ord. 2019-01, 02-13-2019) (Ord. 2018-11, 09-05-2018)
(Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-2015) (Ord. 2014-05, 02-05-
2014) (Ord. 2012-22, 12-05-2012) (Ord. 1978-01, 01-
09-1978)
4-11-20. Varieties of trees.
It is unlawful to plant any species of tree within any
public right-of-way which is not on the Tooele City Street
Tree Selection Guide. No trees shall be planted in park
strips of less than four feet in width. The Tooele City
Selection Guide shall be available from the Community
Development and Public Works Departments and may be
updated when deemed necessary and appropriate by the
Directors.
(Ord. 2018-11, 09-05-2018) (Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-
2015) (Ord. 2006-05, 01-18-2006) (Ord. 1978-01, 01-
09-1978)
4-11-21. Civil Penalties.
(1) A violation of any provision of this Chapter shall
be a civil infraction punishable by the following fines:
(a) $50 for a first violation;
(b) $100 for a second similar violation;
(c) $250 for a third or subsequent violation.
(2) Failure to pay fines in full within 30 days of a
citation shall allow Tooele City to invoice outstanding
fines through City utility billing.
(Ord. 2020-13, 04-15-2020) (Ord. 2019-01, 02-13-2019)
4-11-22. Appeals.
Appeals of civil infraction citations issued pursuant
to this Chapter shall be to the Administrative Hearing
Officer under Chapter 1-28 of this Code.
(Ord. 2020-13, 04-15-2020)
4-33.2 (August 8, 2017)
CHAPTER 11a. RESIDENTIAL PARK STRIP
LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS
4-11a-1. Park strip landscaping.
4-11a-2. Park strip trees.
4-11a-3. Residential Park Strip Tree Bond
Requirements.
4-11a-1. Park strip landscaping.
(1) All park strip areas in residential subdivisions,
with the exception of paved drive approaches and
sidewalks as approved in the site plan, shall be seeded or
sodded with lawn grass or a form of dry scape approved
by the Director, pursuant to standards developed by the
Director. All landscaping shall be perpetually maintained
by the owner of the appurtenant property. The
commercial or industrial subdivision developer shall
prepare park strip areas to receive seed or sod.
(Ord. 2006-05, 01-18-2006); (Ord. 2005-03, 02-02-05)
4-11a-2. Park strip trees.
(1) Within two (2) years of receiving a certificate of
occupancy for a residential housing unit, the owner of
each residential lot within Tooele City shall plant trees
within the unpaved portion of the park strip of each public
street that abuts the property, as follows: at least one (1)
tree per park strip frontage in the R1-7 and R1-8 zones; at
least two (2) trees per park strip frontage in the R1-10,
R1-12, and R1-14 zones; and at least three (3) trees per
park strip frontage in the R1-30,
RR-1, and RR-5 zones.
(2) If public streets abut the front and rear boundaries
of the residential lot, trees are required in the park strip
abutting the front boundary but not the rear boundary. If
public streets abut the front and any side boundaries of the
residential lot, trees must be planted in park strips abutting
the front and side(s).
(3) Trees planted within park strip areas shall comply
with the Street Tree Selection Guide authorized in §4-11-
20. All other varieties are prohibited in the park strip.
(4) Trees shall not be less than one and one-half inches
caliper measured one foot from the ground and shall not
be shorter than six feet in height. Park strip trees shall be
spaced at least fifteen feet apart and shall not be planted
less than ten feet from the adjoining property line. Lot
owners shall be responsible for the perpetual care and
maintenance of trees planted in park strip areas.
(Ord. 2017-15, 05-17-2017) (Ord. 2005-03, 02-02-05)
4-11a-3. Residential Park Strip Tree Bond
Requirements.
(1) Upon applying for a building permit to construct
a residential housing unit upon a residential lot in Tooele
City, the owner of the residential lot or his or her agent
shall post a refundable deposit in the amount of $150 for
each park strip tree that is required under §4-11a-2,
Tooele City Code.
(2) Park strip trees shall of a variety specified in §4-
11-22, Tooele City Code, and shall meet the height and
caliper measurement requirements of §4-11a-1(3).
(3) Within two years of receiving a certificate of
occupancy for a residential housing unit constructed upon
a residential lot within Tooele City, the owner of the lot
shall submit proof to the Tooele City Building
Department that the required park strip trees have been
planted.
(4) Adequate proof shall consist of receipts for the
purchasing or planting of the required park strip trees
accompanied by a photograph or photographs of the
planted trees. The photograph or photographs shall give
context to the location of the trees by depicting some part
of the surrounding area.
(5) After receiving proof of compliance, the Building
Official may, for any reason, send a building inspector to
verify that park strip trees have been planted as
represented, and that they comport with all of the
requirements of this Chapter.
(6) Once adequate proof of compliance with the park
strip tree planting requirement has been provided, as set
forth herein, and the Building Official or his
representative is satisfied that the provisions of this
Chapter have been met, Tooele City shall release the park
strip tree bond to the owner or owners of record of the
appurtenant residential lot, regardless of whether a
previous owner posted the bond or purchased and planted
the trees. The obligation to plant trees in the park strip(s),
as well as the entitlement to recoup the bond proceeds,
shall attach to lot ownership, and no one other than the
owner of record at the time that proof of compliance is
submitted shall have any claim upon the bond amount.
(7) If the owner of a residential lot fails to submit
proof of compliance with this section within two years of
receiving a certificate of occupancy for a residential
housing unit constructed upon the property, the bond
posted for park strip trees shall be forfeited to the City.
(8) Forfeited bond proceeds shall be deposited in a
special account and used exclusively for tree planting and
landscape beautification projects in public spaces located
anywhere within Tooele City.
(Ord. 2005-03, 02-02-05)
(March 29, 2006) 4-34
CHAPTER 12. MUNICIPAL IMPROVEMENT
DISTRICT ACT
4-12-1. Citation of chapter.
4-12-2. Purpose of chapter.
4-12-3. Definitions.
4-12-4. Powers of municipality.
4-12-5. Notice of intention to create special
Improvement district - Contents.
4-12-6. Notice of intention to create special
improvement district - Publication -Mailing.
4-12-7. Protests by property owners - Public
hearing - Resolution - Number of protests
required - Failure to file protest, effect of.
4-12-8. Contracting for improvements - bids,
publication and notice - Improvements for
which contracts need not be let.
4-12-9. Payment of contracts - Method - Progress
payments - Retainage escrow.
4-12-10. Interim warrants.
4-12-11. Connection of public utilities - Power to
regulate - Connection at expense of company
- Service owned or provided by
municipality, power to assess cost of
connection.
4-12-12. When assessments may be levied.
4-12-13. Maximum amount which can be assessed -
Payment from general funds.
4-12-14. Costs not payable by assessments.
4-12-15. Property of public agencies not assessable -
Charges for services or materials permitted
-Property acquired after creation of district.
4-12-16. Areas which may be assessed - Assessment
to be equal and uniform - Alternate
methods of assessment.
4-12-17. Assessment list - Board of equalization and
review - Publication and mailing of notice -
Hearings - Corrections in assessments -
Report of board - Failure to appear at
hearing, effect of.
4-12-18. Ordinance levying assessments - Publication
- Description of property - Recording.
4-12-19. Supplemental assessment.
4-12-20. Payment of assessments in installments -
Frequency - Interest.
4-12-21. Prepayment of unpaid installments.
4-12-22. Default in payment.
4-12-23. Lien assessment - Priority.
4-12-24. Sale of property to collect assessment.
4-12-25. Sale of property - Redemption - Payments
from guaranty fund - Reimbursement from
sale proceeds.
4-12-26. Money received from assessments -
Disposition - Investment.
4-12-27. Special improvement bonds.
4-12-27.1 Refunding of special improvement bonds -
issuance - Payment - security - Reduced
payment obligations.
4-12-28. Objection to assessment - Actions to enjoin
levy or set aside proceedings.
4-12-29. Liability of municipality - Payment of
bonds - Illegal assessments.
4-12-30. Total assessments greater than cost of
improvements - Surplus to special
improvement guaranty fund -
Abandonment of improvement -Rebate to
property owners.
4-12-31. Special Improvement Guaranty Fund -
Sources - Uses - Investment - Special
improvement refunding bonds.
4-12-32. Interest charges, penalties and other
collections greater than expenses - Excess
transferred to guaranty fund.
4-12-33. Special improvement fund insufficient to
pay bond - Payment by warrant against
guaranty fund.
4-12-34. Purchase by municipality of property sold
for delinquent assessments - Assessment
installments paid from guaranty fund -
Reimbursement of guaranty fund from
sale proceeds.
4-12-35. Payment on bonds from guaranty fund -
Municipality subrogated to rights of
holders.
4-12-36. Insufficient balance in guaranty fund-
Replenishment by municipality -
Warrants - Increase in annual tax levy.
4-12-37. Excess amount in guaranty fund -
Transfer to general fund - Special
improvement refunding bonds.
4-12-38. Municipality's right to make other
improvements not restricted - Authority
not affected by other laws.
4-12-39. Proceedings prior to act validated -
Exceptions.
4-12-1. Citation of chapter.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as
the Tooele City Municipal Improvement District Act.
(Ord. 88-25, 08-03-88)
4-12-2. Purpose of chapter.
The purpose of this chapter is to revise, codify and
improve existing laws relating to Tooele City's special
improvement districts, to recognize existing practices
relating to these districts, and to modernize and
improve these laws in the light of these practices and
in recognition of new needs of Tooele City and its
(March 29, 2006) 4-35
inhabitants. (Ord. 88-25, 08-03-88)
4-12-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
(1) "Assessment" means a special tax levied
against property within a special improvement district to
pay all or a portion of the costs of making improvements
in the district. All references to "assessment" or
"assessments" in Subsection 4-12-21(3) and Sections 4-
12-22, 4-12-24, 4-12-25, 4-12-26, 4-12-29, 4-12-30, 4-
12-34, and 4-12-36, are deemed to include any reduced
payment obligations.
(2) "Bonds" or "special improvement bonds"
means bonds issued under this chapter payable from
assessments and out of the Special Improvement
Guaranty Fund established as provided in this chapter.
All references to "bonds" or "special improvement
bonds" in the following provisions are deemed to include
any special improvement refunding bonds:
(a) Subsection 4-12-4(2);
(b) Sections 4-12-21, 4-12-22, 4-12-25, 4-12-
26, 4-12-29, and 4-12-30;
(c) Section 4-12-32, except the reference in
that section to "bond fund"; and
(d) Sections 4-12-33, 4-12-35, and 4-12-38.
(3) "Connection fee" means a fee charged by the
governing body to connect onto the city sewer, water,
gas, or electrical system and used for purposes of
financing special improvements in a special
improvement district or paying for the privilege of using
existing improvements of Tooele City and includes a fee
charged by the governing body to pay for the costs of
connecting onto the city sewer, water, gas, or electrical
system even though the improvements are installed on
the assessed owner's property.
(4) "Contract price" means the amount payable to
one or more contractors for the making of improvements
in a special improvement district under any contract duly
let to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders as required
by this chapter, including amounts payable for extra or
additional work when authorized by the governing body
or in accordance with the terms of the contract less
appropriate credit for work deleted from the contract
when authorized by the governing body or in accordance
with the contract.
(5) "Governing body" means the Tooele City
Council.
(6) "Incidental refunding costs" means any costs of
issuing special improvement refunding bonds and of
calling, retiring, or paying prior bonds, including,
without limitation, legal fees, accounting fees, charges of
fiscal agents, escrow agents and trustees, underwriting
discount, printing costs, giving of notices, any premium
necessary in the calling or retiring of the prior bonds, and
any other costs necessary or desirable in connection with
the issuance of special improvement refunding bonds,
as determined by the governing body, and any interest
on the prior bonds which may be required to be paid in
connection with the issuance of the special
improvement refunding bonds.
(7) "Municipality" means Tooele City.
(8) "Optional improvements" means
improvements in a special improvement district which
may be conveniently installed at the same time as other
improvements in the district and which the governing
body provides may be installed at the option of the
property owner on whose property or for whose
particular benefit the improvements are made,
including, by way of example and not in limitation,
private driveways, irrigation ditches, and water
turnouts.
(9) "Overhead costs" means the actual costs
incurred by a municipality in connection with a special
improvement district for engineering, appraisals, legal
fees, fiscal agent charges, inspection, publishing and
mailing notices, levying assessments, and all other
incidental costs relating to the district.
(10) "Prior bonds" means the outstanding special
improvement bonds which are refunded by an issue of
special improvement refunding bonds.
(11) "Prior ordinance" means the ordinance
levying assessments from which the prior bonds and
the interest thereon are payable.
(12) "Property" means real property or any
interest in real property.
(13) "Property price" means the purchase or
condemnation price of property acquired in order to
make improvements in a special improvement district.
(14) "Reduced payment obligations" means the
reduced amounts of the assessments levied, or the
interest thereon established in the prior ordinance, or
both, as set forth in the amending ordinance described
in Subsection 4-12-27.1(8).
(15) "Special improvement district" or "district"
means a district created for the purpose of making
improvements under this chapter.
(16) "Special improvement refunding bonds"
means any obligations issued to refund any special
improvement bonds and payable from the assessments
and interest thereon from which the prior bonds are
payable, or from any reduced payment obligations and
out of the Special Improvement Guaranty Fund as
provided in this chapter. (Ord. 88-25, 08-03-88)
4-12-4. Powers of municipality.
(1) The governing body of Tooele City shall
have power to make or cause to be made any one or
more or combination of the following improvements:
(a) To establish grades and lay out, establish,
open, extend and widen any street, sidewalk, alley or
(March 29, 2006) 4-36
off-street parking facility;
(b) To improve, repair, light, grade, pave,
repave, curb, gutter, sewer, drain, park and beautify any
street, sidewalk, alley or off-street parking facility;
(c) To construct, reconstruct, extend, maintain
or repair bridges, sidewalks, crosswalks, driveways,
culverts, sewers, storm sewers, drains, flood barriers and
channels; and to construct, reconstruct, extend, maintain,
or repair lines, facilities and equipment (other than
generating equipment) for street lighting purposes or for
the expansion or improvement of a previously
established municipally owned electrical distribution
system, to a district within the boundaries of the
municipality;
(d) To plant or cause to be planted, set out,
cultivate and maintain lawns, shade trees or other
landscaping;
(e) To cover, fence, safeguard or enclose
reservoirs, canals, ditches and watercourses and to
construct, reconstruct, extend, maintain and repair
waterworks, reservoirs, canals, ditches, pipes, mains,
hydrants, and other water facilities for the purpose of
supplying water for domestic and irrigation purposes or
either, regulating, controlling or distributing the same
and regulating and controlling water and watercourses
leading into the municipality;
(f) To acquire, construct, reconstruct, extend,
maintain or repair parking lots or other facilities for the
parking of vehicles off streets;
(g) To acquire, construct, reconstruct, extend,
maintain or repair any of the improvements authorized in
this section for use in connection with an industrial or
research park except that this act may not be used to pay
the cost of buildings or structures used for industry or
research;
(h) To acquire, construct, reconstruct, extend,
maintain or repair parks and other recreational facilities;
(i) To remove any nonconforming existing
improvements in the areas to be improved;
(j) To construct, reconstruct, extend, maintain
or repair optional improvements;
(k) To acquire any property necessary or
advisable in order to make any of such improvements;
(l) To make any other improvements now or
hereafter authorized by any other law, the cost of which
in whole or in part can properly be determined to be of
particular benefit to a particular area within the
municipality;
(m) To construct and install all such
structures, equipment and other items and to do all such
work as may be necessary or appropriate to complete any
of such improvements in a proper manner.
(2) For the purpose of making and paying for all or
a part of the cost of any of such improvements (including
optional improvements), the governing body of Tooele
City may create special improvement districts within
the municipality, levy assessments on the property
within such a district which is benefited by the making
of the improvements and issue interim warrants and
special improvement bonds as provided in this act.
(Ord. 88-25, 08-03-88)
4-12-5. Notice of intention to create special
improvement district - Contents.
(1) Before a special improvement district is
created, the governing body shall give notice of its
intention to make the improvements and to levy
assessments to pay all or a part of the cost of them.
The notice shall:
(a) State the purpose for which the
assessments are to be levied.
(b) State the method or methods under which
the assessments are proposed to be levied, that is,
according to frontage, according to area, according to
assessed valuation, according to lot, according to
number of connections, or by any combination of these
methods.
(c) Describe the district. The description
may be by metes and bounds, by reference to streets or
extensions of streets, or by any other means reasonably
describing the district so as to permit owners of
property therein to ascertain that their property is
within the district. All property to be assessed shall be
included within the district, but it is not a defect if
property which is not to be assessed is included.
Different areas which are not connected or contiguous
may be included in a single special improvement
district and separate boundaries for each of these areas
may be established, or all or one or more of these areas
may be included within a single boundary.
(d) In a general way, describe the
improvements proposed to be made showing the places
the improvements are proposed to be made and the
general nature of the improvements. The
improvements may be described by type or kind and
the places these improvements are proposed to be
made may be described by reference to streets or
portions of streets or extensions of streets or by any
other means the governing body may choose which
reasonably describes the improvements proposed to be
made.
(e) State the estimated cost of the
improvements as determined by the engineer of the
municipality. If the actual cost of the improvements
exceeds the estimated cost, the governing body shall
nevertheless have the right to levy assessments in
excess of the estimated cost.
(f) State that it is proposed to levy
assessments on property in the district to pay all or a
portion of the cost of the improvements according to
(March 29, 2006) 4-37
the benefits to be derived by the property.
(g) Designate the time within which and the
place where protests shall be filed and the time and place
at which the governing body will conduct a public
hearing to consider these protests.
(h) State the method for determining the
necessary number of protests required to be filed under
Subsection 4-12-7(3).
(2) The notice may contain such other information
as the governing body shall determine to be appropriate,
including the amount or proportion of the cost of the
improvements to be paid for by the municipality or from
sources other than assessments, the estimated amount of
each type of assessment for the various improvements to
be made according to the method of assessment chosen
by the governing body and provisions for any optional
improvements. The failure to include this information
shall in no event be deemed jurisdictional or a defect
preventing the municipality from proceeding with the
special improvement district. The inclusion of any
permitted information shall not be considered a
limitation on the municipality from subsequently
changing its plans in regard to any of the information so
set forth. (Ord. 88-25, 08-03-88)
4-12-6. Notice of intention to create special
improvement district - Publication - Mailing.
The notice of intention shall be published in a
newspaper published in the municipality, or if there is no
newspaper published in the municipality, then in a
newspaper having general circulation in the municipality,
except that in cities of the third class or towns where
there is no newspaper published in the city or town, the
governing body may provide that the notice of intention
be given by posting in lieu of publication of this notice.
If the notice is published, it shall be published once
during each week for four successive weeks, the last
publication to be at least five days and not more than 20
days prior to the time fixed in the notice as the last day
for filing of protests. If the notice is posted, it shall be
posted in at least three public places in the municipality
at least 20 and not more than 35 days prior to the time
fixed in the notice as the last day for the filing of
protests. In addition, not later than 10 days after the first
publication or posting of the notice, it shall be mailed
postage prepaid: (1) addressed to each owner of
property to be assessed within the special improvement
district at the last known address of that owner using for
this purpose the names and addresses appearing on the
last completed real property assessment rolls of the
county in which the property is located; and (2)
addressed to "owner" at the street number of each piece
of improved property to be assessed. If a street number
has not been so assigned, then the post office box, rural
route number, or any other mailing address of the
improved property shall be used for the mailing of the
notice. (Ord. 88-25, 08-03-88)
4-12-7. Protests by property owners - Public
hearing - Resolution - Number of protests required
- Failure to file
protest, effect of.
(1) Any person who is the owner of property to
be assessed in the special improvement district
described in the notice of intention shall have the right,
within the time designated in the notice, to file in
writing a protest to the creation of the special
improvement district or making any other objections
relating to it. The protest shall describe or otherwise
identify the property owned by the person or persons
making the protest.
(2) On the date and at the time and place
specified in the notice of intention, the governing body
shall in open and public session consider all protests so
filed and hear all objections relating to the proposed
special improvement district. The hearing may be
adjourned from time to time to a fixed future time and
place. After the hearing has been concluded and after
all persons desiring to be heard have been heard, the
governing body shall consider the arguments put forth
and the protests made and may make such deletions
and changes in the proposed improvements and in the
area to be included in the special improvement district
as it may consider desirable or necessary to assure
adequate benefits to the property in the district but may
not provide for the making of any improvements not
stated in the notice of intention nor for adding to the
district any property not included within the
boundaries of the district unless a new notice of
intention is given and a new hearing held.
(3)(a) After this consideration and
determination, the governing body shall adopt a
resolution either abandoning the district or creating the
district either as described in the notice of intention or
with deletions and changes made as authorized in
subsection (1); but the governing body shall abandon
the district and not create the same if the necessary
number of protests as provided in this subsection (3)
have been filed on or before the time specified in the
notice of intention for the filing of protests after
eliminating from such filed protests: (i) protests
relating to property or relating to a type of
improvement which has been deleted from the district
and (ii) protests which have been withdrawn in writing
prior to the conclusion of the hearing. For purposes of
this section, the necessary number of protests shall
mean the aggregate of the following:
(b) Protests representing one-half of the
property to be assessed in cases where an assessment is
proposed to be made according to frontage;
(March 29, 2006) 4-38
(c) Protests representing one-half of the area of
the property to be assessed where an assessment is to be
made according to area;
(d) Protests representing one-half of the
assessed valuation of the property to be assessed where
an assessment is proposed to be made according to
assessed valuation;
(e) Protests representing one-half of the lots to
be assessed where an assessment is proposed to be made
according to lot; or
(f) Protests representing one-half of
connections to be assessed where an assessment is
proposed to be made according to number of
connections.
(4) If less than the necessary number of protests
are filed by the owners of the property to be assessed, the
governing body shall have jurisdiction to create the
special improvement district and proceed with the
making of the improvements.
(5) Should the governing body create the special
improvement district, it shall, within five days from the
date of creating the district, file a copy of the notice of
intention and the resolution creating the district, as
finally approved, in the county recorder's office in the
county in which the district is located. The county
recorder shall maintain a public file of all special
improvement districts created under this chapter.
(6) Any person who fails to file a protest within
the time specified or having filed withdraws this protest,
shall be deemed to have waived any objection to the
creation of the district, the making of the improvements
and the inclusion of his property in the district. The
waiver, however, shall not preclude his right to object to
the amount of the assessment at the hearing for which
provision is made in section 4-12-17. (Ord. 88-25, 08-
03-88)
4-12-8. Contracting for improvements - Bids,
publication and notice - Improvements for which
contracts need not be let.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this section,
improvements in a special improvement district shall be
made only under contract duly let to the lowest
responsible bidder for the kind of service or material or
form of construction which may be determined upon.
The improvements may be divided into parts and
separate contracts let for each part or several such parts
may be combined in the same contract. A contract may
be let on a unit basis. A contract shall not be let until a
notice to contractors that sealed bids for the construction
of the improvements will be received by the governing
body at a specified time and place and such notice has
been published at least one time in a newspaper having
general circulation in Tooele City at least fifteen days
before the date specified for the receipt of bids; provided,
if by inadvertence or oversight, the notice is not
published or is not published for a sufficient period of
time prior to the receipt of bids, the governing body
may still proceed to let a contract for such
improvements if at the time specified for the receipt of
bids it has received not less than three sealed and bona
fide bids from contractors. The notice to contractors
may be published simultaneously with the notice of
intention. The governing body shall in open session at
the time specified in the notice, open, examine and
publicly declare the bids and may reject any or all bids
when deemed for the public good and, at such or a
later meeting, shall reject all bids other than the lowest
and best bid of a responsible bidder. If the price bid by
the lowest and best responsible bidder exceeds the
estimated costs as determined by the engineer of
Tooele City, the governing body may nevertheless
award a contract for the price so bid. The governing
body may in any case refuse to award a contract and
may obtain new bids after giving a new notice to
contractors or may determine to abandon the district or
not to make some of the improvements proposed to be
made.
(2) A contract need not be let for any
improvement or part of any improvement the cost of
which or the making of which is donated or
contributed by any individual, corporation, the
municipality, the state of Utah or the United States or
any political subdivision of the state of Utah or of the
United States. All such donations or contributions
may be accepted by the municipality, but no
assessments shall be levied against the property in the
district for the amount of such donations or
contributions.
(3) A contract need not be let as provided in this
section where the improvements consist of the
furnishing of utility services or maintenance of
improvements. Such work may be done by the
municipality itself. Assessments may be levied for the
actual cost incurred by the municipality for the
furnishing of such services or maintenance or, in case
the work is done by the municipality, to reimburse the
municipality for the reasonable cost of supplying such
services or maintenance.
(4) A contract need not be let as provided in this
section where any labor, materials or equipment to
make any of the improvements are supplied by the
municipality. Assessments may be levied to reimburse
the municipality for the reasonable cost of supplying
such labor, materials or equipment. (Ord. 88-25, 08-
03-88)
4-12-9. Payment of contracts - Method - Progress
payments - Retainage escrow.
(1) Any contract for work in any special
(March 29, 2006) 4-39
improvement district and any contract for the purchase of
property necessary to acquire in order to make
improvements in any special improvement district may
provide that the contract price or property price shall be,
or, at the option of the municipality, may be paid, in
whole or in part by the issuance of special improvement
bonds issued against the funds created by assessments
levied to pay the costs and expenses of improvements in
the special improvement district or by interim warrants
issued as authorized by this act at the time such special
improvement bonds or interim warrants, as the case may
be, can be legally issued and delivered. If any contract is
not paid from such sources in whole or in part or, if paid
in part, to the extent not so paid from such sources, the
municipality shall be responsible for advancing funds for
payment of the contract price or property price from the
general funds of the municipality or from other funds
legally available for such purpose in the manner and at
the time provided in the contract. From the proceeds of
the sale of interim warrants or special improvement
bonds or from funds paid on assessments not pledged for
the payment of such bonds or warrants, the municipality
may reimburse itself for the amount paid from its general
funds or other funds except that the municipality may not
reimburse itself for any of the costs of making the
improvements properly chargeable to the municipality or
for which assessments may not be levied.
(2) Any contract for work in a special
improvement district may provide for payments to the
contractor as the work progresses. If the contract so
provides, payments may be made from time to time to
the extent of not to exceed 90% of the value of the work
done to the date of payment as determined by estimates
of the engineer for the municipality with final payment to
be made only after completion of the work by the
contractor and acceptance of the work by the
municipality. If payments payable to the contractor as
the work progresses are retained pursuant to this
subsection, they shall be placed in an interest bearing
account and the interest shall accrue for the benefit of the
contractor and subcontractors. It is the responsibility of
the contractor to ensure that any interest accrued on the
retainage is distributed by the contractor to
subcontractors on a pro rata basis. (Ord. 88-25, 08-03-
88)
4-12-10. Interim warrants.
(1) The governing body, from time to time as work
proceeds in a special improvement district, may issue
interim warrants against the district (a) for not to exceed
ninety percent in value of the work theretofore done
upon estimates of the engineer of the municipality, (b)
after completion of the work and acceptance thereof by
the engineer of the municipality and the governing body,
for one hundred percent of the value of the work so
completed, and (c) where improvements in the district
require the acquisition of property, for not to exceed
the property price. Subject to the provisions of section
1-16-9, the warrants may be issued to a contractor to
apply at par value on the contract price for the
improvements or to the owner or owners of the
property to apply at par value on the property price.
The warrants may also be issued and sold at not less
than par value in such manner as the governing body
may determine and the proceeds used to apply towards
payment of the contract price and property price.
(2) Interim warrants shall bear interest from date
of issue until paid at such rate or rates as may be fixed
by the governing body. Interest accruing on interim
warrants shall be included as a cost of the
improvements in the special improvement district.
(3) Interim warrants and interest thereon shall be
paid by the issuance of or by proceeds from the sale of
special improvement bonds issued against the district
or in cash received from the payment of assessments
not pledged to the payment of the bonds or from any of
such sources. (Ord. 88-25, 08-03-88)
4-12-11. Connections of public utilities - Power to
regulate - Connection at expense of company -
Service owned or provided by municipality, power
to assess cost of connection.
The governing body may require in any special
improvement district before paving or repaving is done
within it that all water, gas, sewer, and underground
electric and telephone connections be made under such
regulations and at such distances from the street mains
to the line of the property abutting upon the street to be
paved or repaved as may be prescribed by resolution.
The governing body may require that any waterworks
company owning the water pipe main, any gas
company owning the gas pipe main, and any electric or
telephone company owning any underground electric
or telephone main make these connections. Upon the
neglect or failure of the company to do the same, the
governing body may cause the same to be done; and
the cost of this shall be deducted from any
indebtedness of the municipality to the company, and
no bills shall be paid to the company by the
municipality until all such expense for pipe laying
shall have been liquidated. The governing body shall
also have the power at any time to assess for
reasonable connection fees or for the cost of any
sewer, water, gas, or electric connections when the
municipality owns or supplies these services and owns
the mains, to such depth as it shall deem just and
equitable, upon the property benefited. (Ord. 88-25,
08-03-88)
4-12-12. When assessments may be levied.
(March 29, 2006) 4-40
Assessments for improvements in a special
improvement district may be levied:
(1) At any time after all contracts for the making of
the improvements have been let, the property price for all
property acquired to make the improvements has been
finally determined and the reasonable cost of any work
to be done by the municipality has been determined; or
(2) For light service or park maintenance, at any
time after the light service or park maintenance has
commenced; or
(3) At any time after all of the improvements in the
special improvement district are entirely completed and
accepted. (Ord. 88-25, 08-03-88)
4-12-13. Maximum amount which can be assessed -
Payment from general funds.
(1) Assessments for improvements in a special
improvement district shall not in the aggregate exceed
the sum of:
(a) The contract price;
(b) The reasonable cost of utility services,
maintenance, labor, materials, or equipment supplied by
the municipality;
(c) The property price, if any;
(d) The connection fees, if any;
(e) Interest on interim warrants issued against
the special improvement district;
(f) Overhead costs not to exceed 15% of the
sum of subsections (1)(a), (1)(b), (1)(c), and (1)(d).
(g) Where the assessment is levied prior to the
time all of the improvements in the district are entirely
completed and accepted, an amount for contingencies of
not to exceed 10% of the sum of subsections (1)(a) and
(1)(b).
(2) The municipality shall pay from its general
funds or from other sources legally available for such
purpose:
(a) That part of the overhead costs for which
an assessment cannot be levied;
(b) Where assessments are levied prior to the
time all improvements in the district are entirely
completed, all costs of making the improvements for
which an assessment was not levied; and
(c) The cost of making improvements for the
benefit of property against which an assessment may not
be levied. (Ord. 88-25, 08-03-88)
4-12-14. Costs not payable by assessments.
(1) Nothing in this act shall permit the levy of
assessments to pay for the cost of ordinary repairs to
pavement, sewers, drains, curbing, gutters or sidewalks,
but such levies may be made for extraordinary repairs to
such items. The cost of ordinary repairs shall be borne
by the municipality. The governing body by ordinance
or resolution may define what constitutes ordinary
repairs and what constitutes extraordinary repairs.
(2) Where improvements in a special
improvement district involve changing the grade of a
street, alley or sidewalk, one-half of the cost of
bringing the street, alley or sidewalk to the established
grade shall be paid by the municipality.
(3) Where improvements in a special
improvement district involve improvements to the
intersections of streets or spaces opposite alleys,
assessments may be levied for the cost of such
improvements. (Ord. 88-25, 08-03-88)
4-12-15. Property of public agencies not assessable
- Charges for services or materials permitted -
Property acquired after creation of district.
(1) Except as provided in subsection (2), a
municipality may not levy an assessment against
property owned by the federal government, the state of
Utah, any county, school district, municipality or other
political subdivision of the state of Utah or by any
department or division of any such public agency even
though such property is benefited by improvements
made, but each such public agency is authorized to
contract with the municipality for the making of such
improvement and for the payment of the cost thereof to
the municipality. Nothing in this section shall prevent
a municipality from imposing or a public agency from
paying reasonable charges for any services or materials
actually rendered or supplied by the municipality to the
public agency, including, by way of example and not
in limitation, charges for water, lighting, or sewer
services.
(2) An assessment may be levied and enforced
against property acquired by a public agency which is
within a special improvement district created prior to
the acquisition. Property acquired by a public agency
which is subject to the lien of an assessment at the time
of acquisition shall continue to be subject to such lien
and to enforcement of the same against the property if
the assessment and interest accruing thereon is not paid
when due. (Ord. 88-25, 08-03-88)
4-12-16. Areas which may be assessed - Assessment
to be equal and uniform - Alternate methods of
assessment.
Assessments shall be levied on all blocks, lots,
parts of blocks and lots, tracts or parcels of property
bounding, abutting upon or adjacent to the
improvements or which may be affected or specially
benefited by the improvements to the extent of the
benefits to such property by reason of the
improvements. Assessments may be to the full depth
of such property or to such depth as the governing
body may provide. Assessments shall be equal and
uniform according to the benefits received.
(March 29, 2006) 4-41
Assessments may be according to area or frontage or
assessed valuation or, in the case of water supplied for
irrigation purpose, according to the amount of water
used, all as the governing body may consider fair and
equitable. Different improvements in a special
improvement district may be assessed according to
different methods. An allowance shall be made for
corner lots so that they are not assessed at full rate on
both streets. (Ord. 88-25, 08-03-88)
4-12-17. Assessment list - Board of equalization and
review - Publication and mailing of notice - Hearings
- Corrections in assessments - Report of board -
Failure to appear at hearing, effect of.
(1) Before an assessment is levied, an assessment
list shall be prepared designating each parcel of property
proposed to be assessed and the amount of the
assessment apportioned to this property as provided in
this chapter. Upon completion of the assessment list, the
governing body shall appoint a board of equalization and
review consisting of three or more of the members of the
governing body or at the obligation of the governing
body of the municipality, consisting of the city recorder
or designee, city engineer or public works director or a
designee from the city attorney's office, and shall give
public notice of the completion of the assessment list and
of the time and place of the holding of public hearings
relating to the proposed assessments. Appeal from a
decision of a city board of equalization and review may
be taken to the governing body of the city within 60
days.
(2) The notice shall be published in a newspaper
published in the municipality or, if there is no newspaper
published in the municipality, then in a newspaper
having general circulation in the municipality, except
that in cities of the third class or towns where there is no
newspaper published, the governing body may provide
that the notice be given by posting in lieu of publication.
The notice shall be published at least one time or, if
posted, shall be posted in at least three public places in
the municipality and in either case the first publication or
posting shall be at least 20 and not more than 35 days
prior to the date the board will begin its hearings. In
addition, not later than 10 days after the first publication
or posting of the notice, the notice shall be mailed,
postage prepaid: (a) addressed to each owner of property
to be assessed within the special improvement district at
the last known address of the owner, using for this
purpose the names and addresses appearing on the last
completed real property assessment rolls of the county in
which the property is located; and (b) addressed to
"owner" at the street number of each piece of improved
property to be assessed. If a street number has not been
assigned, then the post office box, rural route number, or
any other mailing address of the improved property shall
be used for the mailing of the notice.
(3) The board of equalization and review shall
convene at the time and place specified in the notice.
Hearings shall be held on not less than three
consecutive days for at least one hour between 9:00
a.m. and 9:00 p.m. as specified in the notice. The
hearings may be adjourned or recessed from time to
time to a specific place and a specific hour and day
until the work of the board shall have been completed.
At each hearing the board shall hear arguments from
any person who believes himself to be aggrieved,
including arguments relating to the benefits accruing to
any tract, block, lot, or parcel of property in the district
or relating to the amount of the proposed assessment
against that tract, block, lot or parcel.
(4) After the hearings have been completed, the
board shall consider all facts and arguments presented
and shall make those corrections in any proposed
assessment as it may consider just and equitable.
These corrections may eliminate one or more pieces of
property or may increase or decrease the amount of the
assessment proposed to be levied against any piece of
property. In the event the corrections result in an
increase of any proposed assessment, before approving
the corrected assessment list, the board shall cause to
be mailed to each owner of property whose assessment
is to be increased a notice stating that the assessment
will be increased, the amount of the proposed new
assessment, that a hearing will be held at which the
owner may appear and make any objections to the
increase, and the time and place of the hearing. The
notice shall be mailed to the last known address of the
owner using for this purpose the names and addresses
appearing on the last completed real property
assessment rolls of the county where the affected
property is located, and in addition a copy of the notice
shall be addressed to "owner" and shall be so mailed
addressed to the street number of each piece of
improved property to be affected by the increased
assessment. If a street number has not been assigned,
then the post office box, rural route number, or any
other mailing address of the improved property shall
be used for the mailing of the notice. The notice shall
be mailed at least 15 days prior to the date stated in the
notice for the holding of the new hearing.
(5) After all corrections shall have been made
and all hearings, including hearings under subsection
(4) shall have been held, the board shall report to the
governing body its findings that each piece of property
within the special improvement district will be
benefited in an amount not less than the assessment to
be levied against the property and that no piece of
property listed on the assessment will bear more than
its proportionate share of the cost of the improvement.
These findings, when approved by the governing body
(March 29, 2006) 4-42
or after passage of time for appeal and review by the
governing body of the city, shall be final and no appeal
may be taken from them. Upon receipt of the report
from the board, the governing body may proceed with
the levy of the assessments.
(6) Every person whose property is subject to
assessment and who fails to appear before the board of
equalization and review to raise his objections to the levy
of the assessment shall be deemed to have waived all
objections to the levy except the objection that the
governing body failed to obtain jurisdiction to order the
making of the improvements which the assessment is
intended to pay. (Ord. 88-25, 08-03-88)
4-12-18. Ordinance levying assessments - Publication
- Description of property - Recording.
(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of any law
concerning the publication, posting or effective date of
ordinances, any ordinance levying assessments shall be
published one time in a newspaper published in the
municipality, or if there is no newspaper published
therein, then in a newspaper having general circulation in
the municipality and the ordinance shall be effective on
the date of such publication or at such later date as may
be provided in the ordinance. No other publication and
no posting of such an ordinance shall be required nor
shall it be necessary to declare that the immediate
preservation of the peace, health or safety of the
municipality requires the ordinance to be effective on the
date of publication or at such later date.
(2) An ordinance levying assessments need not
describe each block, lot, part of block or lot, tract or
parcel of property to be assessed. It shall be sufficient if
the ordinance incorporates by reference the corrected
assessment list.
(3) Within five days after adopting the assessment
ordinance, the governing body shall file a copy of the
ordinance with the county recorder's office in the county
in which the assessed property is located. If the
assessment ordinance incorporates the assessment list by
reference, the governing body shall also file a copy of
the final assessment list with the county recorder. The
county recorder shall maintain a public file of all
assessment ordinances and assessment lists adopted and
approved under this chapter. (Ord. 88-25, 08-03-88)
4-12-19. Supplemental assessment.
In case of any deficiencies, omissions, errors or
mistakes in making any assessment or levy in respect to
the total cost of the improvements or in respect to any
tract, lot, block or parcel in the special improvement
district which has not been fully assessed or which has
been assessed in an incorrect amount, the governing
body may make a supplemental assessment and levy to
supply such deficiencies, omissions, errors, or mistakes
after the holding of a hearing and giving notice as
provided in subsection (4) of section 4-12-17. (Ord.
88-25, 08-03-88)
4-12-20. Payment of assessments in installments -
Frequency - Interest.
(1) An assessment shall be levied at one time
upon the property. The governing body may provide
in the ordinance levying the assessment that all or such
portion of the assessment as is designated in the
ordinance may be paid in installments over a period of
time not exceeding 20 years from the effective date of
the ordinance levying the assessment, except that in
any case where the installments are to be payable over
a period of time exceeding 10 years from the effective
date, the governing body shall find and determine that
the improvements for which the assessment are made
have a reasonable useful life for the full period during
which the installments are payable or that it would
otherwise be in the best interests of the municipality
and of the owners of property to be assessed to provide
for payment of the assessments over a period in excess
of 10 years.
(2) Installments shall be payable at least
annually but may be payable at more frequent intervals
as provided by the ordinance levying the assessment,
except that if the ordinance provides for payment of
the assessment over a period in excess of 10 years
from the effective date of the same, the ordinance may
also provide that no installments of these assessments
shall be payable during all or any portion of the period
ending three years after this effective date.
(3) Where the assessment is payable in
installments, the ordinance shall provide that the
unpaid balance of the assessment shall bear interest at
a rate or rates determined by the governing body from
the effective date of the ordinance or from such other
date as may be specified in the ordinance until due;
except that where the assessment is for light service or
park maintenance, interest shall be charged only from
the due date of each installment, and the first
installment for any assessment shall be due 15 days
after the effective date of the ordinance. Interest shall
be paid in addition to the amount of each installment
annually or at more frequent intervals as provided in
the ordinance levying the assessment. (Ord. 88-25, 08-
03-88)
4-12-21. Prepayment of unpaid installments.
(1) Assessments payable in installments may be
paid prior to the due date of any such installment as
provided in this section but not otherwise.
(2) The whole or any part of the assessment may
be paid without interest within fifteen days after the
ordinance levying the assessment becomes effective.
(March 29, 2006) 4-43
If the assessment is paid in part, the unpaid balance shall
be payable in substantially equal installments over the
period of time installments are payable as provided in the
assessment ordinance.
(3) After such fifteen-day period and if the
ordinance levying the assessment so provides, all unpaid
installments of assessments levied against any piece of
property (but only in their entirety) may be paid prior to
the dates on which they become due, but any such
prepayment may include an additional amount equal to
the interest which would accrue on the assessment to the
next succeeding date on which interest is payable on any
special improvement bonds issued in anticipation of the
collection of the assessments, plus such additional
amount as, in the opinion of the governing body or of
any officer of the municipality designated by the
governing body, is necessary to assure the availability of
money to pay interest on the special improvement bonds
as interest becomes due and payable or interest may be
charged to the date of prepayment plus any premiums
which may become payable on redeemable bonds which
may be called in order to utilize the assessments thus
paid in advance. (Ord. 88-25, 08-03-88)
4-12-22. Default in payment.
(1) When an assessment is payable in installments
and a default occurs in the payment of any installment
when due, the governing body may declare the unpaid
amount to be delinquent, immediately due, and subject to
collection as provided in this chapter. In addition, it may
accelerate payment of the total unpaid balance of the
assessment and declare the whole of the unpaid principal
and interest then due to be immediately due and payable.
Interest shall accrue and be paid on all amounts declared
to be delinquent or accelerated and immediately due and
payable and shall be paid at such rate as shall be
determined by the governing body until the next
succeeding date after payment or collection on which
interest is payable on any bonds issued. Costs of
collection as approved by the governing body or required
by law shall be charged and paid on all amounts declared
to be delinquent or accelerated and immediately due and
payable.
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection
(1), if prior to the final date that payment may be legally
made under a final sale or foreclosure of property to
collect delinquent assessment installments, the owner
pays the amount of all unpaid installments which are past
due and delinquent with interest at the rate determined
by the governing body to date of payment plus all
approved or required costs, the owner shall then be
restored to the right to pay in installments in the same
manner as if default had not occurred. (Ord. 88-25, 08-
03-88)
4-12-23. Lien for assessment - Priority.
An assessment or any part or installment of it, any
interest accruing, and the penalties and costs of
collection as provided in Part 13, Chapter 2, Title 59 of
the Utah Code Annotated shall constitute a lien against
the property upon which the assessment is levied on
the effective date of the ordinance levying the
assessment. This lien shall be superior to the lien of
any trust deed, mortgage, mechanic's or materialman's
lien, or other encumbrance and shall be equal to and on
a parity with the lien for general property taxes. The
lien shall apply without interruption, change in
priority, or alteration in any manner to any reduced
payment obligations and shall continue until the
assessments, reduced payment obligations, and any
interest, penalties, and costs on them are paid,
notwithstanding any sale of the property for or on
account of a delinquent general property tax, special
tax, or other assessment or the issuance of a tax deed,
an assignment of interest by the county, or a sheriff's
certificate of sale or deed. (Ord. 88-25, 08-03-88)
4-12-24. Sale of property to collect assessment.
(1) All assessments made under this chapter or
any part or installment of same shall be paid and
collected when due or the property charged with the
assessment shall be sold for the amount due, plus
interest, penalties, and costs, in such manner as may be
provided by ordinance of the municipality or in the
manner provided by chapter 10, title 59, Utah Code
Annotated, for the sale of property for delinquent
general property taxes. All pertinent provisions of
chapter 10, title 59, Utah Code Annotated, shall apply
under this chapter, including the foreclosure of lien
provisions, unless this chapter shall modify these
provisions and except that the wording of chapter 10,
title 59 shall be changed as appropriate to mean the
assessments permitted to be imposed by this chapter
rather than general property taxes so as to accomplish
the purposes of this chapter.
(2) The governing body may also provide for the
summary sale of any property assessed under this
chapter after a delinquency shall have occurred in the
payment of any assessment or part or installment of it.
The sale shall be in the manner provided for actions to
foreclose mortgage liens or trust deeds, except that if at
the sale no person or entity shall bid and pay the
municipality the amount due on the assessment plus
interest and costs, the property shall be deemed sold to
the municipality for these amounts. The municipality
shall be permitted to bid at the sale.
(3) The remedies provided in this chapter for the
collection of assessments and the enforcement of liens
shall be deemed and construed to be cumulative and
the use of any one method or means of collection or
(March 29, 2006) 4-44
enforcement shall not deprive the municipality of the use
of any other method or means. (Ord. 88-25, 08-03-88)
4-12-25. Sale of property - Redemption - Payments
from guaranty fund - Reimbursement from sale
proceeds.
In case any assessment or any part or installment of
it becomes delinquent and the property subject to same is
sold to the municipality at preliminary tax sale for the
collection of the delinquent amount, plus interest,
penalties, and costs, redemption and private sales of the
property shall be the same as provided in chapter 10, title
59, Utah Code Annotated, relating to general property
tax delinquencies. In order to avoid default in the
payment of any outstanding bonds or interim warrants
issued under this chapter, the municipality may
determine to pay any delinquent amounts due, plus the
interest, penalties, and costs, or it may pay these amounts
and the full balance of the assessment if accelerated or
any parts or installments that may become due during the
period of redemption. All amounts paid by the
municipality for the delinquency may be paid out of the
guaranty fund and charged against the delinquent
property. Upon the final tax sale of the property so
charged, all amounts paid by the municipality shall be
included in the sale price of the property recovered in the
sale, and the guaranty fund reimbursed for it. If the
property so charged is sold to the municipality at final
tax sale and additional assessment installments will
become due, the municipality shall pay the additional
installments out of the guaranty fund, recover their
amount in any sale of the property, and reimburse the
guaranty fund when the property is sold. (Ord. 88-25,
08-03-88)
4-12-26. Money received from assessments -
Disposition - Investment.
Where the municipality levies any assessment for
making and paying for any local improvements, all
monies paid into the municipal treasury in payment of
the assessment and interest on it shall be deemed to be
part of and constitute a fund for the payment of the costs
and expenses of making the local improvements and for
the payment of interim warrants and special
improvement bonds with interest on them issued against
the special improvement district created to make the
improvements and for no other purposes. The fund so
created shall be held in the custody of the treasurer of the
municipality, kept intact and separate from all other
funds and monies of the municipality, and shall be paid
out only for the purposes specified in this chapter. Any
idle money in the fund may be invested appropriately by
the treasurer, and any interest received from the same
shall be paid into the fund exclusively and shall be used
for the same purposes for which the fund was
established. When all bonds or interim warrants or
both have been paid or redeemed in full, any money
remaining in the fund shall be transferred as provided
in section 4-12-32. (Ord. 88-25, 08-03-88)
4-12-27. Special improvement bonds.
Fifteen days or more after the effective date of any
ordinance levying an assessment in a special
improvement district, the governing body of the
municipality levying the assessment, by ordinance or
resolution, may authorize the issuance of special
improvement bonds to pay the costs of the
improvements in the district against the funds created
by the assessment. Special improvement bonds so
authorized shall not exceed the unpaid balance of the
assessments at the end of this 15-day period, shall be
fully negotiable for all purposes, shall mature at such
time or times not exceeding the period of time over
which installments of the assessments are due and
payable plus one year, shall bear interest at the lowest
rate or rates obtainable, shall be payable at such place
or places, shall be in such form and generally shall be
issued and shall be sold in such manner and with such
details as may be provided by ordinance or resolution.
All these bonds shall be dated no earlier than the
effective date of the ordinance levying the assessment.
Except for special improvement bonds issued for
lighting service or park maintenance purposes (which
bonds shall bear interest only from the due date),
interest shall be paid semiannually or annually as
determined by the governing body and may be
evidenced by interest coupons attached to the bonds.
The governing body may provide that the bonds shall
be callable for redemption prior to maturity and fix the
terms and conditions of redemption, including the
notice to be given and the premium, if any, to be paid;
but no bonds shall be callable for redemption unless
the terms and conditions of redemption are stated on
the face of the bonds. The bonds shall be signed and
may be countersigned by any officials of the
municipality (including a member or members of the
governing body) as the governing body of the
municipality shall designate; and, if so provided by the
governing body, the signatures of the bonds and
interest coupons may be by facsimile signature except
that at least one of the signatures on the face of the
bonds shall be by manual signature. Bonds or interest
coupons bearing the signatures (manual or facsimile)
of officers in the office on the date of execution of
same shall be valid and binding obligations
notwithstanding that before the delivery of the bonds
any or all of the persons whose signatures appear on
them shall have ceased to be officers of the
municipality. (Ord. 88-25, 08-03-88)
(March 29, 2006) 4-45
4-12-27.1. Refunding of special improvement bonds -
Issuance - Payment - Security - Reduced payment
obligations.
Special improvement bonds may be refunded, in
whole or in part, at or in advance of their maturity,
whether at stated maturity or upon redemption or
declaration of maturity, at the option of the municipality,
by the issuance of special improvement refunding bonds
pursuant to resolution of the governing body under the
authority of and in the manner provided by this chapter,
Chapter 27, Title 11, the Utah Refunding Bond Act, Utah
Code Annotated, as provided in Subsection (10), and
upon compliance with the following:
(1) Special improvement refunding bonds shall:
(a) be payable solely from the same funds from
which the prior bonds are payable;
(b) mature not later than the date of final
maturity of the prior bonds;
(c) not mature or bear interest at any time in
amounts which cannot be paid when due from the
payments of the assessments and interest thereon, or the
reduced payment obligations, as applicable, assuming
that payments of these assessments, when due, together
with the amounts of any prior payments or prepayments
of these assessments, reduced payment obligations, and
interest previously made and which remain available for
payment of the special improvement refunding bonds;
and
(d) bear interest payable semiannually or
annually, as determined by the governing body.
(2) Special improvement refunding bonds may:
(a) be issued in bearer form with or without
interest coupons attached, or in registered form in
accordance with Chapter 7, Title 15, the Registered
Public Obligations Act, Utah Code Annotated, as
determined by the governing body;
(b)(i) be in a form and contain details
consistent with this chapter, (ii) be payable at a place or
places, (iii) be delivered in exchange for the prior bonds,
or (iv) be sold in a manner, at terms, and with details
consistent with this chapter, and at a price or prices
above, at, or below par, as determined by the governing
body.
(c) be callable for redemption prior to maturity
upon terms, conditions, and notice, and premium, if any,
to be paid, as the governing body determines, but no
special improvement refunding bonds are callable for
redemption unless the terms and conditions of
redemption are stated on their face;
(d) be issued for the purpose of refunding one
or more issues of prior bonds of the municipality and, if
issued to refund two or more issues of prior bonds, be
issued in a single series, to refund all of the issues of
prior bonds to be refunded, or in two or more series to
refund one or more of these issues of prior bonds.
(3) The governing body may provide for the
payment of incidental refunding costs of the special
improvement refunding bonds as follows:
(a) by advancing funds from the general or
other funds of the municipality, if the governing body:
(i) finds and determines that this advance of municipal
funds is in the best interest of the municipality and its
citizens, including, without limitation, the owners of
property within the district, and (ii) provides that the
assessments from which the prior bonds are payable
and the interest payable thereon may not be reduced
during such period as is necessary to provide funds
from the payment of these assessments and interest
thereon with which to reimburse the municipality for
all funds so advanced by it for the payment of
incidental refunding costs, together with interest
thereon at a rate or rates equal to the interest rate or
rates payable on these assessments;
(b) from any premium received from the sale
of the special improvement refunding bonds;
(c) from any earnings on the investment of
the proceeds of the special improvement refunding
bonds pending their use to redeem the prior bonds;
(d) from any other sources legally available
to the municipality for this purpose; or
(e) from any combination of Subsections
(3)(a) through (d).
(4) Special improvement refunding bonds and
any interest coupons attached to them shall be
executed by the municipality by the manual or
facsimile signature or signatures of any officials of the
municipality, including a member of the governing
body, as the governing body designates. Any
signatures of such officials may be attested by the
manual or facsimile signature of another official of the
municipality, including a member of the governing
body, as the governing body designates. In addition to
these signatures, any special improvement refunding
bond may include a certificate or certificates signed by
the manual or facsimile signature or an authenticating
agent, registrar, transfer agent, or the like. At least one
signature of an authorized official or other persons
required or permitted to be placed on the special
improvement refunding bonds shall be a manual
signature. Special improvement refunding bonds and
interest coupons bearing the signatures, manual or
facsimile, of officers in office on the date of execution
of the bonds or coupons shall be valid and binding
obligations even if before the delivery of the special
improvement refunding bonds or interest coupons any
or all of the persons whose signatures appear on them
have ceased to be officers of the municipality.
(5) (a) Special improvement refunding bonds
and the interest thereon shall be payable from and
secured by the same assessments and interest thereon
(March 29, 2006) 4-46
from which the prior bonds were payable and were
secured, as they may be reduced by the amending
ordinance described in Subsection (8), and may be
payable from and secured by the Special Improvement
Guaranty Fund, and shall be payable from and secured
by the Special Improvement Guaranty Fund if the prior
bonds were payable from and secured by this fund.
(b) The governing body shall:
(i) adopt an ordinance amending the prior
ordinance, as provided in Subsection (8); and
(ii) give notice of any reduced payment
obligations to the owners of properties assessed in the
prior ordinance, as provided in Subsection (9).
(c) Neither the amendment of the prior
ordinance nor the issuance of special improvement
refunding bonds shall affect the validity of, or, except for
the amounts of any reductions to the original or prior
assessments or interest thereon, the continued
enforceability of the original or any other prior
assessments or the interest thereon. Neither this
amendment nor the issuance of the special improvement
refunding bonds shall affect the validity of, or, except for
the amounts of any reductions to the original or prior
assessments or interest thereon, the enforceability or
priority of the lien thereof on the properties upon which
the assessments were levied. All these reductions to the
original or prior assessments and the interest thereon
shall continue to exist in favor of the special
improvement refunding bonds. All these liens and
priorities shall continue to exist against these properties
to secure the payment of the reduced payment
obligations and the special improvement refunding bonds
in the same manner and to the same extent, except for the
amounts of any reductions to the original or prior
assessments or interest thereon, as the original and any
other prior assessments, interest thereon, and the prior
bonds were secured by the original assessments, interest
thereon, and the original liens and priorities.
(d) It is the intent of the governing body that
there be no impairment of the validity of, or, except with
respect to the amounts of these reductions to the original
or prior assessments or interest thereon, of the
enforceability or priority of any of these assessments,
interest thereon, or liens as a result of the amendment of
the prior ordinance or the issuance of the special
improvement refunding bonds.
(6) This lien securing any reduced payment
obligations from which the special improvement
refunding bonds are payable and secured shall be
subordinate to the lien securing the original or prior
assessments, interest thereon, and the prior bonds until
the principal of, interest on, and redemption premium, if
any, on the prior bonds are fully paid. Following this
payment, this lien shall continue as provided in Section
4-12-23, as security for the payment of the reduced
payment obligations, the penalties and costs of
collection thereof, and the payment of the principal of,
interest on, and redemption premium, if any, on the
special improvement refunding bonds.
(7) Unless the principal of, interest on, and
redemption premiums, if any, on the prior bonds are
paid simultaneously with the issuance of the special
improvement refunding bonds, the municipality shall
irrevocably set aside the proceeds of the special
improvement refunding bonds in an escrow or other
separate account which shall be pledged as security for
the payment of the principal of, interest on, and
redemption premiums, if any, on the special
improvement refunding bonds or the prior bonds, or
both.
(8) The amending ordinance referred to in
Subsection (5)(b)(i), shall comply with the following:
(a) Subject to the provisions of Subsection
(3)(a), the amount by which the principal or interest, or
both, payable on the special improvement refunding
bonds is less than the amount of principal or interest,
or both, payable on the prior bonds shall be applied to
reduce the assessments levied by the prior ordinance or
the interest payable on those assessments, or both, as
determined by the governing body. Any reductions of
the assessments levied by the prior ordinance or of
interest payable on those assessments, or both, shall be
made in such manner that the then unpaid assessments
levied against each of the assessed properties and the
unpaid interest on these assessments shall receive a
proportionate share of the reductions. These
reductions do not apply to assessments and interest
thereon which have been paid.
(b) The amending ordinance shall state the
amounts of the reduced payment obligations for each
of the properties assessed in the prior ordinance. It is
sufficient if the amending ordinance incorporates by
reference a revised assessment list approved by the
governing body which contains these reduced payment
obligations.
(c) The amending ordinance need not
describe each block, lot, part of block or lot, tract, or
parcel of property assessed.
(d) The amending ordinance shall be
published and shall be effective in accordance with
Subsection 4-12-18(1) and, within five days after
adopting the amending ordinance, the governing body
shall file a copy thereof, together with a copy of the
revised assessment list, if it is incorporated by
reference in the amending ordinance, with the county
recorder's office in the county where the assessed
property is located, to be maintained by the county
recorder with the public file of assessment ordinances
and assessment lists as provided in Subsection 4-12-
18(3).
(March 29, 2006) 4-47
(e) The amending ordinance shall state the date
or dates on which any reductions in the assessments and
the interest thereon levied in the prior ordinance will be
effective. The date or dates may not be prior to the date
when all of the principal of, interest on, and any
redemption premiums on the prior bonds and any
advances of funds made under Subsection (3)(a) are fully
paid.
(9) The notice to owners of assessed properties of
reductions in their assessments and interest payments,
referred to in Subsection (5)(b)(ii): (a) shall identify the
property subject to the assessment; (b) shall state the
amount or amounts of the reduced payment obligations
which will be payable from and after the applicable date
stated in the amending ordinance; and (c) may contain
any other information which the governing body deems
appropriate.
(10) The notice referred to in Subsection (5)(b)(ii)
shall be mailed, postage prepaid, not less than 21 days
prior to the date the first payment of the reduced
assessments becomes due:
(a) addressed to each owner of assessed
property within the special improvement district in the
names and at the addresses appearing on the final
assessment filed with the county recorder pursuant to
Section 4-12-18, or any revisions to this list made by the
municipality; and
(b) addressed to "owner" at the street number
of each piece of improved, assessed property. If a street
number has not been assigned, then the post office box,
rural route number, or any other mailing address of the
improved property shall be used for the mailing of the
notice. This notice may be included with or in any other
notices regarding the payment of assessments and
interest thereon sent to the property owners in the district
within the time and addressed as stated above. Neither
the failure to give notice nor any defect in its content of
the manner or time in which it is given shall affect the
validity or enforceability of the amending ordinance or
the special improvement refunding bonds or the validity,
enforceability, or priority of the reduced payment
obligations. Whether or not this notice is given, no other
notice is required to be given to the owners of the
assessed properties in connection with the issuance of
the special improvement refunding bonds.
(11) To the extent it is not inconsistent with this
chapter, Chapter 27, Title 11, the Utah Refunding Bond
Act, Utah Code Annotated, shall apply to the issuance of
special improvement refunding bonds. The provisions of
this chapter relating to special improvement refunding
bonds apply to all special improvement bonds issued and
outstanding or which may hereafter be issued and
outstanding. This chapter applies to all special
improvement refunding bonds issued under this chapter
even though the prior bonds which are refunded thereby
were issued under any other law, including, without
limitation, any law which has been repealed. (Ord. 88-
25, 08-03-88)
4-12-28. Objection to assessment - Actions to enjoin
levy or set aside proceedings.
(1) No assessment or proceeding in a special
improvement district shall be declared void or set aside
in whole or in part in consequence of any error or
irregularity which does not go to the equity or justice
of the assessment or proceeding. However, any party
feeling aggrieved by an assessment or proceeding and
who has not waived his objections thereto as provided
in section 4-12-7 or 4-12-17 shall have the right to
commence a civil action against the municipality to
enjoin the levy or collection of the assessment or to set
aside and declare unlawful the proceedings.
(2) Any such action must be commenced and
summons must be served on the municipality not later
than thirty days after the effective date of the
ordinance levying assessments in the special
improvement district. Such action shall be the
exclusive remedy of any aggrieved party. No court
shall entertain any complaint which the party was
authorized to make but did not make in a protest filed
pursuant to section 4-12-7 or at hearings held pursuant
to section 4-12-17 or any complaint that does not go to
the equity or justice of the assessment or proceeding.
(3) After the expiration of such thirty-day
period:
(a) The special improvement bonds issued or
to be issued against the district and the assessments
levied in the district shall become incontestable as to
all persons who have not commenced the action
provided for in this section, and
(b) No suit to enjoin the issuance or payment
of the bonds, the levy, collection or enforcement of the
assessments or in any other manner attacking or
questioning the legality of the bonds or assessments
may be instituted in this state and no court shall have
authority to inquire into such matters. (Ord. 88-25, 08-
03-88)
4-12-29. Liability of municipality - Payment of
bonds - Illegal assessments.
(1) Special improvement bonds are not a general
obligation of the municipality. No municipality shall
be held liable for the payment of any special
improvement bond except to the extent of the funds
created and received by assessments against which the
bonds are issued and to the extent of its special
improvement guaranty fund; but the municipality shall
be held responsible for the lawful levy of all
assessments, for the creation and maintenance of the
special improvement guaranty fund as provided by
(March 29, 2006) 4-48
law, and for faithful accounting, collection, settlement
and payment of the assessments and for the moneys of
said fund.
(2) If any property shall be illegally assessed or
any property which is by law exempt from assessment
for local purposes shall be so assessed, the municipality
so assessing such property shall be liable to the holders
of special improvement bonds issued against the funds
created by such assessments, which amount shall be paid
from the general fund of the municipality. (Ord. 88-25,
08-03-88)
4-12-30. Total assessments greater than cost of
improvements - Surplus to special improvement
guaranty fund - Abandonment of improvement -
Rebate to property owners.
Where an assessment is levied prior to the time all
improvements in the district are entirely completed and
accepted, and, on completion and acceptance, the total
cost of the improvements for which assessments were
levied is less than the total amount of the assessments,
the surplus shall be placed in the special improvement
guaranty fund. If special improvement bonds have been
issued by the district prior to the time the surplus is
determined, the surplus shall be held in the guaranty fund
and used for payment of the bonds and interest and any
penalties and costs. If an improvement project is
abandoned after assessments have been levied but before
the improvements have been started, the full amount of
the assessments levied, less any damages or costs related
to the abandonment, shall be rebated to the property
owner at the time the rebate is made of the property
assessed at the last known address of the owner, using
for this purpose the names and addressed appearing on
the last completed real property assessment rolls of the
county in which the property is located. If an
improvement project is abandoned prior to its completion
and acceptance but after assessments have been levied,
the amount of the assessments in excess of that required
to pay for the improvements to the point of abandonment
or termination including any costs and damages, shall be
rebated as provided in this section. (Ord. 88-25, 08-03-
88)
4-12-31. Special Improvement Guaranty Fund -
Sources - Uses - Investment - Special improvement
refunding bonds.
(1) Any municipality which has issued or may
subsequently issue any special improvement bonds or
special improvement refunding bonds, by appropriation
from the general fund or by the levy of a tax of not to
exceed .0002 in any one year or by the issuance of
general obligation bonds or by appropriation from such
other sources as may be determined by the governing
body, shall create a fund for the purpose of guaranteeing,
to the extent of this fund, the payment of special
improvement bonds and special improvement
refunding bonds and interest accruing on them issued
against special improvement districts fort the payment
of improvements made in the district. This fund shall
be designated as the "Special Improvement Guaranty
Fund."
(2) The municipality may lawfully covenant for
the benefit of the holders of special improvement
bonds and special improvement refunding bonds that
so long as the bonds and special improvement
refunding bonds are outstanding and unpaid:
(a) it will create the fund;
(b) it will, by any of the methods authorized
by this section, provide amounts to be transferred to
the fund equal each year to such amount as a tax levy
of .0002 will produce until the fund is equal to not less
than 25% of the amount of all outstanding special
improvement bonds and special improvement
refunding bonds of all special improvement districts of
the municipality, and subsequently, it will transfer to
the fund such amounts at least yearly as may be
required to maintain or replenish the fund to this
percentage; and
(c) the funds on deposit in the guaranty fund
shall be invested either in:
(i) demand deposits and time
certificates of deposits of federally insured depositories
of the state;
(ii) bonds or other evidence or
indebtedness of the United States of America or any of
its agencies or instrumentalities when these obligations
are guaranteed as to principal and interest by the
United States of America; or
(iii) repurchase agreements with any
federally insured bank or savings and loan association
in the state, acting as principal or agent, for securities
of the United States of America or other evidences of
indebtedness of like quality.
(3) For the purposes of Subsection (2)(b), special
improvement refunding bonds are not deemed to be
outstanding until the principal of, interest, and any
redemption premiums on the special improvement
bonds which are refunded by the special improvement
refunding bonds are fully paid. (Ord. 88-25, 08-03-88)
4-12-32. Interest charges, penalties and other
collections greater than expenses - Excess
transferred to guaranty fund.
All interest money collected or interest received
from the investment of the improvement or bond fund,
penalties, costs, and other amounts collected by the
municipality for the benefit and credit of any special
improvement fund and remaining on hand after all
special improvement bonds or interim warrants,
(March 29, 2006) 4-49
together with interest on them, drawn against a special
improvement fund shall have been fully paid and
canceled, shall be transferred by the treasurer of the
municipality to the special improvement guaranty fund.
(Ord. 88-25, 08-03-88)
4-12-33. Special improvement fund insufficient to
pay bond - Payment by warrant against guaranty
fund.
When any special improvement bond drawn against
any special improvement fund is presented to the
municipality for payment and there is not a sufficient
amount in the special improvement fund to pay the same,
payment therefor shall be made by warrant drawn against
the special improvement guaranty fund. (Ord. 88-25, 08-
03-88)
4-12-34. Purchase by municipality of property sold
for delinquent assessments - Assessment installments
paid from guaranty fund - Reimbursement of
guaranty fund from sale proceeds.
In the event any property is sold to the municipality
at final tax sale conducted to collect delinquent property
taxes or delinquent assessments levied under this
chapter, the municipality shall, for as long as the
municipality retains ownership of the property so sold,
pay all annual assessment installments that become due,
including the interest on them. The payments shall be
made out of the guaranty fund and paid into the special
improvement district fund of the district where the
property is located. If the municipality sells the property
it has received from final tax sale by installments or
otherwise, the purchase price for it shall not be less than
an amount sufficient to reimburse the guaranty fund for
all amounts paid out of the fund on behalf of this
property for delinquent assessments or parts or
installment of them, plus interest, penalties, and costs.
The sales price of the property and any interest on it paid
in installments shall be paid into the guaranty fund to the
extent of the full reimbursement as required in this
section. This section shall be read and interpreted in
conjunction with sections 1-16-24 and 1-16-25. (Ord.
88-25, 08-03-88)
4-12-35. Payment on bonds from guaranty fund -
Municipality subrogated to right of holders.
Whenever a municipality shall have paid under its
guaranty any sum on account of principal or interest on
the special improvement bonds of any special
improvement district, it shall be subrogated to the rights
of the holders of such bonds or interest coupons so paid,
and such bonds or coupons and the proceeds thereof
shall become a part of the special improvement guaranty
fund. (Ord. 88-25, 08-03-88)
4-12-36. Insufficient balance in guaranty fund -
Replenishment by municipality - Warrants -
Increase in annual tax levy.
Whenever there is not a sufficient amount of cash
in the Special Improvement Guaranty Fund at any time
to make all purchases of property bid on by the
municipality at sales of property for delinquent
assessments, the governing body may replenish this
fund by transfer or appropriation from the General
Fund of the municipality or from other available
sources as may be determined by it. Warrants drawing
interest at the rate or rates determined by the governing
body may be issued against the fund to meet any
financial liabilities accruing against it, but at the time
of making its next annual tax levy, the municipality
shall provide for the levy of a sum sufficient, with
other resources of the fund, to pay warrants so issued
and outstanding, the tax for such purpose not to exceed
.0002 in any one year. (Ord. 88-25, 08-03-88)
4-12-37. Excess amount in guaranty fund -
Transfers to General Fund - Special improvement
refunding bonds.
Whenever the amount in the special improvement
guaranty fund exceeds 25% of the average amount of
all special improvement bonds and special
improvement districts of the municipality outstanding
during the preceding three-year period, the governing
body of the municipality may by resolution transfer all
amounts in excess of this percentage to the general
fund of the municipality, except that the transfer may
not be made if the amount in the guaranty fund is less
than 25% of the amount of all special improvement
bonds and special improvement refunding bonds of all
special improvement districts of the municipality
which are outstanding at the time of the proposed
transfer. For the purpose of this section, special
improvement refunding bonds are not deemed to be
outstanding until the principal of, interest, and any
redemption premiums on the special improvement
bonds which are refunded by the special improvement
refunding bonds are fully paid. (Ord. 88-25, 08-03-88)
4-12-38. Municipality's right to make other
improvements not restricted - Authority not
affected by other laws.
This act is intended to afford an alternative
method for the making of improvements by Tooele
City, the creation of special improvement districts, the
levy of assessments and the issuance of special
improvement bonds by Tooele City and shall not be so
construed as to deprive Tooele City of the right to
make improvements, create special improvement
districts, levy assessments or other special taxes or
issue special improvement bonds under authority of
(March 29, 2006) 4-50
any other law of this state now in effect or hereafter
enacted, but nevertheless this act shall constitute full
authority for the making of improvements, creation of
special improvement districts, levy of assessments and
issuance of special improvement bonds by Tooele City.
No act hereafter passed by the legislature amending other
acts relating to the same subject matter as covered by this
act shall be construed to affect the authority to proceed
under this act in the manner herein provided unless such
future statute amends this act and specifically provides
that it is to be applicable to proceedings taken and to
special improvement bonds issued under this act. (Ord.
88-25, 08-03-88)
4-12-39. Proceedings prior to act validated -
Exceptions.
All special improvement bonds issued by Tooele
City prior to the effective date of this act and all
proceedings had in the authorization and issuance thereof
and all proceedings taken prior to or in connection with
the levy of assessments out of which such bonds are
payable or in the creation, maintenance and use of the
special improvement guaranty fund of the municipality
issuing such bonds are hereby validated, ratified and
confirmed and all such special improvement bonds are
declared to constitute legally binding obligations in
accordance with their terms and all such assessments are
declared to be legal and valid assessments. Nothing in
this section shall be construed to affect or validate any
bonds, assessments or special improvement guaranty
fund, the legality of which is being contested at the time
this act takes effect. This act shall apply to all
assessments levied and to all special improvement bonds
and interim warrants issued after this act takes effect
even though proceedings prior to the levy or issue were
taken under the provisions of a law repealed by this act
and all of such proceedings are validated, ratified and
confirmed subject to question only as provided in section
4-12-28. (Ord. 88-25, 08-03-88)
(December 3, 2009) 4-54.4
CHAPTER 13. FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
ORDINANCE
4-13-1. Statutory authorization, Findings of Fact,
Purpose, and Methods.
4-13-2. Definitions.
4-13-3. General provisions.
4-13-4. Administration.
4-13-5. Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
4-13-6. Penalties for Noncompliance.
4-13-1. Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact,
Purpose and Methods.
(1) The Legislature of the State of Utah has by
statute delegated the responsibility of local
governmental units to adopt regulations designed to
minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City Council of
Tooele City, Utah, does ordain as follows:
(2) (a) The flood hazard areas of Tooele City are
subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of
life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption
of commerce and governmental services, and
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection
and relief, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety and general welfare.
(b) These flood loses are created by the
cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which
cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by
the occupancy of flood hazards areas by uses vulnerable
to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are
inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise
protected from flood damage.
(3) It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote
the public health, safety and general welfare and to
minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(a) Protect human life and health;
(b) Minimize expenditure of public money for
costly flood control projects;
(c) Minimize the need for rescue and relief
efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(d) Minimize prolonged business
interruptions;
(e) Minimize damage to public facilities and
utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone
and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
floodplains;
(f) Help maintain a stable tax base by
providing for the sound use and development of floodprone
areas in such a manner as to minimize future
flood blight areas; and
(g) Insure that potential buyers are notified
that property is in a flood area.
(4) In order to accomplish its purposes, this
ordinance uses the following methods:
(a) Restrict or prohibit uses that are
dangerous to health, safety or property in times of
flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities;
(b) Require that uses vulnerable to floods,
including facilities which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(c) Control the alteration of natural
floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective
barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
flood waters;
(d) Control filling, grading, dredging and
other development which may increase flood damage;
(e) Prevent or regulate the construction of
flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood
waters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
(Ord. 2009-08, 09-16-09); (Ord. 89-21, 09-27-89)
4-13-2 Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or
phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted to
give them the meaning they have in common usage and
to give this ordinance its most reasonable application.
(1) “Alluvial fan flooding” means flooding
occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar
landform which originates at the apex and is
characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes
of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and
unpredictable flow paths.
(2) “Apex” means a point on an alluvial fan or
similar landform below which the flow path of the
major stream that formed the fan becomes
unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
(3) “Area of shallow flooding” means a
designated AO, AH, or VO zone on a community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent
chance or greater annual chance of flooding to an
average depth of one to three feet where a clearly
defined channel does not exist, where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may
be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding
or sheet flow.
(4) “Area of special flood hazard” is the land in
the floodplain within a community subject to a one
percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
The area may be designated as Zone A on the Flood
Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). After detailed
ratemaking has been completed in preparation for
publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into
Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE or V.
(5) “Base flood” means the flood having a one
percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
(6) “Basement” means any area of the building
having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all
sides.
(7) “Critical Feature” means an integral and
readily identifiable part of a flood protection system,
without which the flood protection provided by the
entire system would be compromised.
(8) “Development” means any man-made change
in improved and unimproved real estate, including but
not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
(December 3, 2009) 4-54.4
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations or storage of equipment or materials.
(9) “Elevated building” means a non-basement
building
(a) built, in the case of a building in Zones
A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have
the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building
in Zones V1-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the
lowest horizontal
structure member of the elevated floor elevated above
the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts
and piers), or shear walls parallel to the floor of the
water and
(b) adequately anchored so as not to impair
the structural integrity of the building during a flood of
up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of
Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D,
"elevated building" also includes a building elevated by
means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with
openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movement of flood waters. In the case of Zones V1-30,
VE, or V, "elevated building" also includes a building
otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building,"
even though the lower area is enclosed by means of
breakaway walls if the breakaway walls met the
standards of Section 60.3(e)(5) of the National Flood
Insurance Program regulations.
(10) “Existing construction” means for the
purposes of determining rates, structures for which the
"start of construction" commenced before the effective
date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs
effective before that date. "Existing construction" may
also be referred to as "existing structures."
(11) “Existing manufactured home park or
subdivision” means a manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation
of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
(12) “Expansion to an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision” means the preparation of
additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or
the pouring of concrete pads).
(13) “Flood or flooding” means a general and
temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from:
(a) the overflow of inland or tidal waters.
(b) the unusual and rapid accumulation or
runoff of surface waters from any source.
(14) “Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)” means an
official map of a community, on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency has delineated both
the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.
(15) “Flood insurance study” is the official report
provided by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency. The report contains flood profiles, water
surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the Flood
Boundary-Floodway Map.
(16) “Floodplain or flood-prone area” means any
land area susceptible to being inundated by water from
any source (see definition of flooding).
(17) “Floodplain management” means the operation
of an overall program of corrective and preventive
measures for reducing flood damage, including but not
limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control
works and floodplain management regulations.
(18) “Floodplain management regulations” means
zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building
codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances
(such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and
erosion control ordinance) and other applications of
police power. The term describes such state or local
regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide
standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention
and reduction.
(19) “Flood protection system” means those
physical structural works for which funds have been
authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have
been constructed specifically to modify flooding in
order to reduce the extent of the areas within a
community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the
extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a
system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams,
reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood
modifying works are those constructed in conformance
with sound engineering standards.
(20) “Flood proofing” means any combination of
structural and non-structural additions, changes, or
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property,
water and sanitary facilities, structures and their
contents.
(21) “Floodway (regulatory floodway)” means the
channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without cumulatively increasing the
water surface elevation more than a designated height.
(22) “Functionally dependant use” means a use,
which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is
located or carried out in close proximity to water. The
term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that
are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or
passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities,
but does not include long-term storage or related
manufacturing facilities.
(23) “Highest adjacent grade” means the highest
natural elevation of the ground surface prior to
construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
(24) “Historic structure” means any structure that
is:
(a) Listed individually in the National
Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by
(December 3, 2009) 4-54.4
the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
(b) Certified or preliminarily determined by
the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or
a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
(c) Individually listed on a state inventory of
historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary
of Interior; or
(d) Individually listed on a local inventory or
historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
(i) by an approved state program as
determined by the Secretary of the Interior or;
(ii) directly by the Secretary of the
Interior in states without approved programs.
(25) ”Levee” means a man-made structure, usually
an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in
accordance with sound engineering practices to contain,
control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide
protection from temporary flooding.
(26) “Levee system” means a flood protection
system which consists of a levee, or levees, and
associated structures, such as closure and drainage
devices, which are constructed and operated in
accordance with sound engineering practices.
(27) “Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the
lowest enclosed area (including basement). An
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an
area other than a basement area is not considered a
building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section
60.3 of the National Flood insurance Program
regulations.
(28) “Manufactured home” means a structure
transportable in one or more sections, which is built on
a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does
not include a "recreational vehicle".
(29) “Manufactured home park or subdivision”
means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided
into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or
sale.
(30) “Mean sea level” means, for purposes of the
National Flood Insurance Program, the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other
datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
(31) “New construction” means, for the purpose of
determining insurance rates, structures for which the
"start of construction" commenced on or after the
effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31,
1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. For floodplain
management purposes, "new construction" means
structures for which the "start of construction"
commenced on or after the effective date of a
floodplain management regulation adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements
to such structures.
(32) “New manufactured home park or
subdivision” means a manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation
of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
(33) “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle, which
is:
(a) built on a single chassis;
(b) 400 square feet or less when measured at
the largest horizontal projections;
(c) designed to be self-propelled or
permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(d) designed primarily not for use as a
permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
(34) “Start of construction” (for other than new
construction or substantial improvements under the
Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)),
includes substantial improvement and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start
of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, placement, or other improvement was within
180 days of the permit date. The actual start means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation;
or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include
land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling;
nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement,
footings, piers or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on
the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the
main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
(35) “Structure” means a walled and roofed
building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is
principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
(36) “Substantial damage” means damage of any
origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of
restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value
of the structure before the damage occurred.
(December 3, 2009) 4-54.4
(37) “Substantial improvement” means any
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure
before "start of construction" of the improvement. This
includes structures, which have incurred "substantial
damage", regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
(a) Any project for improvement of a
structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary
conditions or
(b) Any alteration of a "historic structure",
provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure."
(38) “Variance” is a grant of relief to a person from
the requirement of this ordinance when specific
enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A
variance, therefore, permits construction or
development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this
ordinance. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of
the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)
regulations.).
(39) “Violation” means the failure of a structure or
other development to be fully compliant with the
community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation
certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of
compliance required in NFIP Sections 60.3(b)(5),
(c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is
presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
(40) “Water surface elevation” means the height, in
relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of
floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the
floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
(Ord. 2009-08, 09-16-09); (Ord. 89-21, 09-27-89)
4-13-3 General Provisions.
(1) The ordinance shall apply to all areas of
special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Tooele
City.
(2) The areas of special flood hazard identified by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a
scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood
Insurance Study for the City of Tooele," dated
November 18, 2009, with accompanying Flood
Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Boundary-Floodway
Maps (FIRM and FBFM) and any revisions thereto are
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of
this ordinance.
(3) A Development Permit shall be required to
ensure conformance with the provisions of this
ordinance.
(4) No structure or land shall hereafter be located,
altered, or have its use changed without full compliance
with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable
regulations.
(5) This ordinance is not intended to repeal,
abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants,
or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance and
another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed
restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the
more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(6) In the interpretation and application of this
ordinance, all provisions shall be:
(a) considered as minimum requirements;
(b) liberally construed in favor of the
governing body; and,
(c) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any
other powers granted under State statutes.
(7) The degree of flood protection required by this
ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can
and will occur and flood heights may be increased by
man-made or natural causes.
This ordinance does not imply that land outside the
areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within
such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages.
This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of
the community or any official or employee thereof for
any flood damages that result from reliance on this
ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
(Ord. 2009-08, 09-16-09); (Ord. 89-21, 09-27-89)
4-13-4 Administration.
(1) The City Engineer is hereby appointed the
Floodplain Administrator to administer and implement
the provisions of this ordinance and other appropriate
sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program
Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
(2) Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain
Administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
(a) Maintain and hold open for public
inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of
this ordinance.
(b) Review permit applications to determine
whether proposed building sites, including the
placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably
safe from flooding.
(c) Review, approve or deny all applications
for development permits required by adoption of this
ordinance.
(d) Review permits for proposed development
to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained
from those Federal, State or local governmental
agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C.
1334) from which prior approval is required.
(e) Where interpretation is needed as to the
exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a
conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
(December 3, 2009) 4-54.4
conditions) the Floodplain Administrator shall make the
necessary interpretation.
(f) Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent
communities and the State Coordinating Agency, which
is the State of Utah National Flood Insurance
Coordinator, prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification
to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(g) Assure that the flood carrying capacity
within the altered or relocated portion of any
watercourse is maintained.
(h) When base flood elevation data has not
been provided in accordance with Section 4-13-3(2),
the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and
floodway data available from a Federal, State or other
source, in order to administer the provisions of Section
4-13-5.
(i) When a regulatory floodway has not been
designated, the Floodplain Administrator must require
that no new construction, substantial improvements, or
other development (including fill) shall be permitted
within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM,
unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of
the proposed development, when combined with all
other existing and anticipated development, will not
increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point within the community.
(j) Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter
1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations, a community may approve certain
development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the
community's FIRM which increases the water surface
elevation of the base flood by more than one foot,
provided that the community first applies for a
conditional FIRM revision through FEMA (Conditional
Letter of Map Revision).
(3) Application for a Development Permit shall be
presented to the Floodplain Administrator on forms
furnished by him/her and may include, but not be
limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing
the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed
landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures,
including the placement of manufactured homes, and
the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of
special flood hazard. Additionally, the following
information is required:
(a) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level),
of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and
substantially improved structures;
(b) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to
which any nonresidential structure shall be
floodproofed;
(c) A certificate from a registered
professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential
floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing
criteria of Section 4-13-5(2)(b);
(d) Description of the extent to which any
watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
(e) Maintain a record of all such information
in accordance with Section 4-13-4(2)(a).
Approval or denial of a Development Permit by the
Floodplain Administrator shall be based on all of the
provisions of this ordinance and the following relevant
factors:
(a) The danger to life and property due to
flooding or erosion damage;
(b) The susceptibility of the proposed facility
and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such
damage on the individual owner;
(c) The danger that materials may be swept
onto other lands to the injury of others;
(d) The compatibility of the proposed use
with existing and anticipated development;
(e) The safety of access to the property in
times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(f) The costs of providing governmental
services during and after flood conditions including
maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems;
(g) The expected heights, velocity, duration,
rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters
and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at
the site;
(h) The necessity to the facility of a
waterfront location, where applicable;
(i) The availability of alternative locations,
not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the
proposed use;
(j) The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan for that area.
(4) (a) The appeal Board as established by the
community shall hear and render judgment on requests
for variances from the requirements of this ordinance.
(b) The Appeal Board shall hear and render
judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is
an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the Floodplain Administrator in the
enforcement or administration of this ordinance.
(c) Any person or persons aggrieved by the
decision of the Appeal Board may appeal such decision
in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
(d) The Floodplain Administrator shall
maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and
shall report variances to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency upon request.
(e) Variances may be issued for the
reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures
listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the
State Inventory of Historic places, without regard to the
procedures set forth in the remainder of this ordinance.
(f) Variances may be issued for new
construction and substantial improvements to be erected
on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to
and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, providing the
relevant factors in Section 4-13-4(3)(b) have been fully
(December 3, 2009) 4-54.4
considered. As the lot size increases beyond the onehalf
acre, the technical justification required for issuing
the variance increases.
(g) Upon consideration of the factors noted
above and the intent of this ordinance, the Appeal
Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose
and objectives of this ordinance (Section 4-13-1(3)).
(h) Variances shall not be issued within any
designated floodway if any increase in flood levels
during the base flood discharge would result.
(i) Variances may be issued for the repair or
rehabilitation of historic structures upon a
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation
will not preclude the structure's continued designation
as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design
of the structure.
(j) Prerequisites for granting variances:
(i) Variances shall only be issued upon a
determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(ii) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(A) showing a good and sufficient
cause;
(B) a determination that failure to
grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship
to the applicant, and
(C) a determination that the granting
of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public
expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing
local laws or ordinances.
(iii) Any application for which a variance
is granted shall be given written notice that the structure
will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the
cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the
increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor
elevation.
(k) Variances may be issued by a community
for new construction and substantial improvements and
for other development necessary for the conduct of a
functionally dependent use provided that:
(i) the criteria outlined in Sections 4-13-
4(4)(a-i) are met, and
(ii) the structure or other development is
protected by methods that minimize flood damages
during the base flood and create no additional threats to
public safety.
(Ord. 2009-08, 09-16-09); (Ord. 89-21, 09-27-89)
4-13-5. Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
(1) In all areas of special flood hazards the
following provisions are required for all new
construction and substantial improvements:
(a) All new construction or substantial
improvements shall be designed (or modified) and
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or
lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the
effects of buoyancy;
(b) All new construction or substantial
improvements shall be constructed by methods and
practices that minimize flood damage;
(c) All new construction or substantial
improvements shall be constructed with materials
resistant to flood damage;
(d) All new construction or substantial
improvements shall be constructed with electrical,
heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning
equipment and other service facilities that are designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during conditions
of flooding.
(e) All new and replacement water supply
systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters into the system;
(f) New and replacement sanitary sewage
systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters into the system and
discharge from the systems into flood waters; and,
(g) On-site waste disposal systems shall be
located to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding.
(2) In all areas of special flood hazards where base
flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in
Section 4-13-3(2), Section 4-13-4(2)(h), or Section 4-
13-5(3)(c), the following provisions are required:
(a) Residential Construction - new
construction and substantial improvement of any
residential structure shall have the lowest floor
(including basement), elevated to or above the base
flood elevation. A registered professional engineer,
architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to
the Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this
subsection as proposed in Section 4-13-3(3)(a)(i), is
satisfied.
(b) Nonresidential Construction - new
construction and substantial improvements of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated to or above the base
flood level or together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base
flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and
effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural
design, specifications, and plans for the construction,
and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards
of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of
such certification which includes the specific elevation
(in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures
are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Floodplain
Administrator.
(December 3, 2009) 4-54.4
(c) Enclosures - new construction and
substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas
below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood
forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and
exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
(i) A minimum of two openings having a
total net area of not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be
provided.
(ii) The bottom of all openings shall be
no higher than one foot above grade.
(iii) Openings may be equipped with
screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters.
(d) Manufactured Homes –
(i) Require that all manufactured homes
to be placed within Zone A on a community's FHBM or
FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices
which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this
requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and
anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are
not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to
applicable State and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
(ii) Require that manufactured homes that
are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-
30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites
(A) outside of a manufactured home
park or subdivision,
(B) in a new manufactured home
park or subdivision,,
(C) in an expansion to an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision, or
(D) in an existing manufactured
home park or subdivision on which a manufactured
home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a
flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that
the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated
to or above the base flood elevation and be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system
to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(iii) Require that manufactured homes be
placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision with Zones A1-
30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not
subject to the provisions of paragraph (4) of this section
be elevated so that either:
(A) the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is at or above the base flood
elevation, or
(B) the manufactured home chassis
supported by reinforced piers or other foundation
elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less
than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement.
(e) Recreational Vehicles - Require that
recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-
30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either:
(i) be on the site for fewer than 180
consecutive days,
(ii) be fully licensed and ready for
highway use, or
(iii) meet the permit requirements of
Section 4-13-4(3)(a), and the elevation and anchoring
requirements for manufactured homes" in paragraph (d)
of this Section. A recreational vehicle is ready for
highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is
attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities and security devices, and has no permanently
attached additions.
(3) (a) All subdivision proposals including the
placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall be consistent with Sections 4-13-
1(2), (3), and (4) of this ordinance.
(b) All proposals for the development of
subdivisions including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions shall meet Development
Permit requirements of Section 4-13-3(3); Section 4-13-
4(3); and the provisions of Section 4-13-5 of this
ordinance.
(c) Base flood elevation data shall be
generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed
development including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions. Or which is greater than
50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise
provided pursuant to Section 4-13-3(2) or Section 4-13-
4(2)(h) of this ordinance.
(d) All subdivision proposals including the
placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(e) All subdivision proposals including the
placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located
and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
(4) Located within the areas of special flood
hazard established in Section 4-13-3(2), are areas
designated as shallow flooding. These areas have
special flood hazards associated with base flood depths
of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly defined channel does not
exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable
and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding
is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the
following provisions apply:
(a) All new construction and substantial
improvements of residential structures have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated above the highest
(December 3, 2009) 4-54.4
adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two
feet if no depth number is specified).
(b) All new construction and substantial
improvements of non-residential structures;
(i) have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at
least as high as the depth number specified in feet on
the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth
number is specified), or;
(ii) together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base
flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects
of buoyancy.
(c) A registered professional engineer or
architect shall submit a certification to the Floodplain
Administrator that the standards of this Section, as
proposed in Section 4-13-4(3)(a)(i), are satisfied.
(d) Require within Zones AH or AO adequate
drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide
flood waters around and away from proposed
structures.
(5) Floodways - located within areas of special
flood hazard established in Section 4-13-3(2), are areas
designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood
waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and
erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply:
(a) Encroachments are prohibited, including
fill, new construction, substantial improvements and
other development within the adopted regulatory
floodway unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in
accordance with standard engineering practice that the
proposed encroachment would not result in any
increase in flood levels within the community during
the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(b) If Section 4-13-5(5)(a) above is satisfied,
all new construction and substantial improvements shall
comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction
provisions of Section 4-13-5.
(c) Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter
1, Section 65.12, of the NFIP regulations, a community
may permit encroachments within the adopted
regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in
base flood elevations, provided that the community first
applies for a conditional FIRM and floodway revision
through FEMA.
4-13-6. Penalties for noncompliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed,
located, extended, converted, or altered without full
compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other
applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of
this ordinance by failure to comply with any of its
requirements (including violations of conditions and
safeguards established in connection with conditions)
shall constitute a class B misdemeanor. Any person
who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with any
of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be
fined not more than $1000 or imprisoned for not more
than 180 days, or both, for each violation, and in
addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the
case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of
Tooele from taking such other lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 2009-08, 09-16-09); (Ord. 89-23, 11-15-89);
(Ord. 89-21, 09-27-89)
(December 3, 2009) 4-54.4
(PAGE 4-54.4 RESERVED)

(December 3, 2009) 4-54.4
4-55 (December 6, 2019)
CHAPTER 14. ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS
BUILDINGS
4-14-1. "Un iform Code for the
Ab a temen t of Da n g er o us
Buildings" Adopted.
4-14-2. Definitions.
4-14-3. Repealed.
4-14-4. Appeals.
4-14-5. Appeal Procedures.
4-14-6. Repair and Demolition Fund. (Repealed.)
4-14-7. Contest. (Repealed.)
4-14-8. Conditional Permit to Secure.
4-14-9. Permit Expiration or Termination.
4-14-10. Effect of Recording.
4-14-11. Permit Appeal.
4-14-12. Method of Securing Buildings.
4-14-13. Property Maintenance Responsibilities.
4-14-14. Recovery of Fees and Costs.
4-14-1. "Uniform Code for the Abatement of
Dangerous Buildings" Adopted.
(1) The "Uniform Code for the Abatement of
Dangerous Buildings" (hereinafter "UCADB"), 1997
edition, published by the International Conference of
Building Officials, is hereby adopted as a code of
Tooele City, subject to the amendments and exceptions
thereto set out in this Chapter. Each and all of the
regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of the
UCADB, subject to the amendments and exceptions
thereto as set out in this Chapter, are hereby referred to,
adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully set out
herein.
(2) The purpose of this Chapter is to provide a
just, equitable, and practicable method whereby
buildings or structures which from any cause endanger
the life, limb, health, morals, property, safety, or welfare
of the general public or their occupants, may be
required to be repaired, vacated, and/or demolished.
(3) The remedies declared in this Chapter are
cumulative with and in addition to any other remedy
provided by the uniform codes adopted by the City.
(Ord. 2019-32, 12-04-2019) (Ord. 1998-42, 11-18-
1998) (Ord. 1995-06, 05-19-1995) (Ord. 1994-20, 05-
12-1994)
4-14-2. Definitions.
As used in the UCADB:
(1) "Legislative body" means the Tooele City
Council unless specifically stated otherwise.
(2) "Director of public works" means the
Building Official.
(3) "Clerk of this jurisdiction" means the City
Recorder.
(4) "Treasurer of this jurisdiction" means the City
Treasurer.
(Ord. 2019-32, 12-04-2019) (Ord. 1994-20, 05-12-
1994)
4-14-3. Repealed. (Ord. 1998-42, 11-18-1998).
(Ord. 1994-20, 05-12-1994)
4-14-4. Appeals.
All references in the UCADB to the “board of
appeals” shall be amended to reference the
Administrative Hearing Officer under Chapter 1-28 of
this Code. (Ord. 2019-32, 12-04-2019) (Ord. 1995-06,
05-19-1995) (Ord. 1994-20, 05-12-1994)
4-14-5. Appeal Procedures.
Procedures for the conduct of appeals shall be
those set forth in Chapter 1-28 of this Code.
(Ord. 2019-32, 12-04-2019) (Ord. 1995-06, 05-19-
1995) (Ord. 1994-20, 05-12-1994)
4-14-6. Repair and Demolition Fund. (Repealed.)
(Ord. 2019-32, 12-04-2019) (Ord. 1995-06, 05-19-
1995) (Ord. 1994-20, 05-12-1994)
4-14-7. Contest. (Repealed.)
(Ord. 2019-32, 12-04-2019) (Ord. 1995-06, 05-19-
1995) (Ord. 1994-20, 05-12-1994)
4-14-8. Conditional Permit to Secure.
(1) An application for a conditional permit to
secure a building for temporary nonoccupancy may be
made by the owner of the building who has received
from the building official a notice of deficiencies and
order to repair or demolish pursuant to the UCADB.
The application must be made within 30 days of service
of the notice and order and must be accompanied with a
declaration of intent concerning the plans, use, and
anticipated disposition of the building, together with a
specific date for the commencement of the work to be
performed under the permit, as well as the permit fee.
The issuance by the building official of a conditional
permit to secure shall act as a temporary stay of the
notice and order until the permit expires or is terminated
or cancelled.
(2) Unless provided otherwise, securing
authorized under a conditional permit to secure shall be
commenced within seven days of its issuance. The
permit will expire if the work is not completed within
15 days of its issuance.
(Ord. 2019-32, 12-04-2019) (Ord. 1994-20, 05-12-
1994)
4-14-9. Permit Expiration or Termination.
(1) Failure of the owner to pay required permit
fees, obtain a permit, commence or complete work as
ordered, or to correct securing deficiencies as required
in this Chapter will result in the termination and
cancellation of the conditional permit to secure. Notice
of the expiration or termination shall be delivered
personally or by certified mail and shall be effective
five days thereafter unless any deficiencies are corrected
and the building official reinstates this permit. The
permit is not transferable and will terminate upon the
4-56 (December 6, 2019)
owner's transfer of the property.
(2) If a conditional permit to secure expires or
terminates, the preexisting notice and order will be
automatically reinstated. The building official may
proceed for abatement of a building by repair,
demolition, or securing of the building, with the
abatement costs together with any unpaid permit fees to
be charged to the owner or levied against the property
pursuant to the UCADB.
(Ord. 2019-32, 12-04-2019) (Ord. 1994-20, 05-12-
1994)
4-14-10. Effect of Recording.
The action of the building official in ordering the
approval or denial of a conditional permit to secure
shall be recorded against the property in the Tooele
County recorder's office and shall constitute notice to
the public, including future bona fide purchasers, that
the building and property violate code requirements and
are the subject of an outstanding notice and order for
noncompliance which has temporarily been stayed
pursuant to a nontransferable conditional permit to
secure. A notice of expiration or cancellation shall also
be recorded after expiration becomes final indicating
the stay is vacated and the order is reinstated. Such
findings shall specify that the permit is nontransferable
and shall terminate upon any transfer of the owner's
interest in the property.
(Ord. 2019-32, 12-04-2019) (Ord. 1994-20, 05-12-
1994)
4-14-11. Permit Appeal.
(1) Any aggrieved property owner or other
interested party may appeal the building official's
decision regarding a conditional permit by filing an
appeal to the Administrative Hearing Officer pursuant
to Chapter 1-28 of this Code within 10 days of the
decision being appealed.
(2) Any party which fails to appeal as provided
herein shall be deemed to have waived such appeal
right.
(Ord. 2019-32, 12-04-2019) (Ord. 1994-20, 05-12-
1994)
4-14-12. Method of Securing Buildings.
All buildings to be temporarily secured shall be
boarded as follows:
(1) All openings in the structure on the ground
floor or easily accessible from the ground floor shall be
secured either by erecting a single one-half-inch-thick
layer of plywood sheathing covering over all exterior
openings, overlapping the opening on every edge by no
more than three inches, anchored along the edges by
eight-penny or larger common nails or equivalent
screws spaced no more than every six inches.
(2) Alternately, the openings may be secured by
conventional wood-frame construction. The frames
shall use wood studs of a size not less than two inches
by four inches placed not more than 24 inches apart on
center. The frame stud shall have the four-inch sides or
the wide dimension perpendicular to the face of the
wall. Each side of the frame shall be covered with
plywood sheathing of at least one-half inch thickness or
equivalent lumber nailed over the opening by using
eight-penny common nails or equivalent screws spaced
no more than every six inches on the outside edges and
no more than every twelve inches along intermediate
stud supports.
(3) All coverings shall be painted the same color
as the building or its trim. Whole glass areas above
ground floor are acceptable so long as they remain
intact, but if broken, they must be covered as provided
in Subsections (1) or (2). Exterior doors shall be
secured by a strong non-glass door adequately locked to
preclude entry of unauthorized persons, or shall be
covered as an opening described in Subsections (1) or
(2).
(Ord. 2019-32, 12-04-2019) (Ord. 1994-20, 05-12-
1994)
4-14-13. Property Maintenance Responsibilities.
(1) Buildings and property under the purview of
the UCADB shall be properly maintained and secured
by their owner, who shall keep the property free from
debris, litter, and weeds.
(2) The building official will cause a bimonthly
inspection to insure such buildings remain properly
secured and maintained. If the owner fails to timely
obtain a conditional permit to secure, or comply to with
any terms hereof, the owner shall receive a warning by
telephone and also, if possible, a written confirmation of
the warning from the building official. The owner shall
commence action to correct the deficiency within five
days of such notice or other appropriate time as
designated by the building official, or the permit shall
be cancelled by the building official.
(Ord. 2019-32, 12-04-2019) (Ord. 1994-20, 05-12-
1994)
4-14-14. Recover of Fees and Costs.
(1) Chapter 9 of the UDBAC shall be replaced
with this Section.
(2) Consistent with the provisions and procedures
of U.C.A. 10-11-3 and -4, as amended, and after any
established deadlines for the payment of abatementrelated
fees and costs have passed, the officer may file
and record with the Tooele County Recorder and
Treasurer a building abatement tax lien and an itemized
statement of all such fees and costs.
(3) Upon full payment of all amounts owing
under a building abatement tax lien, or upon the entry of
an order from the Administrative Hearing Office or a
Utah Court declaring the lien amount satisfied, the City
shall file and record an appropriate notice of satisfaction
and/or release of lien.
(4) The City may pursue all lawful means to
recover all penalties, fees, and costs imposed or
incurred pursuant to this Chapter.
(Ord. 2019-32, 12-04-2019)
4-57 (December 6, 2019)
(Page 4-57 Reserved)
(November 20, 2019)
4-58
Chapter 15. Development Impact Fees
4-15-1 Definitions.
4-15-2 Assessment of Impact Fees.
4-15-3 Exemption from Impact Fees.
4-15-4 Credits.
4-15-5 Waiver.
4-15-6 Appeals.
4-15-7 Establishment of Impact Fees Accounts.
4-15-8 Refunds.
4-15-9 Use of Funds.
4-15-10 Independent Fee Calculations.
4-15-1 Definitions.
(1) Except as expressly provided in this Section,
words and phrases used in this Chapter shall have the
meaning given to them in U.C.A. 11-36a-102, as amended
(the “Impact Fees Act”).
(2) “Eligible affordable housing units” means
(a) Single-family and two-family dwellings that
are:
(i) constructed, rented, and sold in
partnership with the Tooele County Housing Authority
(the “Authority”); and,
(ii) deed restricted, on a form approved by
the City Attorney, in such a manner that:
(A) dwellings are available for purchase
or rent-to-own only by those purchasers or tenants whose
combined household annual gross income per dwelling is
verified by an Authority to be 60% or less of the Tooele
County area median income;
(B) dwellings are rent-restricted
according to a formula established by an Authority based
in part on numbers of dwelling unit bedrooms and on
tenant incomes;
(C) dwellings are subject to a
compliance period of at least 15 years as part of an
extended use period of at least 50 years;
(D) dwellings are maintained in good
condition;
(E) dwellings are fully insured for
hazards and liability;
(F) requires compliance with the terms
and covenants of the deed restriction; and,
(G) requires compliance with Section
42 of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended.
(b) Multi-family dwellings that:
(i) are constructed and rented in
partnership with an Authority; and,
(ii) are deed restricted, on a form approved
by the City Attorney, in such a manner that:
(A) dwellings are available for rent only
by tenants whose combined household annual gross
income per unit is verified by the Authority to be 60% or
less of the Tooele County area median income; and,
(B) dwellings comply with the
requirements of subsection (2)(a)(ii)(B)-(G), above.
3. “Eligible public facility” means a structure that is
owned or leased by the state of Utah, the Tooele County
school district, a charter school, Tooele County, Tooele
City, the Tooele City municipal building authority, the
Tooele City redevelopment agency, or other similar entity
conducting development activity with a broad public
purpose.
(Ord. 2019-30, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2012-02, 03-07-2012)
(Ord. 2010-04, 02-17-2010) (Ord. 2001-36, 01-23-2001)
(Ord. 2001-35, 01-23-2001) (Ord. 1996-15, 06-05-1996)
4-15-2 Assessment of Impact Fees.
(1) Assessment of Impact Fees.
(a) Culinary Water Impact Fee.
(i) The City shall collect a culinary water
impact fee from any applicant seeking a building permit,
in the amount of $4,609 per Equivalent Residential
Connection (ERC), as defined in the Culinary Water
System Master Plan (January 2012) (impact fee facilities
plan).
(ii) The service area for purposes of the
culinary water impact fee shall be the entire area within
the corporate boundary of Tooele City Corporation.
(iii) Non-Standard Impact Fee. The City
reserves the right under the Impact Fees Act to assess an
adjusted impact fee that more closely matches the true
impact that a building or land use will have upon the
City’s culinary water system. This adjustment may result
in a higher than normal impact fee if the City determines
that a particular user may create a greater impact than
what is standard for its land use. The formula for
determining a non-standard culinary water impact fee is
contained in the Culinary Water Impact Fee Analysis
(February 2012).
(b) Sanitary Sewer Impact Fee.
(i) The City shall collect a sanitary sewer
impact fee from any applicant seeking a building permit,
as follows:
(A) Residential: the base fee shall be
$2,290 per Equivalent Residential Unit (ERU), as defined
in the documents comprising the 2010 Waste Water
Capital Facilities Plan (impact fee facilities plan).
(B) Non-residential: as determined
under Figure 4.5 (Impact Fee ERU Multipliers) of the
2010 Sewer Treatment and Collections Impact Fee
Analysis.
(ii) The service area for purposes of the
sanitary sewer impact fee shall be the entire area within
the corporate boundary of Tooele City Corporation.
(iii) Non-Standard Impact Fee. The City
reserves the right under the Impact Fees Act to assess an
adjusted impact fee that more closely matches the true
(November 20, 2019)
4-59
impact that a building or land use will have upon the
City’s waste water system. This adjustment may result in
a higher than normal impact fee if the City determines that
a particular user may create a greater impact than what is
standard for its land use. The formula for determining a
non-standard sanitary sewer impact fee is contained in
Figure 4.6 (Calculation of Non-Standard Sewer Impact
Fee) of the 2010 Sewer Treatment and Collections Impact
Fee Analysis.
(c) Parks and Recreation Impact Fee.
(i) The City shall collect a parks and
recreation impact fee from any applicant seeking a
building permit for a new dwelling unit, as follows:
(A) Single-Family Residential: $2,168
per unit. For purposes of this Section, Single-Family
Residential includes detached single-family units and
attached single-family units, including townhouses,
condominiums, and duplexes.
(B) Multi-Family Residential: $1,959
per unit. For purposes of this Section, Multi-Family
Residential means apartment buildings with three or more
units per building.
(ii) The service area for purposes of the
park and special purpose recreation facilities impact fee
shall be the entire area within the corporate boundary of
Tooele City Corporation.
(d) Public Safety Impact Fee: Fire.
(i) The City shall collect a public safetyfire
impact fee from any applicant seeking a building
permit for a new building, as follows:
(A) Residential: $200.59 per dwelling
unit.
(B) Non-residential: $104.67 per 1,000
square-feet of building.
(ii) The service area for purposes of the
public safety-fire impact fee shall be the entire area within
the corporate boundary of Tooele City Corporation.
(iii) Non-Standard Impact Fee. The City
reserves the right under the Impact Fees Act to assess an
adjusted impact fee that more closely matches the true
impact that a building or land use will have upon the
City’s public safety fire facilities. This adjustment may
result in a higher than normal impact fee if the City
determines that a particular user may create a greater
impact than what is standard for its land use. The formula
for determining a non-standard public safety-fire impact
fee is contained in the Public Safety Impact Fee Facilities
Plan and Impact Fee Analysis (February 2012).
(e) Public Safety Impact Fee: Police.
(i) The City shall collect a public safetypolice
impact fee from any applicant seeking a building
permit for a new building, as follows:
(A) Residential: $137.29 per dwelling
unit.
(B) Commercial: $120.65 per 1,000
square-feet of building.
(C) Industrial: $9.67 per 1,000 squarefeet
of building.
(ii) The service area for purposes of the
public safety-police impact fee shall be the entire area
within the corporate boundary of Tooele City
Corporation.
(iii) Non-Standard Impact Fee. The City
reserves the right under the Impact Fees Act to assess an
adjusted impact fee that more closely matches the true
impact that a building or land use will have upon the
City’s public safety police facilities. This adjustment may
result in a higher than normal impact fee if the City
determines that a particular user may create a greater
impact than what is standard for its land use. The formula
for determining a non-standard public safety-police
impact fee is contained in the Public Safety Impact Fee
Facilities Plan and Impact Fee Analysis (February 2012).
(2) Collection. Impact fees shall be collected from
the applicant prior to issuing the building permit, using the
impact fee in effect on the date of filing a complete
application for the building permit.
(3) Adjustment of impact fees. Impact fees may be
adjusted at the time the fees are charged, as follows:
(a) to ensure that the impact fees are imposed
fairly;
(b) to respond to
(i) unusual circumstances in specific cases;
or,
(ii) a request for a prompt and
individualized impact fee review for the development
activity of the state or a school district or charter school;
and,
(c) if the Building Official determines that a
user would create a greater than normal impact on any
system improvement.
(4) Existing Buildings.
(a) Where a building alteration or change of use
requires a new building permit or a new occupancy
permit, and the building alteration or change of use is
anticipated to result in increased impacts to City systems
and facilities, the applicant shall pay, as a condition of
permit approval, additional impact fees corresponding to
the increased impacts.
(b) Where a building or use of a building
incorporates technologies or processes designed to
decrease impacts to City systems and facilities, and those
technologies or processes fail or cease to be used, for any
reason or to any degree, the City may assess additional
impact fees corresponding to the increased impacts
resulting from such failure or cessation of use. Such fees
shall be invoiced to the building water account through
the regular monthly city water bill.
(c) Should any developer undertake
development activities such that the ultimate density,
(November 20, 2019)
4-60
intensity, or other impact of the development activity is
not revealed to the City, either through inadvertence,
neglect, a change in plans, or any other cause whatsoever,
and/or the impact fee is not initially charged against all
units or the total density or intensity within the
development, the City shall be entitled to assess an
additional impact fee to the development or other
appropriate person covering the density or intensity for
which an impact fee was not previously paid. Such fees
shall be invoiced to the development water account
through the regular monthly city water bill.
(d) The Building Official shall determine the
extent to which the payment of additional impact fees is
required.
(Ord. 2012-02, 03-07-2012) (Ord. 2010-04, 02-17-2010)
(Ord. 2007-10, 03-21-2007) (Ord. 2001-36, 01-23-2001)
(Ord. 2001-35, 01-23-2001) (Ord. 1999-36, 12-16-1999)
(Ord. 1999-10, 4-21-1999) (Ord. 1996-16, 11-20-1996)
(Ord. 1996-15, 06-05-1996)
4-15-3 Exemptions from Impact Fees.
(1) The following development activities shall be
exempt from the payment of all or a portion of the impact
fees:
(a) Replacement of a primary structure with a
new primary structure of the same use at the same site or
lot when such replacement:
(i) does not result in the construction of an
additional dwelling unit or a change in use; and,
(ii) does not increase the demand for
municipal services or the impact upon system
improvements.
(b) Alterations to, or expansion, enlargement,
remodeling, rehabilitation, or conversion of, an existing
primary structure that does not increase the demand for
municipal services or the impact upon system
improvements.
(2) The Building Official shall determine whether a
particular structure falls within an exemption identified in
this Section or any other section. The Building Official
shall issue a written determination, stating the basis for the
exemption, and which shall be subject to the appeals
procedures set forth herein.
(Ord. 2015-16, June 3, 2015) (Ord. 2012-02, 03-07-2012)
(Ord. 2010-04, 02-17-2010) (Ord. 2001-36, 01-23-2001)
(Ord. 2001-35, 01-23-2001) (Ord. 1996-15, 06-05-1996)
4-15-4 Credits.
(1) A developer may be allowed a credit against
impact fees for any dedication of or improvement to land
or new construction of system improvements provided by
the developer, provided that they are (i) identified in the
applicable capital facilities plan, (ii) offset the need for a
system improvement, and (iii) required by the City as a
condition of approving the development activity.
Otherwise, no credit may be given.
(2) For each request for a credit, unless otherwise
agreed by the City, the fee payer shall retain an appraiser
approved by the Building Official to determine the value
of the land or construction dedicated.
(3) The fee payer shall pay the cost of the appraisal.
(4) After receiving the appraisal, the Building
Official shall provide the applicant with a letter or
certificate setting forth the dollar amount of the credit, the
reason for the credit, where applicable, the legal
description of the land donated, and the legal description
or other adequate description of the project or
development to which the credit may be applied. The
applicant must sign and date a duplicate copy of such
letter or certificate indicating the applicant’s agreement to
the terms of the letter or certificate, and return such signed
document to the Building Official before the impact fee
credit will be awarded. The failure of the applicant to
sign, date, and return such document within 30 days shall
nullify the credit.
(5) Any claim for a credit must be made not later
than the time of application for building permit. Any
claim not so made shall be deemed waived.
(6) Determinations made by the Building Official
pursuant to this section shall be subject to the appeals
procedure set forth herein.
(Ord. 2010-04, 02-17-2010) (Ord. 2001-36, 01-23-2001)
(Ord. 2001-35, 01-23-2001) (Ord. 1996-15, 06-05-1996)
4-15-5 Waiver.
(1) The City Council may, but is not required to,
waive the imposition of impact fees for:
(a) Construction of eligible affordable housing
units (up to $10,000 per dwelling unit); or,
(b) Construction of an eligible public facility.
(2) Upon allowing a full or partial waiver under this
Section for an eligible public facility, the City Council
shall establish one or more sources of funds other than
impact fees to pay the amount of impact fees waived for
that facility.
(Ord. 2019-30, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2010-04, 02-17-2010)
(Ord. 2001-36, 01-23-2001) (Ord. 2001-35, 01-23-2001)
(Ord. 96-15, 06-05-96)
4-15-6 Appeals.
(1) A fee payer may appeal the impact fees imposed
or other determinations which the Building Official is
authorized to make pursuant to this Chapter. However, no
appeal shall be permitted unless and until the impact fees
at issue have been paid.
(2) Appeals shall be taken within the time constraints
identified in U.C.A. Section 11-36a-702, as amended.
Appellants shall specify the grounds for the appeal, and
deposit the necessary appeal fee, which is set forth in the
Tooele City Fee Schedule for appeals of land use
decisions.
(3) Appeals shall be filed with the City Recorder.
The City Recorder shall fix a time for the hearing of the
appeal and give notice to the parties in interest. At the
(November 20, 2019)
4-61
hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or
attorney.
(4) The City Council, or such other body as the City
Council shall designate, shall make a decision within 30
days after the appeal is filed. The City Council shall make
findings of fact regarding the applicability of the impact
fees to a given development activity. The decision of the
City Council shall be final, and may be appealed to the
Third Judicial District Court for Tooele County.
(5) Certain impact fee payers may request mediation
or arbitration under the state Impact Fees Act, U.C.A. 11-
36-101 et. seq., as amended.
(Ord. 2010-04, 02-17-2010) (Ord. 2001-36, 01-23-2001)
(Ord. 2001-35, 01-23-2001) (Ord. 1996-15, 06-05-1996)
4-15-7 Establishment of Impact Fees Accounts.
(1) The City will establish a separate interest-bearing
ledger account for the Impact Fees collected pursuant to
this Ordinance and will conform to the accounting
requirements provided in the Impact Fees Act. All
interest earned on the collection of Impact Fees shall
accrue to the benefit of the segregated account. Impact
Fees collected prior to the effective date of this Ordinance
need not meet the requirements of this Section.
(2) At the end of each fiscal year, the City shall
prepare a report on each fund or account generally
showing the source and amount of all monies collected,
earned, and received by the fund or account and each
expenditure from the fund or account.
(3) The City may expend Impact Fees only for
system improvements that are (i) public facilities
identified in the City’s capital facilities plans, and (ii) of
the specific public facility type for which the fee was
collected. Impact fees will be expended on a first-in firstout
basis.
(4) Impact Fees collected pursuant to the
requirements of this Ordinance are to be expended,
dedicated, or encumbered for a permissible use within six
(6) years of the receipt of those funds by the City, except
as provided in Subsection (5).
(5) The City may hold previously dedicated or
unencumbered fees for longer than six (6) years if it
identifies in writing (i) an extraordinary and compelling
reason why the fees should be held longer than six years,
and (ii) an absolute date by which the fees will be
expended.
(Ord. 2010-04, 02-17-2010) (Ord. 2001-36, 01-23-2001)
(Ord. 2001-35, 01-23-2001) (Ord. 1996-15, 06-05-1996)
4-15-8 Refunds.
(1) If the City fails to disburse, expend, or encumber
the impact fees within 6 years of when the fees were paid,
or such other time periods as justified by an extraordinary
or compelling reason, the person who paid the impact fees
may request a refund of such fees. In determining whether
impact fees have been disbursed, expended, or
encumbered, such fees shall be considered disbursed,
expended, or encumbered on a first-in, first-out basis.
(2) Persons seeking a refund of impact fees must
submit a written request for a refund of the fees to the
Building Official within 120 days of the date that the right
to claim the refund arises.
(3) Any impact fees for which no application for a
refund has been made within this 120 day period shall be
retained by the City and expended on the type of public
facilities for which they were collected.
(4) Refunds of impact fees under this section shall
include any interest earned on the impact fees.
(5) When the City seeks to terminate any or all
components of an impact fee program, any funds not
disbursed, expended, or encumbered from any terminated
component or components, including interest earned shall
be refunded pursuant to this section. Upon the finding
that any or all fee requirements are to be terminated, the
City shall place notice of such termination, and the
availability of refunds, in a newspaper of general
circulation at least 2 times. All funds available for refund
shall be retained for a period of 120 days. At the end of
the 120 day period, any remaining funds shall be retained
by the City, but must be expended on the type of public
facilities for which they were collected.
(6) The City shall refund to the current owner of
property for which impact fees have been paid all impact
fees paid, including interest earned on the impact fees
attributable to the particular development activity, within
1 year of the date that a right to claim the refund arises, if
(i) the development activity for which the impact fees
were imposed did not occur, (ii) no impact resulted, (iii)
the impact fees have not been spent or encumbered, and
(iv) the owner makes written request for a refund within
120 days of the expiration or abandonment of the permit
for development activity.
(Ord. 2010-04, 02-17-2010) (Ord. 2001-36, 01-23-2001)
(Ord. 2001-35, 01-23-2001) (Ord. 1996-15, 06-05-1996)
4-15-9 Use of Funds.
(1) Pursuant to this Chapter, impact fees:
(a) shall be used for public facilities that
reasonably benefit the new development;
(b) shall not be imposed to make up for
deficiencies in public facilities serving existing
developments; and,
(c) shall not be used for maintenance or
operation of public facilities.
(2) Impact fees may be used to recoup costs of
designing, constructing, and acquiring public facilities in
anticipation of new growth and development to the extent
that the development activity will be served by the
previously-constructed improvements or the previouslyincurred
costs. Impact fees may used for environmental
mitigation.
(3) In the event that bonds or similar debt
instruments are or have been issued for the advanced
provision of public facilities for which impact fees may be
(November 20, 2019)
4-62
expended, impact fees may be used to pay debt service on
such bonds, or similar debt instruments, to the extent that
the facilities or improvements provided are consistent with
the requirements of this section and are used to serve the
development activity.
(Ord. 2010-04, 02-17-2010) (Ord. 2001-36, 01-23-2001)
(Ord. 2001-35, 01-23-2001) (Ord. 1996-15, 06-05-1996)
4-15-10 Independent Fee Calculations.
(1) If a fee payer believes that a fee should be
charged, different than the impact fees determined
according to this Chapter, then the fee payer may prepare
and submit to the Building Official an independent fee
calculation for the impact fees associated with the
development activity for which a Building Permit is
sought. The documentation submitted shall contain
studies and data showing the basis upon which the
independent fee calculation was made. The Building
Official is not required to accept any documentation
which the Building Official reasonably deems to be
inaccurate, unsubstantiated, or unreliable and may require
the fee payer to submit additional or different
documentation prior to the Building Official's
consideration of an independent fee calculation.
(2) Any fee payer submitting an independent fee
calculation shall pay an administrative processing fee, per
calculation, of $100.
(3) Based on the information within the Building
Official's possession, the Building Official may
recommend, and the Mayor is authorized to adjust, the
impact fee to the specific characteristics of the
development activity, and according to principles of
fairness. Such adjustment shall be preceded by written
findings justifying the fee.
(4) Determinations made by the Building Official
pursuant to this section may be appealed subject to the
procedures set forth herein.
(Ord. 2010-04, 02-17-2010) (Ord. 2001-36, 01-23-2001)
(Ord. 2001-35, 01-23-2001) (Ord. 1996-15, 06-05-1996)
(March 13, 1997) 4-62
CHAPTER 16. UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE
CODE.
4-16-1. Uniform Administrative Code adopted.
The "Uniform Administrative Code," 1994 Edition,
copyrighted by the International Conference of Building
Officials, is hereby adopted by reference in its entirety,
save and except such portions as are repealed, modified,
or amended by this Tooele City Code. (Ord. 95-07, 05-19-
95); (Ord. 94-35, 05-24-94); (Ord. 94-45, 08-09-94)
4-16-2. Penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any
provision of the Uniform Administrative Code shall be
deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor and shall be
subject to a fine under Section 76-3-301, Utah Code
Annotated, or by imprisonment in the Tooele county Jail
for a period not exceeding 90 days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment." (Ord. 94-35, 05-24-94); (Ord. 94-
45, 08-09-94)
(April 20, 2020)
CHAPTER 17. APWA MANUAL OF
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND MANUAL
OF STANDARD PLANS ADOPTED
4-17-1. APWA Manual of Standard Specifications
and Manual of Standard Plans Adopted.
4-17-2. Construction of Public Improvements.
4-17-3. Enforcement.
4-17-4. Civil Penalties.
4-17-5. Appeals.
4-17-1. APWA Manual of Standard Specifications
and Manual of Standard Plans adopted.
Tooele City recognizes that the Utah City
Engineers Association endorses adoption of the
American Public Works Association Manual of
Standard Specifications and Manual of Standard Plans
(hereinafter “APWA Standards”), as amended and/or
revised. To the extent that Tooele City is not
preempted by the law of the State of Utah from
adopting the APWA Standards as an ordinance of
Tooele City, its most current edition is so adopted.
Additionally, Tooele City has adopted separate or
amended standards and specifications for specific
aspects of the APWA Standards. In those instances,
the Tooele City adopted amendments shall govern.
The APWA Standards and the Tooele City adopted
amendments shall collectively constitute the “City
Standards”.
Nothing in this ordinance shall preclude adoption
and enforcement of policies that are consistent with
the stated purposes of the APWA Standards.
(Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-2015) (Ord. 2003-06, 02-05-03)
(Ord. 1998-08, 03-04-1998) (Ord. 1995-11, 06-03-
1995)
4-17-2. Construction of Public Improvements.
Public improvements shall be constructed to City
Standards and the standards and specifications
established in an Administrative Policy on Public
Improvement Standards and Specifications. Where
the Administrative Policy does not contain a particular
standard or specification, or a standard or specification
is unclear, the public improvements shall be
constructed according to the APWA Standards. The
Administrative Policy shall allow for variations to the
established standards and specification to
accommodate unusual or unforeseen circumstances.
“Public improvements” shall have the meaning given
in Section 7-1-5 of this Code, and shall be interpreted
inclusively, not exclusively.
(Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-2015)
4-17-3. Enforcement.
The City Standards shall be enforced by the
Tooele City Engineer, or designee. When there are
practical difficulties involved in carrying out the
provisions of the City Standards, the City Engineer or
designee may grant modifications for individual cases.
The City Engineer or designee must first find that a
special individual reason makes the strict letter of the
City Standards impractical and that the modification is
in conformance with the intent and purpose of the City
Standards. The details of any action granting
modifications shall be recorded in the files of the City
Engineer.
(Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-2015) (Ord. 1998-08, 03-04-
1998) (Ord. 1995-11, 06-03-1995)
4-17-4. Civil Penalties.
(1) Any violation of this Chapter shall be
punishable by a civil penalty of $100.
(2) In addition to the civil penalty, the violator
shall be required to correct the violation at the
violator’s cost.
(3) Each day of violation shall be a separate
violation subject to an additional civil penalty.
(Ord. 2020-12, 04-15-2020) (Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-
2015) (Ord. 1998-08, 03-04-1998) (Ord. 1995-11, 06-
03-1995)
4-17-5. Appeals.
A person subject to a civil penalty for violation of
this Chapter may appeal the penalty within 10 calendar
days as provided in Chapter 1-28 (Administrative
Hearing Officer).
(Ord. 2020-12, 04-15-2020)
(November 20, 2019) 5-1
TITLE 5. BUSINESS REGULATION TITLE OF
TOOELE CITY
Chapter 1. General Provisions.
Chapter 2. Auctions and Auctioneers.
Chapter 3. Closing Sale.
Chapter 4. Christmas Tree Sales.
Chapter 5. Repealed. (Ord. 2012-31, 12-05-2012).
Chapter 6. Home Occupations.
Chapter 7. Repealed. (Ord. 2007-17, 06-20-2007).
Chapter 7a. Agricultural Vendors; Itenerant or
Transient Merchants; Solicitors.
Chapter 8. Repealed. (Ord. 2012-28, 12-05-2012).
Chapter 9. Repealed. (Ord. 2012-29, 12-05-2012).
Chapter 10. Repealed.
Chapter 11. Private Police or Detective.
Chapter 12. Repealed. (Ord. 2012-30, 12-05-2012).
Chapter 13. Repealed. (Ord. 94-04, 02-15-1994).
Chapter 14. Repealed. (Ord. 94-04, 02-15-1994).
Chapter 15. Secondhand and Junk Dealers.
Chapter 16. Park Concessions.
Chapter 17. Uniform Local Sales and
Use Tax Ordinance.
Chapter 18. Utility License Tax.
Chapter 18a. Municipal Energy and Use Tax.
Chapter18b. Repealed. (Ord. 2004-08, 06-16-2004).
Chapter 18c. Telecommunication Service Providers
Tax.
Chapter 19. Franchise to Mounta in Sta tes
Telephone and Telegraph Company.
Chapter 20. Beer Licenses.
Chapter 21. Towing Companies.
Chapter 22. Ice Cream Trucks.
Chapter 23. Sexually Oriented Businesses.
Chapter 24. Telecommunications Rights-of-Way.
Chapter 25. Transient Room Tax.
Chapter 26. Mobile Food Businesses.
Chapter 27. Wireless Communication Services.
CHAPTER 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
5-1-1. Purpose.
5-1-2. Definitions.
5-1-3. Unlawful to operate without license.
Repealed.
5-1-4. Responsibility for obtaining license.
5-1-5. Separate license required for each branch.
5-1-6. Duty to display license.
5-1-7. Exemptions.
5-1-8. Inspec tions for City code
c o m p l i a n ce - No t i c e o f
noncompliance - License revocation
- Complaints.
5-1-9. Preparation, issuance, and listing of
licenses.
5-1-10. License fees.
5-1-11. License additional to all regulatory licenses.
5-1-12. Revenue Tax on business in
competition with public utilities.
Repealed.
5-1-13. Revenue Measure. Repealed.
5-1-14. Fee payments and prorations.
5-1-15. Renewal billing procedure.
5-1-16. Fee Adjustment to avoid burdening
interstate commerce. Repealed.
5-1-17. Exemption of insurance companies.
Repealed.
5-1-18. Time periods.
5-1-19. Mistakes in fee calculations.
5-1-20. Deviations prohibited.
5-1-21. Fee for duplicate license.
5-1-22. Refunds.
5-1-23. License transfers.
5-1-24. Applications for special licenses.
5-1-25. Particular occupations. Repealed.
5-1-26. Bonding. Repealed.
5-1-27. Designation of agent for service of process.
Repealed.
5-1-28. Revocation.
5-1-29. Appeal of preliminary revocation
determination.
5-1-30. Doing business after license denied
or revoked. Repealed.
5-1-31. Licensing after denial or revocation.
Repealed.
5-1-32. Powers and duties of police.
5-1-33. Violations and penalties.
5-1-34. Effect of conviction - Prosecution not
barred.
5-1-35. Separability clause.
5-1-1. Purpose.
Pursuant to powers granted by the State of Utah as
set forth in various provisions of the Utah Code
Annotated, 1953, as amended, the City of Tooele, Utah,
intends by this Title (1) to regulate and license
businesses and occupations within its corporate limits,
(2) to protect the safety and welfare of business patrons,
owners, and employees, and (3) to maintain a current
index of licensed businesses and occupations for
economic development and other public purposes.
(Ord. 2009-16, 03-17-2010) (Ord. 1998-09, 05-06-
1998) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-1983)
5-1-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Title, the following words
(November 20, 2019) 5-2
and phrases shall have the meaning herein prescribed:
Business License Specialist: an employee of the
Community Development Department tasked with
business license activities under this Title.
City: The municipality of the City of Tooele, Utah.
Contractor: Any person who, for a fixed sum,
price, fee percentage or other compensation, other than
wages, undertakes with another to improve any
building, highway, road, improvement of any kind,
other than to personalty or any part thereof; provided,
that the term "contractor" as used in this Title shall
include any one who builds more than one (1) structure
on his own property during any one (1) year for the
purpose of sale and shall include subcontractor, but
shall not include anyone who merely furnished materials
or supplies without fabricating the same into, or
consuming the same in the performance of the work of
the contractor as herein defined.
Department: the Community Development
Department.
Director: the Director of the Community
Development Department.
Division: Business license division of the
Community Development Departmenr.
Employee: The operator, owner, or manager of a
place of business; any person or person employed by an
operator, owner, or manager in the operation of a place
of business, whether part-time or full-time.
Engage in business or conduct business: Includes,
but is not limited to, the sale of tangible personal
property at retail or wholesale, the manufacturing of
goods or property, and the rendering of services to
others for a consideration by persons engaged in any
trade, craft, business, or occupation, including doctors,
lawyers, accountants, dentists, etc., where a place of
business is located within Tooele City. The act of
employees rendering services to employers shall not be
included in such terms unless otherwise specifically
prescribed.
License and Active License: Certificate or
document issued by the City evidencing permission or
authority to its named holder to engage in, conduct, and
carry on a particular business or to pursue a particular
occupation within the City.
Licensee: The person to whom a license has been
issued pursuant to the provisions of this Title.
Organized event: The Tooele Arts Festival, the
Festival of the Old West, and similar such events.
Permit: A written license or instrument issued by
the City authorizing and empowering the grantee
thereof to some act not forbidden by law but not
allowable without such authority.
Person: Any individual or natural person, receiver,
assignee, trustee in bankruptcy, trust, firm, partnership,
joint venture, corporation, club, company, business
trust, association, society or other group of individuals
acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal,
nonprofit or otherwise.
Place of business: A location maintained or
operated by a licensee within the City from which the
licensee engages in business.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2017-08, 02-15-
2017) (Ord. 2017-02, 02-01-2017) (Ord. 2012-27, 12-
05-2012) (Ord. 2009-16, 03-17-2010) (Ord. 1998-09,
05-06-1998) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-1983)
5-1-3. Unlawful to operate without license.
Repealed.
(Ord. 2009-16, 03-17-2010)
5-1-4. Responsibility for obtaining license.
(1) It shall be the responsibility of a person
engaging in business within the City to apply for,
obtain, and maintain in full force and effect a valid
license. The application shall be issued by the
Department, and shall contain the following
information: business name, business address, business
mailing address and telephone number, business owner's
name, applicant’s home address and home telephone
number; and one (1) character reference.
(2) Separate licenses shall not be required for
persons who engage in business with others as a
partnership or corporation legally constituted.
(3) For organized events, the organizing or
sponsoring organization shall obtain the license.
Individual businesses participating in the events, with
the authorization of the organizing or sponsoring
organization, shall not be required to obtain individual
business licenses to sell products or otherwise engage in
business at the events. The licensed organization shall
regulate the number and type of businesses pursuant to
the organization’s event policies, consistent with any
Tooele City policies.
(4) All independent contractors engaged in or
conducting business must obtain a business license.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2017-08, 02-15-
2017) (Ord. 2017-02, 02-01-2017) (Ord. 2009-16, 03-
17-2010) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-1983)
5-1-5. Separate license required for each branch.
A separate license must be obtained for each branch
established or separate place of business in which the
business of a licensee is carried on. Each license shall
authorize the person obtaining it to engage in, carry on,
pursue, or conduct only that business described in such
license and only at the location which is indicated
thereon.
(Ord. 2009-16, 03-17-2010) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-
1983)
5-1-6. Duty to display license.
Every licensee licensed pursuant to the provision of
(November 20, 2019) 5-3
this Title shall keep the license displayed and exhibited
while the same is in force in some conspicuous part of
the place of business. Every licensee not having a fixed
place of business shall carry such license with him/her
at all times while carrying on the business for which the
license is issued and shall produce the license for
inspection when requested to do so by any person.
(Ord. 2009-16, 03-17-2010) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-
1983)
5-1-7. Exemptions.
(1) Fee Exemptions. The provisions of this Title
shall not be deemed or construed to require the payment
of a license fee:
(a) by any institution or organization which is
conducted, managed, or carried on wholly for the
benefit of charitable purposes or from which profit is
not derived, directly or indirectly, by any individual,
firm, or for-profit corporation;
(b) for the conducting of any entertainment,
concert, exhibition, or lecture on scientific, historical,
literary, musical, religious, or moral subject, whenever
the receipt from such is to be appropriated to any
church or school or to any religious or charitable
organization within the City;
(c) for the conducting of any entertainment,
dance, fraternal, educational, military, state, county or
municipal organization or association when the receipts
from such are to be appropriated for the purposes and
objects for which such association or organization is
formed and from which profit is not derived, either
directly or indirectly, by any individual, firm or profit
corporation.
(2) License Exemption. The provisions of this
Title shall not be deemed or construed to require a
business license for a business that is operated:
(a) only occasionally; and,
(b) by an individual who is under 18 years of
age.
(3) Where Utah statutes exempt certain businesses
from local business licensing fees, such business shall
not be exempt from the requirement to apply for and
obtain a license.
(Ord. 2017-18, 05-17-2017) (Ord. 2009-16, 03-17-
2010) (Ord. 2002-05, 04-03-2002) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-
07-1983)
5-1-8. Inspections for City code compliance - Notice
of noncompliance - License revocation - Complaints.
(1) New businesses. Prior to the issuance of a
license to engage in a new business, or for an existing
business to conduct business at a new location, the
applicant shall permit inspections to be made of the
prospective place of business by the appropriate
departments of the City or other governmental agency
to ensure compliance with building, fire, health and
other City codes, ordinances, and regulations. No
license shall be granted without inspections and code
compliance.
(2) Existing businesses. Existing places of
business licensed within the City may be inspected
periodically by departments of the City, annually upon
the City’s own initiative or upon the City receiving a
complaint of alleged noncompliance, for compliance
with building, fire, health, and other City codes,
ordinances, and regulations.
(3) Notice of noncompliance. Written notice shall
be given by the Department to a licensee upon the
finding of any code noncompliance, which notice shall
provide for a reasonable period not to exceed sixty (60)
days in which to correct such noncompliance, the failure
of which may result in the revocation of the license by
the Department Director, the license non-renewal, or
other civil and criminal penalties.
(4) Business license renewal. No business license
shall be renewed where a civil, administrative, or
criminal proceeding has made a finding of
noncompliance with City codes, ordinances, or
regulations and all appeal periods have expired. A
license may be reinstated or renewed upon the cure of
the noncompliance, verified by City inspection. The
payment of a business license renewal fee by a
noncompliant business shall not estop the City from
revoking a business license, or refusing to renew a
business license, due to such noncompliance.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2014-07, 06-04-
2014) (Ord. 2009-16, 03-17-2010) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-
07-1983)
5-1-9. Preparation, issuance, and listing of licenses.
The Department shall prepare and issue appropriate
licenses for every person qualifying therefor under the
provision of this Title and shall state in each license the
name and address of the licensed business and the
period of time for which it is issued. All licenses shall
be signed by the Director or the Business Licensing
Specialist. The Department shall maintain a list of all
persons holding licenses and the status of each such
license.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2009-16, 03-17-
2010) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-1983)
5-1-10. License fees.
(1) There is hereby levied upon every person
engaged in business within the City an annual license
fee to be calculated as follows:
(a) Base Fee: $40.00
(b) Additional Fee: $3.00 per employee.
(2) The annual business license fee shall not
exceed $1,000.00.
(Ord. 2009-16, 03-17-2010) (Ord. 2003-31, 12-03-
2003) (Ord. 1998-09, 05-06-1998) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-
(November 20, 2019) 5-4
07-1983)
5-1-11. License additional to all regulatory licenses.
The license fees imposed by this Title shall be in
addition to any and all other taxes or fees imposed by
any other provisions of the Ordinances of the City of
Tooele.
(Ord. 2009-16, 03-17-2010) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-
1983)
5-1-12. Revenue tax on business in competition with
public utilities. Repealed.
(Ord. 2009-16, 03-17-2010)
5-1-13. Revenue Measure. Repealed.
(Ord. 1998-09, 05-06-1998)
5-1-14. Fee payments.
(1) All license fees shall be paid at the Office of
the Department of Finance of the City prior to the
license being issued.
(2) The annual license fees provided in this Title
shall be due and payable to the City at the times
specified, or if not so specified, on the first day of
January of each year
(3) Fees shall not be prorated.
(Ord. 2009-16, 03-17-2010) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-
1983)
5-1-15. Renewal billing procedure.
(1) During December of each year, the
Department shall send a statement to each current
licensee within the City, calling for the computation by
the licensee of a license fee for the next calendar year.
The statement shall notify the licensee that payment of
the license fee is due no later than January 31 of the
new calendar year and that a penalty will be assessed if
the fee is not timely paid.
(2) Any fee remaining unpaid as of February 1
shall have added thereto a penalty in the amount of fifty
percent (50%) of the total amount of the license fee due.
(3) By March 1 of each year, the Department shall
send a final notice to each licensee whose annual
license fee remains unpaid. The notice shall inform the
licensee that if the fee and accrued penalty are not paid
by March 15, the Department will place the license in
an inactive status.
(4) If the fee and penalty remain unpaid after
March 15, the Department shall notify the licensee by
first-class mail that the license is inactive and that the
licensee cannot engage in further business within the
city until the licensee pays the fee and accrued penalty.
(5) The Business License Specialist is empowered
to enter onto business premises during business hours of
operation to make observations regarding the activity of
a business whose business license has been deactivated
or revoked..
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2009-16, 03-17-
2010) (Ord. 2006-20, 09-06-2006) (Ord. 1998-09, 05-
06-1998) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-1983)
5-1-16. Fee adjustment to avoid burdening
interstate commerce. Repealed.
(Ord. 2009-16, 03-17-2010)
5-1-17. Exemption of insurance companies.
Repealed.
(Ord. 2009-16, 03-17-2010)
5-1-18. Time periods.
The licenses shall be effective for the calendar year
in which issued.
(Ord. 2009-16, 03-17-2010) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-
1983)
5-1-19. Mistakes in fee calculations.
In no event shall any mistakes made by an
applicant, a licensee, or the Department in the
calculation of a license fee prevent or prejudice the
collection by the City of amounts actually due from any
person subject to licensing under this Title. Likewise,
no such mistakes shall prevent or prejudice the refund to
licensees of amounts overpaid by the reason of
mistakes.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2009-16, 03-17-
2010) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-1983)
5-1-20. Deviations prohibited.
No greater or lesser amounts shall be charged or
received for licenses and no license shall be issued for
any period of time other than as specifically provided in
this Title.
(Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-1983)
5-1-21. Fee for duplicate license.
The Department shall make a charge of ten dollars
($10.00) for each duplicate license issued to replace any
license issued under the provisions of this Title.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2009-16, 03-17-
2010) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-1983)
5-1-22. Refunds.
No refund shall be made against any fee for a
license issued pursuant to this Title without the written
approval of the Director for good cause.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2009-16, 03-17-
2010) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-1983)
5-1-23. License transfers.
Upon the written consent of the Business Licensing
Specialist endorsed thereon, licenses issued pursuant to
the provisions of this Title may be transferred from one
place of business to another provided that the licensee
remains the same. A transfer fee of ten dollars ($10.00)
(November 20, 2019) 5-5
shall be paid for each such transfer. There shall be no
transfers of licenses from one person to another or from
one business to another.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2009-16, 03-17-
2010) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-1983)
5-1-24. Applications for special licenses.
(1) Applications shall be required and special
licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of other
articles of this Title for the following activities or
occupations, among others:
(a) Activities:
(i) Sale of beer;
(ii) Operation of a public dance;
(iii) Operation of an auction house;
(iv) Operation of amusement devices;
(v) Sale of Christmas trees.
(b) Occupations:
(i) Auctioneer;
(ii) Itinerant or transient merchant;
(iii) Pawnbroker;
(iv) Private police or detective;
(v) Garbage collector;
(vi) Home occupations as defined by
section 7-2-19, Tooele City Code;
(vii) Agricultural vendor;
(viii) Solicitor.
(2) For the activities defined in subsection (1)(a)
above, a regular license to engage in business of the
kind required by this Title will also be required in
addition to the respective above special licenses.
(Ord. 2009-16, 03-17-2010) (Ord. 1987-24, 01-02-
1988) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-1983)
5-1-25. Particular occupations. Repealed.
(Ord. 2009-16, 03-17-2010)
5-1-26. Bonding. Repealed.
(Ord. 2009-16, 03-17-2010)
5-1-27. Designation of agent for service of process.
(1) Each licensed business shall be registered with
the State of Utah Department of Commerce, Division of
Corporations, or successor division.
(2) The owner listed on the business license
application shall be considered the agent for service of
process or notice given pursuant to this Chapter.
(Ord. 2013-07, 04-17-2013) (Ord. 2009-16, 03-17-
2010) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-1983)
5-1-28. Revocation.
(1) The issuance of a license under this Title 5
grants a revocable property interest and privilege to
engage in business. The licensee agrees, as a condition
of license issuance, to operate the licensed business or
activity in conformity with the ordinances of the City
and all other applicable laws.
(2) Any license issued pursuant to the provisions
of this Title may be revoked for one year by the
Director for any of the following reasons:
(a) the violation by the licensee of any
provisions in this Title;
(b) failure to pay when due any license fee,
tax, charge, or penalty provided for in State statute or
City ordinance;
(c) falsification of the license application or
supporting documentation provided with the license
application;
(d) any fraud or misrepresentation of a
material fact in the procurement of the license;
(e) noncompliance with building, fire, or
health codes;
(f) any conduct at the licensed premises
tending to render the licensed premises, business, or
activity a private or public nuisance as defined in this
Code, or a menace to the health, peace, or general
welfare of the City or its inhabitants;
(g) using or possessing for use a false weight
or measure or any other device for falsely determining
or recording any quantity or quality;
(h) selling, or offering or exposing for sale,
commodities that vary from the standard of composition
or quality prescribed by any statute that provides
criminal penalties for:
(i) deviation from standards set by any
statute;
(ii) deviation from standards set by
established commercial usage; or,
(iii) deviation from legal requirements for
truthfulness or disclosure in labeling as required by any
statute;
(i) activities, under the guise of conducting a
business, that are fraudulent, deceptive, or constituting a
violation of City ordinance or other law;
(j) failure of the licensee to retain the legal
qualifications necessary for the license;
(k) violation of the zoning ordinances
governing the licensed business or activity, including
parking ordinance requirements;
(l) conviction of a felony or any crime of
moral turpitude on or related to the licensed business or
activity after the issuance of a license;
(m) refusal to allow City officers or employees
to make inspection of the licensed premises during the
hours of 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. Monday through Friday;
(n) selling, or offering or exposing for sale, to
minors any harmful material, sexually oriented material,
or sexual paraphernalia, as defined in Section 11-1-10
of this Code;
(o) violation of any of the terms or conditions
of a conditional use permit; and,
(p) any violation of City ordinance or other
law relating to the licensed business or activity.
(3) An action or omission constituting grounds for
(November 20, 2019) 5-6
revocation under this Section by an agent, employee,
officer, operator, owner, or patron of the licensee or the
licensed business or activity shall constitute the action
or omission of the licensee.
(4) Notification of the Director’s preliminary
determination to revoke a business license shall be
mailed by the Department by certified U.S. mail to the
licensed business at the mailing address identified on
the business license application.
(5) Notification of business license revocation
shall be mailed by the Department by certified U.S.
mail to the licensed business:
(a) if no timely appeal of the preliminary
revocation determination was filed, at the mailing
address identified on the business license application;
or,
(b) if a timely appeal of the preliminary
revocation determination was filed, and the
determination was sustained by the Administrative
Hearing Officer, at the address identified on the appeal.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2014-01, 01-15-
2014) (Ord. 2013-07, 04-17-2013) (Ord. 2012-13, 04-
18-2012) (Ord. 2009-16, 03-17-2010) (Ord. 1987-24,
01-02-1988) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-1983)
5-1-29. Appeal of preliminary revocation
determination.
Appeals of actions taken or decisions made under
this Chapter shall be to the Administrative Hearing
Officer.
(Ord. 2014-01, 01-15-2014) (Ord. 2013-07, 04-17-
2013) (Ord. 2009-16, 03-17-2010) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-
07-1983)
5-1-30. Doing business after license denied or
revoked. Repealed.
(Ord. 2009-16, 03-17-2010)
5-1-31. Licensing after denial or revocation.
Repealed.
(Ord. 2009-16, 03-17-2010)
5-1-32. Powers and duties of police.
All police officers of the City are hereby appointed
inspectors of licenses and, in addition to their several
duties as police officers, are empowered and required in
the performance of their duties to examine all places to
see that such licenses are in fact valid and that they are
posted in a conspicuous place within the place of
business or displayed as required. Police officers shall
have and exercise the power:
(1) To enter, free of charge, during a business’
regular business hours, any place of business for which
a license is required, and to demand the exhibition of a
current license by any person engaged or employed in
the conduct of such business.
(2) To issue citations and make arrests for the
violation of any provisions of this Title.
(Ord. 2009-16, 03-17-2010) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-
1983)
5-1-33. Violations and penalties.
(1) It shall be a violation of this Chapter for any
person to do any of the following within the City:
(a) engage in business without first procuring
a license;
(b) engage in business when a license for the
business has been revoked, and the revocation appeal
period has expired or an appeal has resulted in the
revocation being affirmed;
(c) engage in business when a license has
become inactive through the non-payment of applicable
license fees and accrued penalties; and,
(d) fail to display the license at the licensed
place of business, or, if there is no fixed place of
business, fail to carry the license while engaging in
business.
(2) Any person violating any of the provisions of
this Title shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor and
shall, upon conviction therefor, be punished by a fine in
a sum not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or
by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days or
by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 2009-16, 03-17-2010) (Ord. 1998-09, 05-06-
1998) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-1983)
5-1-34. Effect of conviction - Prosecution not
barred.
The conviction and punishment of any person for
engaging in business without a license shall not excuse
or exempt such person from the payment of any license
fees due or unpaid at the time of such conviction; and
nothing herein shall prevent a criminal prosecution for
any violation of the provisions of this Title.
(Ord. 2009-16, 03-17-2010) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-
1983)
5-1-35. Separability clause.
If any subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or
portion of this Title, including but not limited to any
exemption, is for any reason held to be invalid or
unconstitutional by the decision of any court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this Title. The City
Council of the City of Tooele hereby declares that it
would have adopted this Title and each subsection,
sentence, clause, phrase, or portion thereof, irrespective
of the fact that any one or more subsections, sentences,
clauses, phrases, or portions thereof be declared invalid
or unconstitutional.
(Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-1983)
(November 20, 2019) 5-7
(Page 5-7 Reserved)
(November 20, 2019) 5-8
CHAPTER 2. AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS
5-2-1. License.
5-2-2. License application.
5-2-3. License fee.
5-2-4. Exemptions.
5-2-5. Bond required. (Repealed)
5-2-6. False bidding - Auctioneer or
officer to be present.
5-2-7. Conduct generally.
5-2-8. Fraud.
5-2-9. Transient auction houses.
5-2-10. Duties of auctioneer relating to
owner - Commission. (Repealed)
5-2-11. Marketing of merchandise - Selling
un-inventoried goods.
5-2-12. Representations as to quality -
Records required.
5-2-13. Transfer of license prohibited.
5-2-14. Violation as misdemeanor.
5-2-1. License.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer to
sell at public auction in the City any merchandise, or to
keep, conduct or operate an auction house or a transient
auction house in the City for the purpose of selling or
offering for sale any inventory of stock or merchandise,
without first obtaining a license in writing approved by
the Department.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2012-32, 12-05-
2012) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-1983)
5-2-2. License application.
Application for a license required by this Chapter
shall contain the following:
(1) The name of the applicant, his residence and
the address of the proposed place of sale;
(2) A statement that neither fraud nor deception of
any kind is contemplated nor will the same be practiced
and that neither the sale, the reasons given therefor, nor
the goods to be sold have been or will thereafter be
fraudulently or falsely advertised or in any way
whatsoever misrepresented as far as the public auction
is concerned;
(3) Detailed statements or representations
proposed to be made or advertised regarding the goods
to be sold;
(4) The length of time for which the license is
desired;
(5) A statement as to whether or not the applicant
has previously engaged in a like or similar business,
designating the place and time where the same was
conducted; and,
(6) A true and correct detailed inventory listing the
articles proposed to be sold by auction and giving any
identifying numbers or marks which may be upon the
articles to be sold, indicating opposite the description of
each article whether the same is new or used, and listing
each of the articles described in said inventory with a
number; provided, however, that no articles need be
listed in the inventory which have a reasonably
anticipated retail value or fifty dollars ($50.00) or less.
(Ord. 2012-32, 12-05-2012) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-
1983)
5-2-3. License fee.
The fee for licenses required by auctioneers
pursuant to this Chapter shall be established in
accordance with the license fees set forth in Section 5-1-
10.
(Ord. 2012-32, 12-05-2012) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-
1983)
5-2-4. Exemptions.
The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to
any auction held for charitable or benevolent purposes,
or as a part of a church, fair, festival or bazaar.
(Ord. 2012-32, 12-05-2012) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-
1983)
5-2-5. Bond required. (Repealed.)
(Ord. 2012-32, 12-05-2012)
5-2-6. False bidding - Auctioneer or officer to be
present.
No person shall act at any sale by auction as a bybidder
or booster to bid in behalf of the auctioneer or
owner, or to run up the price of the article to be sold, or
to make any false bid. The licensee, or if the licensee is
a corporation, then one of its officers, shall remain in
continuous attendance at each auction held to assure
compliance with this Chapter.
(Ord. 2012-32, 12-05-2012) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-
1983)
5-2-7. Conduct generally.
Auctioneers and their assistants are forbidden to
conduct their sales in such a manner as to cause people
to gather in crowds on the sidewalks so as to obstruct
the same; nor shall they use obscene language in crying
their sales, nor make or cause to be made noisy
acclamations such as the ringing of bells, blowing of
whistles or otherwise (though not enumerated here)
through the streets in advertising their sales; and no
bellman or crier, drum, fife, or other musical instrument
or noise-making means of attracting attention of the
passersby, except the customary auctioneer's flags, shall
be employed or suffered to be used at or near any place
of auction whatsoever.
(Ord. 2012-32, 12-05-2012) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-
1983)
(November 20, 2019) 5-9
5-2-8. Fraud.
It shall be unlawful for an auctioneer or his
assistants when selling or offering for sale at public
auction any goods, wares or merchandise under the
provisions of this Chapter, while describing said goods,
wares or merchandise with respect to character, quality,
kind of value or otherwise, to make any fraudulent,
misleading, untruthful or unwarranted statements
tending in any way to mislead bidders, or to substitute
one article for another.
(Ord. 2012-32, 12-05-2012) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-
1983)
5-2-9. Transient auction houses.
(1) Any person or any agent, servant or employee
of any person who shall sell or offer for sale at auction
any goods, wares, merchandise or article of value in or
from any hotel, rooming house, dwelling house,
boardinghouse, store, storeroom, stall, tent, building,
structure, stand or other place indoors or outdoors, and
who shall occupy said place for the purpose of
conducting a temporary business therein, shall be
deemed a transient auction house owner for the
purposes of this Chapter; and the person, or any agent,
servant or employee thereof, so engaged shall not be
relieved from the provisions of this Chapter by reason
of association temporarily with any licensed dealer,
trader, merchant or auctioneer.
(2) Transient auction houses and auction house
owners shall be subject to the following additional
requirements and regulations:
(A) Section 5-7a-2 (License required -
Display) regarding license display;
(B) Section 5-7a-3 (Application for license);
(C) Section 5-7a-4 (Fee) for each owner,
agent, and employee assisting with or participating in
the transient auction house operation in Tooele City;
(D) Section 5-7a-5 (Review of application and
issuance of license);
(E) Section 5-7a-6 (Denial of license and right
of appeal);
(F) Section 5-7a-7 (Photographs and identity
badges) for each owner, agent, and employee assisting
with or participating in the transient auction house
operation in Tooele City;
(G) Section 5-7a-8 (Inspections); and,
(H) Section 5-7a-9 (Deceptive soliciting
practices prohibited).
(Ord. 2012-32, 12-05-2012) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-
1983)
5-2-10. Duties of auctioneer relating to owner -
Commission. (Repealed.)
(Ord. 2012-32, 12-05-2012)
5-2-11. Marketing of merchandise - Selling uninventoried
goods.
Before any sale is made at auction, the licensee
must attach to each article to be sold, having a
reasonably anticipated retail value of fifty dollars
($50.00) or more, a card with the number of the article
endorsed thereon such that the number shall correspond
to the article as it is described in the inventory listed in
the application on file with the Department. No article
having a reasonably anticipated retail value in excess of
fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be sold at said auction unless
the same is described and set forth in the inventory on
file with the Department as required by this Chapter.
Where a sale is held by public auction of the stock-onhand
of any merchant or auction house in accordance
with the provisions of this Chapter, such sale shall not
be fed or replenished.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2012-32, 12-05-
2012) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-1983)
5-2-12. Representations as to quality - records
required.
All sales and all persons participating in sales must
truly and correctly represent at all times to the public
attending such auction the facts with respect to quality
of items for sale. The licensee shall keep a complete
record of all sales in excess of fifty dollars ($50.00)
made at auction, showing the name and address of each
purchaser; a description of each article sold, including
the number thereof, which shall correspond with the
numbers shown upon the inventory on file with the
Department; and the date of each such sale. The record
shall at times be open to inspection by the Department.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2012-32, 12-05-
2012) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-1983)
5-2-13. Transfer of license prohibited.
The license granted under the provisions of this
Chapter shall not be transferable nor shall the same be
loaned or used by any person other than the one who
has been licensed.
Licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter may be
revoked by the City pursuant to Sections 5-1-28 and -
29. Upon revocation of the license, the licensee shall
cease to operate thereunder.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2012-32, 12-05-
2012) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-1983)
5-2-14. Violation as misdemeanor.
Violation of the provisions of this Chapter is a
Misdemeanor punishable as provided in Section 5-1-33.
(Ord. 2012-32, 12-05-2012) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-
1983)
5-10 (November 20, 2019)
CHAPTER 3. CLOSING SALE
5-3-1. Definitions.
5-3-2. License required. (Repealed)
5-3-3. Fee. (Repealed)
5-3-4. Application. (Repealed)
5-3-5. Year in business required prior to
issuance of license - Exception.
(Repealed)
5-3-6. Issuance of license and term. (Repealed)
5-3-7. Renewals - Term and fee. (Repealed)
5-3-8. Display of license. (Repealed)
5-3-9. Revocation of license. (Repealed)
5-3-10. Rules and regulations. (Repealed)
5-3-11. Mingling of goods prohibited. (Repealed)
5-3-12. Each sale a separate offense. (Repealed)
5-3-13. Resumption of business prohibited.
(Repealed)
5-3-14. Records to be kept. (Repealed)
5-3-15. Exemptions to chapter. (Repealed)
5-3-16. Compliance with chapter required.
(Repealed)
5-3-17. Notice of Sale.
5-3-18. Limitations.
5-3-19. Penalty.
5-3-1. Definitions.
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall
have the meanings herein stated:
(1) Sale. "Sale" shall mean:
(a) Any sale of, or any offer to sell to the
public or any group thereof, goods, wares or
merchandise in order, in transit or in stock, in
connection with a declared purpose as set forth by
advertising that such sale is anticipatory to or for the
purpose of termination, liquidation, revision, windup,
anticipatory removal, dissolution or abandonment of the
business or that portion of the business conducted at any
location; and,
(b) All sales advertised in any manner
calculated to convey to the public the belief that upon
the disposal of the goods to be placed on sale, the
business or that portion thereof being conducted at any
location will cease, be removed, interrupted,
discontinued or changed; and,
(c) All sales advertised to be "Adjustor's
Sale", "Assignee's Sale", "Administrator's Sale",
"Closing Sale", "Creditor's Sale", "End Sale", "Forced
Out of Business Sale", "Going Out of Business Sale",
"Insurance Salvage Sale", "Last Days Sale", "Lease
Expires Sale", "Liquidation Sale", "Removal Sale",
"Reorganization Sale", "Quitting Business Sale", "We
Quit Sale", "Wholesale Closing Out Sale", "Fixtures
Sale", or advertised by any other expression or
characterization or phrase of like or similar language
which would reasonably convey to the public that the
sale is being conducted as a result of such occurrences
as enumerated above, which are not intended to be all
inclusive but refer to type or class of sale.
(2) Publ i sh, Pub l i shing, Advertisement ,
Advertising. "Publish, publishing, advertisement,
advertising", shall mean any and all means of conveying
to the public notice of sale or notice of intention to
conduct a sale, whether by word of mouth, newspaper
advertisement, magazine advertisement, handbill,
written notice, printed notice, printed display, billboard
display, poster, radio or television announcement and
any and all means including oral, written or printed.
(Ord. 1987-11, 05-12-1987)
5-3-2. License required. (Repealed.)
(Ord. 2012-33, 12-05-2012)
5-3-3. Fee. (Repealed.)
(Ord. 2012-33, 12-05-2012)
5-3-4. Application. (Repealed.)
(Ord. 2012-33, 12-05-2012)
5-3-5. Year in business required prior to issuance of
license - Exception. (Repealed.)
(Ord. 2012-33, 12-05-2012)
5-3-6. Issuance of license and term. (Repealed.)
(Ord. 2012-33, 12-05-2012)
5-3-7. Renewals, term and fee. (Repealed.)
(Ord. 2012-33, 12-05-2012)
5-3-8. Display of license. (Repealed.)
(Ord. 2012-33, 12-05-2012)
5-3-9. Revocation of license. (Repealed.)
(Ord. 2012-33, 12-05-2012)
5-3-10. Rules and regulations. (Repealed.)
(Ord. 2012-33, 12-05-2012)
5-3-11. Mingling of goods prohibited. (Repealed.)
(Ord. 2012-33, 12-05-2012)
5-3-12. Each sale a separate offense. (Repealed.)
(Ord. 2012-33, 12-05-2012)
5-3-13. Resumption of business prohibited.
(Repealed.)
(Ord. 2012-33, 12-05-2012)
5-3-14. Records to be kept. (Repealed.)
(Ord. 2012-33, 12-05-2012)
5-3-15. Exemptions to chapter. (Repealed.)
(Ord. 2012-33, 12-05-2012)
5-11 (November 20, 2019)
5-3-16. Compliance with chapter required.
(Repealed.)
(Ord. 2012-33, 12-05-2012)
5-3-17. Notice of Sale.
Any person conducting a Sale shall inform the
Department in writing of the Sale prior to the conduct of
the Sale.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2012-33, 12-05-
2012)
5-3-18. Limitations.
(1) No Sale may be conducted for more than 30
consecutive days. Days during the advertized Sale on
which the selling business is closed or the Sale is
interrupted shall be counted toward the 30 days.
(2) Only 1 Sale may be conducted in any calendar
year.
(Ord. 2012-33, 12-05-2012)
5-3-19. Penalty.
Any violation of this Chapter shall constitute a
class C misdemeanor, punishable as provided in Section
1-4-3 of this Code.
(Ord. 2012-33, 12-05-2012)
(December 28, 2012) 5-12
CHAPTER 4. CHRISTMAS TREE SALES
5-4-1. Unlawful to sell Christmas trees
without a license.
5-4-2. Written consent to cut trees required.
5-4-3. Unlawful to possess or sell untagged trees.
5-4-4. Application for license.
5-4-5. Issuing of license - Fee and license period.
5-4-6. Cleanup deposit. (Repealed)
5-4-7. Violation a misdemeanor.
5-4-1. Unlawful to sell Christmas trees without a
license.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the
business of selling fir or evergreen trees or trees
commonly called "Christmas trees" in the City without
first obtaining a license therefor. If a presently Tooele
City licensed business sells Christmas trees, the licensee
shall comply with Sections 5-4-2 and 5-4-3.
(Ord. 2012-34, 12-05-12); (Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-83)
5-4-2. Written consent to cut trees required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell at any
time or to offer for sale in the City any fir, evergreen or
Christmas tree cut or procured from or within the public
domain of the United States, or of the State of Utah,
without written authority having been first obtained
from the United States, said State of Utah, or from the
owner of such private lands, as the case may be, to cut
and remove such trees.
(Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-83)
5-4-3. Unlawful to possess or sell untagged trees.
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his
possession for sale, or to sell or offer for sale in the
City, trees from the sources described in Section 5-4-2
unless the same shall have been officially tagged with a
tag furnished or approved either by the United States
Forest Service or the Department of Forestry of the
State of Utah.
(Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-83)
5-4-4. Application for license.
Any person desiring a license to sell and dispose of
Christmas trees within the City shall make application
therefor to the division. Such application shall
specifically state and set forth the source of title to the
trees to be sold and whether said trees, or any of them,
were cut or procured within any public domain of the
United States, or of the State of Utah, or from any
private lands, either within or without the State of Utah.
Applicants shall be required in connection with such
applications to furnish the division with evidence of
ownership of such trees and/or authority to cut and
procure the same from the public domain or from
private lands.
(Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-83)
5-4-5. Issuing of license - Fee and license period.
Upon satisfactory showing made by the applicant
that he has a bona fide title to trees regulated by this
Chapter and that the same were not obtained illegally or
in violation of any laws of the United States, or of the
State of Utah, or any law, rules or regulation of the state
or county from which such trees have been obtained,
and that the applicant has authority to cut and procure
the same from either the public domain or from private
land, the division shall grant to such applicant a
business license upon the payment of the fee set forth in
the Tooele City Fee Schedule. Such license shall be
valid for a period of sixty (60) days from November
first of each year.
(Ord. 2011-20, 12-07-11); (Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-83)
5-4-6. Cleanup deposit.
(Repealed. Ord. 2012-34, 12-05-12)
5-4-7. Violation a misdemeanor.
Violation of the provisions of this Chapter is a
misdemeanor punishable as provided in Section 5-1-33.
(Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-83)
(December 28, 2012) 5-13
CHAPTER 5. PUBLIC DANCE LICENSES
Repealed. (Ord. 2012-31, 12-05-12)
(December 28, 2012) 5-14
(Page 5-14 Reserved)
15 (September 11, 2017)
CHAPTER 6. HOME OCCUPATIONS
5-6-1. Definition.
5-6-2. License required - Display.
5-6-3. Procedure.
5-6-4. License fees - Exemption.
5-6-5. Inspections.
5-6-6. Zoning requirements.
5-6-7. Violation a misdemeanor.
5-6-1. Definition.
The term “home occupation” shall have the
meaning contained in Section 7-1-5 (Definitions) of this
Code.
(Ord. 2017-19, 09-06-2017) (Ord. 2012-36,
12-05-2012) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-1983)
5-6-2. License required - Display.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in a
home occupation without first securing a business
license therefor, unless expressly exempt by law. The
licensee shall conspicuously display such license in the
licensed place of business so that the same is plainly
visible to the public.
(Ord. 2017-19, 09-06-2017) (Ord. 2012-36,
12-05-2012) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-1983)
5-6-3. Procedure.
Applicants for a license required by this Chapter
shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 5-1
(General Provisions).
(Ord. 2017-19, 09-06-2017) (Ord. 2012-36,
12-05-2012) (Ord. 1987-24, 01-02-1988) (Ord.
1983-22, 12-07-1983)
5-6-4. License fees - Exemption.
(1) License fees for licenses issued pursuant to this
Chapter shall be the same as set forth in Section 5-1-10
(License fees).
(2) A home occupation business is exempt from
the license fees required by subsection (1), above,
unless the combined offsite impact of the business,
together with the primary residential use, is anticipated
to, or is shown to, materially exceed the offsite impact
of the primary residential use alone. The City
Recorder shall determine the anticipation or existence
of such impacts.
(Ord. 2017-19, 09-06-2017) (Ord. 2012-36,
12-05-2012) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-1983)
5-6-5. Inspections.
The City reserves the right to inspect any premises
licensed or applied to be licensed for home occupation
for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety,
and welfare.
(Ord. 2017-19, 09-06-2017) (Ord. 2012-36,
12-05-2012) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-1983)
5-6-6. Zoning requirements.
Home occupations shall comply with all land use
regulations set forth in Title 7 of the Tooele City Code.
(Ord. 2017-19, 09-06-2017) (Ord 2012-36, 12-05-2012)
(Ord. 1987-24, 01-02-1988) (Ord. 1983-22,
12-07-1983)
5-6-7. Violation a misdemeanor.
Violation of the provisions of this Chapter is a class
B misdemeanor punishable as provided in Section
5-1-33 (Violations and penalties).
(Ord. 2017-19, 09-06-2017) (Ord. 2012-36,
12-05-2012) (Ord. 1983-22, 12-07-1983)
(July 12, 2007) 5-16
CHAPTER 7. AGRICULTURAL VENDORS;
ITINERANT OR TRANSIENT MERCHANTS;
SOLICITORS
Repealed. (Ord. 2007-17, 06-20-2007)
5-17 (November 20, 2019)
CHAPTER 7a. AGRICULTURAL VENDORS;
ITINERANT OR TRANSIENT MERCHANTS;
SOLICITORS
5-7a-1. Definitions.
5-7a-2. License required - Display.
5-7a-3. Application for license.
5-7a-4. Fee.
5-7a-5. Review of application and issuance of license.
5-7a-6. Denial of license and right of appeal.
5-7a-7. Photographs and identity badges.
5-7a-8. Inspections.
5-7a-9. Deceptive soliciting practices prohibited.
5-7a-10. “No Solicitation” notice.
5-7a-11. Duties of solicitors.
5-7a-12. Violation a misdemeanor.
5-7a-1. Definitions.
As used in this Chapter:
(1) "Agricultural vendor" means a person engaged
in the sale of fruits and/or vegetables from stands, motor
vehicles, or roadsides.
(2) "Itinerant" or "transient merchant" means any
person who offers for sale at wholesale or retail any
goods, wares or merchandise in or from any hotel, stall,
tent, building, structure, stand, railroad car, motor vehicle,
field, corner or other place and who does not occupy that
place for the purpose of conducting a permanent business
thereon or therein.
(3) "Solicitor" means any person selling, offering for
sale or taking orders for merchandise or services door to
door within the City. Solicitors include, but are not
limited to, photographers, sellers of magazines, cosmetics,
home care products, and any other person engaged in
direct sales, but specifically excluding newspaper carriers.
(4) "Merchandise" includes all goods, food, wares,
photographs, subscriptions to any kind of publication,
tickets, coupons or receipts representing value.
(Ord. 2007-17, 6-20-2007)
5-7a-2. License required - Display.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct the
business of an agricultural vendor or itinerant or transient
merchant without first securing a license for each place to
be so operated. The licensee shall conspicuously display
such license in or at the place of business so that the same
is plainly visible to the public.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct the
business of a solicitor without first securing a license
therefor. Each solicitor shall carry on the solicitor’s
person a copy of the business license.
(3) Agricultural vendors who sell fruits and
vegetables produced and sold from their own homes or
property immediately adjoining their own homes are
exempt from licensing and the payment of license fees
under this Chapter.
(Ord. 2007-17, 6-20-2007)
5-7a-3. Application for license.
All applications for a license under this Chapter shall
be made to and upon forms provided by the Department.
Each application form shall require disclosure and
reporting by the applicant of the following information:
(1) Contact information, including the applicant’s
true, correct and legal name, former names or aliases used
during the last ten (10) years; the applicant’s telephone
number, home address and mailing address, if different;
and the address to which all notices are to be sent.
(2) Proof of identity by a valid driver license issued
by any state, valid passport issued by the United States,
valid identification card issued by any state, or a valid
identification card issued by a branch of the United States
military.
(3) Proof of registration with the Department of
Commerce either by the applicant or the entity which the
applicant is representing.
(4) Marketing information, including the nature of
merchandise offered by the applicant, whether the goods
will be offered door to door, and whether the merchandise
will be simultaneously exchanged at the time of payment.
(5) If the applicant is a solicitor, responses to the
following questions regarding disqualifying conditions as
follows:
(a) Has the applicant been criminally convicted
of felony homicide, physically abusing, sexually abusing,
or exploiting a minor, sale or distribution of controlled
substances, or sexual assault of any kind?
(b) Are any criminal charges currently pending
against the applicant for felony homicide, physically
abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting a minor, sale or
distribution of controlled substances, or sexual assault of
any kind?
(c) Has the applicant been criminally convicted
of a felony within the last ten (10) years?
(d) Has the applicant been incarcerated in a
federal or state prison within the past five (5) years?
(e) Has the applicant been criminally convicted
of a misdemeanor within the past five (5) years involving
a crime of moral turpitude, or violent or aggravated
conduct involving persons or property?
(f) Has a final civil judgment been entered
against the applicant within the last five (5) years
indicating that the applicant had either engaged in fraud,
or intentional misrepresentation?
(g) Is the applicant currently on parole or
probation to any court, penal institution, or governmental
entity, including being under house arrest or subject to a
tracking device?
(h) Does the applicant have an outstanding
arrest warrant from any jurisdiction?
(i) Is the applicant currently subject to a
protective order based on physical or sexual abuse issued
by a court of competent jurisdiction?
(6) Execution and affirmation under oath and on
penalty of perjury that based on the applicant’s present
information and belief the information provided is
5-17.1 (November 20, 2019)
complete, truthful, and accurate.
(7) In addition to furnishing the information
requested on the application, each applicant for a
solicitor’s license shall submit a copy of the applicant’s
current criminal history on file at the Utah Department of
Public Safety Bureau of Criminal Identification.
(8) Each applicant for an agricultural vendor license
shall, prior to doing business, obtain a letter from the city
building inspector indicating that the inspector has
reviewed the plan for point of sale and that adequate and
safe parking exists there. Upon receiving the letter,
agricultural vendors exempt from licensing may
commence business. Upon presenting the letter from the
building inspector to the Department, a nonexempt
applicant may then fill out and file with the Department a
business license application.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2007-17, 6-20-2007)
5-7a-4. Fee.
Each itinerant or transient merchant, agricultural
vendor, or solicitor shall pay a $40.00 annual fee. No
proration will be granted.
(Ord. 2007-17, 6-20-2007)
5-7a-5. Review of application and issuance of license.
(1) Within five business days of receipt of the
completed application and applicable documentation, the
Department shall review the application for completeness
and shall take such other reasonable action to verify the
information appearing on the application.
(2) The Department shall issue a business license to
the applicant if the information is complete and verified
and the license fee has been paid.
(3) The license shall show the name of the licensee
and the business permitted to be carried on thereunder, the
place where the licensed business is to be carried on if at
a fixed place, and the date of expiration of such license.
(4) Licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter shall
expire on December 31 of each year.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2007-17, 6-20-2007)
5-7a-6. Denial of license and right of appeal.
(1) The Department, with authorization from the
Director, shall refuse to issue a license to an applicant for
any of the following reasons:
(a) The information submitted by the applicant
is incomplete, incorrect, or misrepresented.
(b) The applicant has answered affirmatively to
any of the questions set forth in Section 5-7a-3(5).
(c) The applicant fails to pay the requisite fee.
(2) Appeal of actions taken or decisions made under
this Chapter shall be to the Administrative Hearing
Officer.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2013-07, 04-17-2013)
(Ord. 2007-17, 6-20-2007)
5-7a-7. Solicitor photographs and identity badges.
Before commencing work, each solicitor who is, or
who will be, present in the City to conduct the applicant’s
business shall obtain an identity badge from the
Department at a cost of $10.00 and wear the badge at all
times while conducting business in the City. The solicitor
shall return the badge to the Department at the conclusion
of the persons’ business in the City or the end of the
calendar year, whichever is earlier. Upon return of the
identity badge, the Department shall refund $5.00 of the
cost of the badge.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2017-22, 06-21-2017)
(Ord. 2007-17, 6-20-2007)
5-7a-8. Inspections.
The City reserves the right to inspect any premises or
location utilized for carrying on businesses regulated by
this Chapter to assure compliance with the provisions of
this Code and with the conditions of any City approval,
permit, or license.
(Ord. 2012-35, 12-05-12); (Ord. 2007-17, 6-20-2007)
5-7a-9. Deceptive soliciting practices prohibited.
(1) No solicitor shall intentionally make any
materially false or fraudulent statement in the course of
soliciting.
(2) A solicitor shall immediately disclose to the
consumer during face-to-face solicitation:
(a) The name of the solicitor;
(b) The name and address of the entity with
whom the solicitor is associated; and,
(c) The purpose of the solicitor’s contact with
the person.
(3) No solicitor shall use a fictitious name, an alias,
or any name other than his or her true and correct name.
(4) No solicitor shall represent directly or indirectly
that the City’s grant of a license implies any endorsement
by the City of the solicitor’s goods or services or of the
individual solicitor.
(Ord. 2007-17, 6-20-2007)
5-7a-10. “No Solicitation” notice.
(1) Any occupant of a residence may give notice of
a desire to refuse solicitors by displaying a “No
Solicitation” sign or sign of similar import which shall be
posted on or near the main entrance door or on or near the
property line adjacent to the sidewalk leading to the
residence.
(2) The display of such sign or placard shall be
deemed to constitute notice to any solicitor that the
inhabitant of the residence does not desire to receive
and/or does not invite solicitors.
(Ord. 2007-17, 6-20-2007)
5-7a-11. Duties of Solicitors.
(1) A solicitor shall check each residence for the
presence of a “No Solicitation” notice or notice of similar
import before attempting to make contact with any person
in the residence.
(2) A solicitor shall not knock on the door, ring the
5-17.2 (November 20, 2019)
doorbell, or in any other manner attempt to attract the
attention of an occupant of a residence that bears a “No
Solicitation” sign or sign or placard of similar import for
the purpose of selling or attempting to sell merchandise or
services. Possession of a license does not relieve any
solicitor of this duty.
(3) A solicitor shall not attempt through ruse,
deception, or fraudulent concealment to secure an
audience with an occupant at a residence.
(4) A solicitor shall not intentionally or recklessly
make any physical contact with, or touch another person
without the person’s consent.
(5) A solicitor shall not follow a person into a
residence without the person’s express consent.
(6) A solicitor who is at any time asked by an
occupant of a residence or dwelling to leave shall
immediately and peacefully depart.
(7) A solicitor shall not continue to attempt to sell or
offer to sell merchandise or services after the person to
whom the solicitor is speaking has clearly communicated
the person’s lack of interest in the solicitor’s merchandise
or services.
(8) A solicitor shall not solicit at a residence by
knocking on the door, ringing the doorbell, or otherwise
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
(Ord. 2016-09, 07-06-2016) (Ord. 2007-17, 6-20-2007)
5-7a-12. Violation a misdemeanor.
A violation of any provision of Sections 5-7a-2(1), 5-
7a-2(2), 5-7a-7, 5-7a-9 and 5-7a-11 is a class C
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2007-17, 6-20-2007)
(December 28, 2012) 5-18
CHAPTER 8. MECHANICAL DEVICES
Repealed. (Ord. 2012-28, 12-05-12)
(December 28, 2012) 5-19
(Page 5-19 Reserved)
(December 28, 2012) 5-20
CHAPTER 9. VENDING MACHINES
Repealed. (Ord. 2012-29, 12-05-12)
(October 8, 2019) 5-21
CHAPTER 10. PAWNBROKERS
(Repealed Ord. 2019-25, 09-18-2019)
(March 24, 2017) 5-23
CHAPTER 11. PRIVATE POLICE OR
DETECTIVE (Repealed)
(Ord. 2017-05, 03-01-2017)
(March 24, 2017) 5-24
(PAGE 5-24 RESERVED)
5-25 (December 28, 2012)
CHAPTER 12. COLLECTORS OF GARBAGE
AND WASTE MATERIALS
Repealed. (Ord. 2012-30, 12-05-12)
(March 21, 1994) 5-26
CHAPTER 13. AGRICULTURAL VENDORS
5-13-1 through 5-13-8. Repealed. (Ord. 94-04, 02-
15-94)
5-27 (March 21, 1994)
CHAPTER 14. SOLICITORS
5-14-1 through 5-14-9. Repealed. (Ord 94-04, 02-15-
94)
5-28 (March 24, 2017)
CHAPTER 15. SECONDHAND AND JUNK
DEALERS (Repealed)
(Ord. 2017-04, 03-01-2017)
(November 20, 2019) 5-29
CHAPTER 16. PARK CONCESSIONS
5-16-1. Concessions in parks.
5-16-2. Sale of food without a business license
prohibited.
5-16-3. Application for business license.
5-16-4. Operation not to be changed.
5-16-5. Fees.
5-16-6. Duration of concession.
5-16-7. Repealed.
5-16-8. Penalties.
5-16-1. Concessions in parks.
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all
public parks and playgrounds, and associated buildings
and parking areas, owned or controlled by Tooele City.
(Ord. 2016-10, 07-06-16) (Ord. 2010-07, 06-15-2010)
(Ord. 1988-19, 07-06-1988)
5-16-2. Sale of food without a business license
prohibited.
(1) No person, firm, corporation, organization, or
association shall sell any food or food product of any
kind in any city-owned park or playground without a
business license as a concessionaire.
(2) For organized events, the organizing or
sponsoring organization shall obtain the license. The
individual food vendors shall not be required to obtain
individual business licenses to sell food or food
products at the event. The licensed organization shall
regulate the number and type of vendors, and vendor
activities, pursuant to the organization’s event policies,
consistent with any Tooele City policies.
(3) All food vendors shall be required to comply
with applicable state and local health regulations and to
obtain all required state and local health permits.
(4) A business license issued pursuant to this
Chapter shall be issued under and governed by the
provisions of Chapter 1 of this Title.
(Ord. 2016-10, 07-06-16) (Ord. 2010-07, 06-15-2010)
(Ord. 1988-19, 07-06-1988)
5-16-3. Application for business license.
(1) Each person, firm, or corporation desiring to
apply for a business license as a concessionaire to sell
food in any city-owned park or playground shall file an
application therefor. In addition to the information
required by Chapter 1 of this Title, the application shall
include the following information:
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
(b) The location where the applicant proposes
to sell food.
(c) The types of food proposed to be sold.
(d) A description of any buildings or
equipment, owned by the city, desired to be used by the
concessionaire.
(e) The equipment that the concessionaire
plans to use, including not only food preparation and
food serving equipment but also any cart or building
proposed to be used in the operation.
(f) A plan for removing trash from, and
otherwise cleaning, the site of the food product
preparation and sale.
(Ord. 2016-10, 07-06-16) (Ord. 2010-07, 06-15-2010)
(Ord. 1988-19, 07-06-1988)
5-16-4. Operation not to be changed.
Any person receiving a business license as a
concessionaire shall not change any part of the
operation described in the application, including
equipment used or the food to be served, without
applying for and receiving approval of the change from
the Department.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2016-10, 07-06-16)
(Ord. 2010-07, 06-15-2010) (Ord. 1988-19, 07-06-
1988)
5-16-5. Fees.
Each person licensed under this Chapter shall pay
the regular annual business licensing fee except as
provided in Section 5-1-7 of this Title.
(Ord. 2016-10, 07-06-16) (Ord. 2010-07, 06-15-2010)
(Ord. 1988-19, 07-06-1988)
5-16-6. Duration of concession.
Each business license to each concessionaire shall
expire on December 31 of each year regardless of the
date of issuance.
(Ord. 2016-10, 07-06-16) (Ord. 2010-07, 06-15-2010)
(Ord. 1988-19, 07-06-1988)
5-16-7. Temporary concessions. Repealed.
(Ord. 2010-07, 06-15-2010) (Ord. 1988-19, 07-06-
1988)
5-16-8. Penalties.
(1) Any person or business entity selling food
products in a city-owned park or playground without a
business license shall be guilty of a Class B
misdemeanor under Section 5-1-33 of this Title.
(2) Any person or business entity violating any
other provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of an
Infraction.
(3) A separate offense shall be deemed committed
on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
(Ord. 2016-10, 07-06-16) (Ord. 1988-19, 07-06-1988)
5-30 (March 24, 2017)
CHAPTER 17. UNIFORM LOCAL SALES AND
USE TAX ORDINANCE
5-17-1. Title.
5-17-2. Authority and purpose.
5-17-3. Effective date.
5-17-4. Sales tax.
5-17-5. Contract with state tax commission.
5-17-6. Penalties.
5-17-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Uniform Local
Sales and Use Tax Code of the City of Tooele." (Ord.
90-03, 03-15-90)
5-17-2. Authority and purpose.
(1) The 48th session of the Utah legislature has
authorized cities of the state of Utah to enact sales and
use tax ordinances imposing a one percent tax.
(2) It is the purpose of this chapter to conform the
sales and use tax of the city to the requirements of the
Sales and Use Tax Act, Chapter 12 of Title 59, Utah
Code Annotated, 1953, as amended. (Ord. 90-03, 03-
15-90)
5-17-3. Effective date.
This chapter shall become effective 12:01 o'clock
a.m., January 1, 1990. (Ord. 90-03, 03-15-90)
5-17-4. Sales tax.
(1) (a) From and after the effective date of this
chapter, there is levied and there shall be collected and
paid a tax upon every retail sale of tangible personal
property, services and meals made within Tooele City at
the rate of one percent.
(b) An excise tax is hereby imposed on the
storage, use, or other consumption in this city of
tangible personal property from any retailer on or after
the operative date of this chapter at the rate of one
percent of the sales price of the property.
(c) For the purpose of this chapter all retail
sales shall be presumed to have been consummated at
the place of business delivered by the retailer or his
agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common
carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. In the
event a retailer has no permanent place of business, the
place or places at which the retail sales are
consummated shall be as determined under the rules and
regulations prescribed and adopted by the State Tax
Commission. Public utilities as defined by Title 54,
Utah Code Annotated, 1953, shall not be obligated to
determine the place or places within the city where
public utilities services are rendered, but the place of
sale or the sales tax revenue arising from such service
allocable to the city shall be as determined by the State
Tax Commission pursuant to an appropriate formula
and other rules and regulations to be prescribed and
adopted by it.
(2) (a) Except as hereinafter provided, and except
insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of
the Sales and Use Tax Act, all of the provisions of
Chapter 12, Title 59, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as
amended, and in force and effect on the effective date of
this chapter, insofar as they relate to sales taxes,
excepting Sections 59-12-101 and 59-12-119 thereof,
are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as
though fully set forth herein.
(b) Wherever, and to the extent that in
Chapter 12 of Title 59, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, the
state of Utah is named or referred to as the taxing
agency, the name of Tooele City shall be substituted
therefor. Nothing in subparagraph (2) shall be deemed
to require substitution of the name of Tooele City for
the word "State" when that word is used as part of the
title of the State Tax Commission, or of the Constitution
of the State of Utah, nor shall the name of Tooele City
be substituted for that of the state in any section when
the result of that substitution would require action to be
taken by or against Tooele City or any agency thereof,
rather than by or against the State Tax Commission in
performing the functions incident to the administration
or operation of this chapter.
(c) If an annual license has been issued to a
retailer under Section 59-12-106 of the Utah Code
Annotated, 1953, an additional license shall not be
required by reason of this section.
(d) There shall be excluded from the purchase
price paid or charged by which the tax is measured:
(i) the amount of any sales or use tax
imposed by the state of Utah on a retailer or consumer;
(ii) the gross receipts from the sale of or
the cost of storage, use or other consumption of tangible
personal property upon which a sales or use tax has
become due by reason of the same transaction to any
other municipality and any county in the state of Utah,
under the sales or use tax ordinance enacted by that
county or municipality in accordance with the Sales and
Use Tax Act. (Ord. 90-03, 03-15-90)
5-17-5. Contract with state tax commission.
Prior to the effective date of this chapter, Tooele
City has entered into an agreement with the State Tax
Commission to perform all functions incident to the
administration or operation of this chapter. (Ord. 90-03,
03-15-90)
5-17-6. Penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter
shall be deemed guilty of a class B misdemeanor and
shall be punished as provided in Section 1-4-3. (Ord.
90-03, 03-15-90)
(March 24, 2017) 5-31
CHAPTER 18. UTILITY LICENSE TAX
5-18-1. Utility license tax required.
5-18-2. When payable.
5-18-3. Late filings.
5-18-1. Utility license tax required.
(1) There is hereby levied an annual license tax
upon every business which provides, as a public utility,
cable television services within Tooele City.
(2) Businesses which provide cable television
services within Tooele City shall pay a license tax
which shall be calculated as a percentage of gross
revenue derived from the sale or use of public utility
services; the rate of taxation shall be specified in the
cable television franchise ordinance (Ord. 91-18).
(2) As used in this part:
(a) "Gross revenue" means the revenue
derived from the sale and use of public utility services
within Tooele City.
(b) "Public utility service” for purposes of this
chapter means the sale and use of cable television
services.
(Ord. 2004-08, 06-16-04); (Ord. 98-44, 12-16-98);
(Ord. 97-26, 06-18-97); (Ord. 87-14, 07-30-87)
5-18-2. When payable.
The utility license tax shall be payable for each
calendar quarter and shall be reported on forms
prescribed by the Tooele City Finance Department.
Remittance shall be made no later than the month end
following the last month of the quarter.
(Ord. 97-26, 06-18-97); (Ord. 87-14, 07-30-87)
5-18-3. Late filing.
Late filings shall be subject to a five percent (5%)
late filing fee.
(Ord. 97-26, 06-18-97); (Ord. 87-14, 07-30-87)
(March 24, 2017) 5-32
CHAPTER 18a. MUNICIPAL ENERGY AND USE
TAX.
5-18a.1. Definitions
5-18a-2. Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax.
5-18a-3. Exemptions from the Municipal Energy
Sales and Use Tax.
5-18a-4. Tax Collection Contract with State Tax
Commission.
5-18a-5. Incorporation of Part 1, Chapter 12, Title
59, Utah Code, Including Amendments.
5-18a-6. No Additional License to Collect the
Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax
Required - No Additional License or
Reporting Requirements.
5-18a-7. Effective Date.
5-18a-1. Definitions.
(1) “Consumer” means a person who acquires
taxable energy for any use that is subject to the Municipal
Energy Sales and Use Tax.
(2) “Contractual Franchise Fee” means:
(a) a fee:
(i) provided for in a franchise agreement;
and,
(ii) that is consideration for the franchise
agreement; or,
(b) (i) a fee similar to subsection (2)(a); or,
(ii) any combination of subsections (2)(a)
or (2)(b).
(3) (a) “Delivered Value” means the fair
market value of the taxable energy delivered for sale or
use in the
municipality and includes:
(i) the value of the energy itself; and,
(ii) any transportation, freight, customer
demand charges, service charges, or other costs typically
incurred in providing taxable energy in usable form to
each class of customer in the municipality,
(b) “Delivered Value” does not include the
amount of a tax paid under Part 1 or Part 2 of Chapter 12,
Title 59 of the Utah Code Annotated.
(4) “Energy Supplier” means a person supplying
taxable energy, except for persons supplying a de minimus
amount of taxable energy, if such persons are excluded by
rule promulgated by the State Tax Commission.
(5) “Franchise Agreement” means a franchise or an
ordinance, contract, or agreement granting a franchise.
(6) “Franchise Tax” means:
(a) a franchise tax;
(b) a tax similar to a franchise tax; or
(c) any combination of subsections (a) or
(b).
(7) “Person” includes any individual firm,
partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, estate,
trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, this state, any
county, city, municipality, district, or other local
governmental entity of the state, or any group or
combination acting as a unit.
(8) “Sale” means any transfer of title, exchange, or
barter, conditional or otherwise, in any manner, of taxable
energy for a consideration. It includes:
(a) installment and credit sales;
(b) any closed transaction constituting a sale;
and,
(c) any transaction under which right to
acquire, use or consume taxable energy is granted under
a lease or contract and the transfer would be taxable if an
outright sale were made.
(9) “Storage” means any keeping or retention of
taxable energy in Tooele City for any purpose except sale
in the regular course of business.
(10) (a) ”Use” means the exercise of any right or
power over taxable energy incident to the ownership or
the leasing of the taxable energy.
(b) “Use” does not include the sale, display,
demonstration, or trial of the taxable energy in the regular
course of business and held for resale.
(11) “Taxable Energy” means gas and electricity.
(Ord. 97-26, 06-18-97)
5-18a-2. Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax.
There is hereby levied, subject to the provisions of
this chapter, a tax on every sale or use of taxable energy
made within Tooele City equaling six percent (6%) of the
delivered value of the taxable energy to the consumer.
This tax shall be known as the Municipal Energy Sales
and Use Tax.
(1) The tax shall be calculated on the delivered
value of the taxable energy to the consumer.
(2) The tax shall be in addition to any sales or use
tax on taxable energy imposed by Tooele City authorized
by Title 59, Chapter 12, Part 2 of the Utah Code
Annotated, The Local Sales and Use Tax Act.
(Ord. 97-26, 06-18-97)
5-18a-3. Exemptions from the Municipal Energy Sales
and Use Tax.
(1) No exemptions are granted from the Municipal
Energy Sales and Use Tax except as expressly provided in
Utah Code Ann. §10-1-305(2)(b); notwithstanding an
exemption granted by §59-1-104 of the Utah Code.
(2) The following are exempt from the Municipal
Energy Sales and Use Tax, pursuant to Utah Code Ann.
§10-1-305(2)(b):
(a) sales and use of aviation fuel, motor
fuel, and special fuels subject to taxation under Title 59,
Chapter 13 of the Utah Code Annotated;
(b) sales and use of taxable energy that is
exempt from taxation under federal law, the United States
Constitution, or the Utah Constitution;
(c) sales and use of taxable energy
purchased or stored for resale;
(d) sales or use of taxable energy to a person, if
the primary use of the taxable energy is for use in
compounding or producing taxable energy or a fuel
subject to taxation under Title 59, Chapter 13 of the Utah
Code Annotated.
(e) taxable energy brought into the state by a
(March 24, 2017) 5-33
nonresident for the nonresident’s own personal use or
enjoyment while within the state, except taxable energy
purchased for use in the state by a nonresident living or
working in the state at the time of purchase;
(f) the sale or use of taxable energy for any
purpose other than as a fuel or energy; and,
(g) the sale of taxable energy for use outside the
boundaries of Tooele City.
(3) The sale, storage, use, or other consumption of
taxable energy is exempt from the Municipal Energy Sales
and Use Tax levied by this Chapter, provided:
(a) the delivered value of the taxable energy
has been subject to a municipal energy sales or use tax
levied by another municipality within the state authorized
by Title 59, Chapter 12, Part 3 of the Utah Code
Annotated; and,
(b) Tooele City is paid the difference between
the tax paid to the other municipality and the tax that
would otherwise be due under this Chapter, if the tax due
under this Chapter exceeds the tax paid to the other
municipality.
(Ord. 97-26, 06-18-97)
5-18a-4. Tax Collection Contract with State Tax
Commission.
(1) On or before the effective date of this Chapter,
Tooele City shall contract with the State Tax Commission
to perform all functions incident to the administration and
collection of the Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax, in
accordance with this Chapter. The Mayor, with the
approval by Resolution of the Tooele City Council and the
Tooele City Attorney, is hereby authorized to enter into
supplementary agreements with the State Tax Commission
that may be necessary to the continued administration and
operation of the Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax
Ordinance enacted by this Chapter.
(2) An energy supplier shall pay the Municipal
Energy Sales and Use Tax revenues collected from
consumers directly to Tooele City, monthly if:
(a) Tooele City is the energy supplier; or,
(b) (i) the energy supplier estimates that the
municipal energy sales and use tax collected annually
from its Utah consumers equals $1,000,000 or more; and,
(ii) the energy supplier collects the
Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax.
(3) An energy supplier paying the Municipal
Energy Sales and Use Tax directly to Tooele City may
deduct any contractual franchise fees collected by the
energy supplier qualifying as a credit and remit the net tax
less any amount the energy supplier retains as authorized
by §10-1-307(4), Utah Code Annotated.
(Ord. 97-26, 06-18-97)
5-18a-5. Incorporation of Part 1, Chapter 12, Title 59,
Utah Code, Including Amendments.
(1) (a) Except as herein provided, and except
insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Title
10, Chapter 1, Part 3, Municipal Energy Sales and Use
Tax Act, as well as this Chapter, all of the provisions of
Part 1, Chapter 12, Title 59 of the Utah Code Annotated
1953, as amended, and in force and effect on the effective
date of this Chapter, insofar as they relate to sales and use
taxes, excepting Sections 59-12-101 and 59-12-119
thereof, and excepting for the amount of the sales and use
taxes levied therein, are hereby adopted and made a part
of this Chapter as if fully set forth herein.
(b) Wherever, and to the extent that in Part
1, Chapter 12, Title 59, Utah Code Annotated 1953, as
amended, the State of Utah is named or referred to as the
“taxing agency,” the name of Tooele City shall be
substituted, insofar as is necessary for the purposes of that
part, as well as Part 3, Chapter 1, Title 10, Utah Code
Annotated 1953, as amended. Nothing in this
subparagraph (b) shall be deemed to require substitution
of the name Tooele City for the word “State” when that
word is used as part of the title of the State Tax
Commission, or of the Constitution of Utah, nor shall the
name of Tooele City be substituted for that of the State in
any section when the result of such a substitution would
require action to be taken by or against Tooele City or any
agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Tax
commission in performing the functions incident to the
administration or operation of this Chapter.
(c) Any amendments made to Part 1,
Chapter 12, Title 59, Utah Code Annotated 1953, as
amended, which would be applicable to Tooele City for
the purposes of carrying out this Chapter are hereby
incorporated herein by reference and shall be effective
upon the date that they are effective as a Utah statute.
(Ord. 97-26, 06-18-97)
5-18a-6. No Additional License to Collect the
Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax Required - No
Additional License or Reporting Requirements.
No additional license to collect or report the
Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax levied by this
Chapter is required, provided the energy supplier
collecting the tax has a license issued under Section 59-
12-106, Utah Code Annotated.
(Ord. 97-26, 06-18-97)
5-18a-7. Effective Date.
This Chapter is effective June 30, 1997. The
Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax shall be levied
beginning 12:01 a.m., July 1, 1997.
(Ord. 97-26, 06-18-97)
5-34 (March 24, 2017)
CHAPTER 18b. MOBILE TELEPHONE
SERVICE REVENUE ACT.
Repealed. (Ord. 2004-08, 06-16-04)
(Ord. 2000-27, 12-06-2000)
(March 24, 2017) 5-35
CHAPTER 18c. TELECOMMUNICATION
SERVICE PROVIDERS TAX.
5-18c-1. Definitions.
5-18c-2. Levy of tax.
5-18c-3. Tax Rate.
5-18c-4. Rate limitation and exemption therefrom.
5-18c-5. Effective date of tax levy.
5-18c-6. Changes in Rate or Repeal of the Tax.
5-18c-7. Interlocal Agreement for collection of the
tax.
5-18c-8. Procedures for taxes erroneously recovered
from customers.
5-18c-9. Repeal of inconsistent taxes and fees.
5-18c-1. Definitions.
As used in this ordinance:
(1) “Commission” means the State Tax Commission.
(2) (a) Subject to Subsections (2) (b) and (c),
"customer" means the person who is obligated under a
contract with a telecommunications provider to pay for
telecommunications service received under the contract.
(b) For purposes of this ordinance, "customer"
means:
(i) the person who is obligated under a
contract with a telecommunications provider to pay for
telecommunications service received under the contract;
or
(ii) if the end user is not the person
described in Subsection (2) (b) (i), the end user of
telecommunications service.
(c) "Customer" does not include a reseller:
(i) of telecommunications service; or
(ii) for mobile telecommunications service,
of a serving carrier under an agreement to serve the
customer outside the telecommunications provider's
licensed service area.
(3) (a) “End user" means the person who uses a
telecommunications service.
(b) For purposes of telecommunications service
provided to a person who is not an individual, "end user"
means the individual who uses the telecommunications
service on behalf of the person who is provided the
telecommunications service.
(4) “Gross Receipts attributed to the municipality”
means those gross receipts from a transaction for
telecommunications services that is located within the
municipality for the purposes of sales and use taxes under
Utah Code Title 59, Chapter 12, Sales and Use Tax Act
and determined in accordance with Utah Code section 59-
12-207.
(5) “Gross receipts from telecommunications service”
means the revenue that a telecommunications provider
receives for telecommunications service rendered except
for amounts collected or paid as:
(a) a tax, fee, or charge:
(i) imposed by a governmental entity;
(ii) separately identified as a tax, fee, or
charge in the transaction with the customer for the
telecommunications service; and
(iii) imposed only on a telecommunications
provider;
(b) sales and use taxes collected by the
telecommunications provider from a customer under Title
59, Chapter 12, Sales and Use Tax Act; or
(c) interest, a fee, or a charge that is charged by
a telecommunications provider on a customer for failure
to pay for telecommunications service when payment is
due.
(6) "Mobile telecommunications service" is as
defined in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act,
4 U.S.C. Sec. 124.
(7) "Municipality" means Tooele City Corporation.
(8) "Place of primary use":
(a) for telecommunications service other than
mobile telecommunications service, means the street
address representative of where the customer's use of the
telecommunications service primarily occurs, which shall
be:
(i) the residential street address of the
customer; or
(ii) the primary business street address of
the customer; or
(b) for mobile telecommunications service, is as
defined in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act,
4 U.S.C. Sec. 124.
(9) Notwithstanding where a call is billed or paid,
"service address" means:
(a) if the location described in this Subsection
(9) (a) is known, the location of the telecommunications
equipment:
(i) to which a call is charged; and
(ii) from which the call originates or
terminates;
(b) if the location described in Subsection (9) (a)
is not known but the location described in this Subsection
(9) (b) is known, the location of the origination point of
the signal of the telecommunications service first
identified by:
(i) the telecommunications system of the
telecommunications provider; or
(ii) if the system used to transport the signal
is not a system of the telecommunications provider,
information received by the telecommunications provider
from its service provider; or
(c) if the locations described in Subsection (9)
(a) or (b) are not known, the location of a customer's place
of primary use.
(10) (a) Subject to Subsections (10) (b) and (10) (c),
"telecommunications provider" means a person that:
(i) owns, controls, operates, or manages a
telecommunications service; or
(ii) engages in an activity described in
Subsection (10) (a) (i) for the shared use with or resale to
any person of the telecommunications service.
(March 24, 2017) 5-36
(b) A person described in Subsection (10) (a) is
a telecommunications provider whether or not the Public
Service Commission of Utah regulates:
(i) that person; or
(ii) the telecommunications service that the
person owns, controls, operates, or manages.
(c) "Telecommunications provider" does not
include an aggregator as defined in Utah Code Section 54-
8b-2.
(11) "Telecommunications service" means:
(a) telephone service, as defined in Utah Code
Section 59-12-102, other than mobile telecommunications
service, that originates and terminates within the
boundaries of this state; and
(b) mobile telecommunications service, as
defined in Utah Code Section 59-12-102:
(i) that originates and terminates within the
boundaries of one state; and
(ii) only to the extent permitted by the
Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act, 4 U.S.C. Sec.
116 et seq.
(Ord. 2004-08, 06-16-04)
5-18c-2. Levy of tax.
There is hereby levied a municipal
telecommunications license tax on the gross receipts from
telecommunications service attributed to this municipality.
(Ord. 2004-08, 06-16-04)
5-18c-3. Tax Rate
The rate of the tax levy shall be 3.5% of the
telecommunication provider’s gross receipts from
telecommunications service that are attributed to the
municipality. If the location of a transaction is
determined to be other than this municipality then the rate
imposed on the gross receipts for telecommunications
services shall be determined pursuant to the provisions of
Utah Code Section 10-1-407.
(Ord. 2007-14, 04-04-2007); (Ord. 2004-08, 06-16-04)
5-18c-4. Rate limitation and exemption therefrom.
This rate of this levy shall not exceed 4% of the
telecommunication provider’s gross receipts from
telecommunication service attributed to the municipality
unless a higher rate is approved by a majority vote of the
voters in this municipality that vote in:
(a) a municipal general election;
(b) a regular general election; or
(c) a local special election.
(Ord. 2004-08, 06-16-04)
5-18c-5. Effective date of tax levy.
This tax shall be levied beginning July 1, 2004.
(Ord. 2004-08, 06-16-04)
5-18c-6. Changes in Rate or Repeal of the Tax.
This ordinance is subject to the requirements of Utah
Code Section 10-1-403. If the tax rate is changed or the
tax is repealed, then the appropriate notice shall be given
as provided in Utah Code Section 10-1-403.
(Ord. 2004-08, 06-16-04)
5-18c-7. Interlocal Agreement for collection of the tax.
On or before the effective date of the ordinance, the
municipality shall enter into the uniform interlocal
agreement with the Commission as described in Utah
Code Section 10-1-405 for the collection, enforcement,
and administration of this municipal telecommunications
license tax;
(Ord. 2004-08, 06-16-04)
5-18c-8. Procedures for taxes erroneously recovered
from customers.
Pursuant to the provisions of Utah Code Section 10-
1-408, a customer may not bring a cause of action against
a telecommunications provider on the basis that the
telecommunications provider erroneously recovered from
the customer the municipal telecommunication license tax
except as provided in Utah Code Section 10-1-408.
(Ord. 2004-08, 06-16-04)
5-18c-9. Repeal of inconsistent taxes and fees.
Any tax or fee previously enacted by this
municipality under authority of Utah Code Section 10-1-
203 or Utah Code Title 11, Chapter 26, Local Taxation of
Utilities Limitation is hereby repealed.
(Ord. 2004-08, 06-16-04)
(March 24, 2017) 5-37
CHAPTER 19. FRANCHISE TO MOUNTAIN
STATES TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH
COMPANY
5-19-1. Twenty five (25) year franchise to
maintain equipment in public rights
of way.
5-19-2. Company subject to regulations of city.
5-19-3. City has right to maintain fire
alarm and police systems upon
company poles.
5-19-4. Permit necessary to move
structures which interfere with
company equipment.
5-19-5. Company waives no previous rights
obtained to maintain equipment on
public rights of way.
5-19-6. Repealed.
5-19-7. Payments in lieu of all other taxes.
5-19-8. Provisions for publication.
5-19-9. Conflicting ordinances repealed.
5-19-1. Twenty-five (25) year franchise to maintain
equipment in public rights of way.
There is hereby granted to the Mountain States
Telephone and Telegraph Company, a corporation, its
successors and assigns, for a period of twenty-five (25)
years from and after the effective date of this
Ordinance, the right and privilege to construct, erect,
operate and maintain in, upon, along, across, above,
under and over the streets, alleys, public ways and
public places, now or hereafter laid out or dedicated,
and all extensions thereof and additions thereto in the
City of Tooele, poles, wires, cables, underground
conduits, manholes and other fixtures and equipment
necessary or proper for the maintenance and operation
in said City of a telephone exchange and lines
connected therewith; provided, however, that no poles
or other fixtures shall be placed where the same will
interfere with any gas mains, electric light or power
lines, water hydrant or water main; and all such poles or
other fixtures placed on any street shall be placed at the
outer edge of the sidewalk and inside the curb line, and
those placed close to the line of the lot abutting on said
alleys; such equipment or fixtures in any event shall be
placed in such a manner as not to interfere with the
usual travel on said streets, alleys and public ways.
(Ord. 83-22, 12-07-83)
5-19-2. Company subject to regulations of city.
During the life of this franchise, the Company shall
be subject to all lawful exercises of the police power by
the City and to such reasonable regulations thereunder
as the City may by Ordinance thereafter provide. It is
expressly understood and agreed by and between the
said Company and the City that the Company shall save
the City harmless from all loss sustained by the City on
account of any suit, judgment, execution, claim or
demand whatsoever resulting from negligence on the
part of the Company in the construction and
maintenance of its telephone system in the City. The
City shall notify the Company's representative within
five (5) days after the presentation of any claim or
demand, either by suit or otherwise made against the
City on account of any negligence as aforesaid on the
part of the Company. (Ord. 83-22, 12-07-83)
5-19-3. City has right to maintain fire alarm and
police systems upon company poles.
The City shall have the right and privilege during
the life of this franchise, without charge, where aerial
construction of said Company exists, to place and
maintain upon the poles of said Company within the
corporate limits, wires and fixtures necessary for police
and fire alarm systems, such wires and fixtures to be
placed and maintained under the supervision of the
Company. The City in its use and maintenance of such
wires and fixtures shall at all times comply with the
rules and regulations of the Company, and the
provisions of the latest edition of the National Electrical
Safety Code as that there may be minimum danger of
contact or conflict between the wires and fixtures of the
Company and the wires and fixtures of the City. It is
further agreed, in order to avoid danger to life and
property, that the above privilege is granted on
conditions that no such police or fire alarm wires or
fixtures of the City shall be placed on poles carrying
electric light or power wires, nor shall said police or fire
alarm wires or other fixtures be exposed, without the
consent of the Company to the danger of contact with
any conductor carrying a voltage greater than the
normal telephone voltage. The City shall be solely
responsible for all injury to persons or damage to
property arising out of the construction or maintenance
of said police and fire alarm fixtures, or arising out of
the attachment, maintenance or removal of said wires
and fixtures to the poles of the Company. In cases or
re-arrangement of the Company's plant or removal of
poles or fixtures, the City shall care for or remove its
own fixtures, and shall save the Company harmless
from any damage or injury to persons or property,
including property of the City, arising out of the
removal or construction of its wires or other fixtures.
(Ord. 83-22, 12-07-83)
5-19-4. Permit necessary to move structures which
interfere with company equipment.
Any person or corporation desiring to move a
building or other improvement along, or to make any
unusual use of the streets, alleys and public ways of the
City which, in movement or use would interfere with the
poles, wires or other fixtures of the Company or the
(March 24, 2017) 5-38
City, shall first give notice to the Company of the City,
as the case may be, and shall pay to the Company or the
City, as the case may be, a sum sufficient to cover the
expenses and damage incident to the cutting, altering
and moving the wires or other fixtures of the Company
or the City, and shall make application for a permit from
the City for such movement or use. Before a permit is
given to the City therefor, the applicant shall present a
receipt from the Company showing such payment.
Thereupon, the Company, upon presentation of the said
permit, shall within forty-eight (48) hours thereafter
provide for and do such cutting, altering and moving of
the wires or other fixtures of said Company as may be
necessary to allow such moving or other unusual use of
the streets, alleys and public ways of the City. (Ord. 83-
22, 12-07-83)
5-19-5. Company waives no previous rights
obtained to maintain equipment on public rights of
way.
It is expressly understood and agreed by the City
that the enactment of this Franchise and its acceptance
by the Company was and is made upon the express
condition and understanding that neither the said
enactment or the grant or acceptance of this franchise
shall constitute a waiver upon the part of the Company
of any rights or claims had or made by said Company
with respect to the occupancy of the streets, alleys and
public places of the City under the law of the Territory
of Utah and under the constitutional and general statutes
of the State of Utah, nor shall anything in this franchise
in anyway prejudice or impair any rights or claims
existing independently of this franchise of said
Company or its predecessors or successors with respect
to the construction, operation and maintenance, either
before or after the life of this franchise, or a telephone
system in said City. (Ord. 83-22, 12-07-83)
5-19-6. Repealed.
(Ord. 83-22, 12-07-83)
5-19-7. Payments in lieu of all other taxes.
In consideration of the payments hereinabove
provided for, it is expressly understood and agreed by
the City and the Company that the payments so
provided in Section 5-13-6 hereof shall be in lieu of any
and all other franchise, license, privilege, occupation, or
any other form of excise or revenue tax (except general
and valorem property taxes and special assessment for
local improvements), based upon or measured by the
revenue, employees, payroll, property, poles, wires,
instruments, conduits, pipes, fixtures or other
appurtenances of the Company, and all other property
or equipment of the Company or any part thereof;
provided that said payments shall continue only so long
as the Company is not prohibited from making the same
by any lawful authority having jurisdiction in the
premises, and so long as the City does not charge, levy
or collect, or attempt to charge, levy or collect any of
the forms of taxes specified above in this paragraph;
and if any lawful authority having jurisdiction in the
premises shall hereafter prohibit such payment or
payments, or if the City does levy, charge or collect or
attempt to levy, charge or collect any of the forms of
taxes specified in this paragraph, the obligation to make
such payments as hereinabove provided shall forthwith
cease. (Ord. 83-22, 12-07-83)
5-19-8. Provisions for publication.
This ordinance shall be deposited in the office of
the City Recorder of the City of Tooele and shall be
published once in a daily newspaper published in said
City within seven (7) days after filing, and shall be in
full force and effect on the ____ day of ________,
19__, provided the Company, within thirty (30) days
after the passage and approval of this ordinance shall
have filed with the City Council of the City of Tooele,
Utah, an unconditional acceptance thereof in writing.
Within ten (10) days after the filing of said acceptance,
the City Recorder, by letter addressed to the Secretary
of said Company at Denver, Colorado, shall
acknowledge the receipt of said acceptance. (Ord. 83-
22, 12-07-83)
5-19-9. Conflicting ordinances repealed.
All ordinances in conflict herewith are expressly
repealed. (Ord. 83-22, 12-07-83)
5-39 (November 20, 2019)
CHAPTER 20. BEER LICENSES
5-20-1. Definitions.
5-20-2. Unlawful to engage in retail beer sales
without a license.
5-20-3. Beer licenses classified.
5-20-4. Class A retailer license.
5-20-5. Class B restaurant license.
5-20-6. Class C tavern license.
5-20-7. Class D private facility license.
5-20-8. Class E public facility license.
5-20-9. Class F brewery license.
5-20-10. Combination B and C license.
5-20-11. Seasonal or event license.
5-20-12. Liquor license - General requirements.
5-20-13. Application for license - General
requirements.
5-20-14. Referral to police department.
5-20-15. Grounds for denial.
5-20-16. Approval or denial of license - Appeals.
5-20-17. License renewals.
5-20-18. Transfer of license.
5-20-19. License fees.
5-20-20. Referral to Health and Community
Development Departments
5-20-21. Class C tavern license restriction.
5-20-22. Expiration of license.
5-20-23. Display of licenses.
5-20-24. Periodic inspection of premises by police
department.
5-20-25. License suspension - Appeals.
5-20-26. License revocation - Appeals.
5-20-27. Unlawful to sell beer or liquor without
license
5-20-27a. Unlawful to sell beer or liquor to minors.
5-20-27b. Unlawful for minor to sell beer or liquor.
5-20-27c. Unlawful to fail to notify law enforcement
of criminal activity.
5-20-28. Unlawful to allow consumption of liquor
without license.
5-20-29. Unlawful to consume liquor at
unlicensed establishment.
5-20-30. Unlawful to store liquor.
5-20-31. Minimum light and open view required in
licensed premises.
5-20-32. Presence of minors in certain
establishments prohibited.
5-20-33. Unlawful to permit minors in a
class C establishment.
5-20-34. Presence of minors in lounge or bar areas.
5-20-35. Unlawful to permit intoxicated
person on licensed premises.
5-20-36. Sale or disposition of beer
between certain hours unlawful.
5-20-37. Sanctions.
5-20-38. Regulation of kegs and other large
containers.
5-20-1. Definitions.
The words and phrases used in this Chapter shall
have the meanings given them by Utah Code §32B-1-102,
as amended unless a different meaning is clearly indicated
from the context of the provision in question.
(Ord. 2017-16, 05-17-2017) (Ord. 2002-05, 04-03-2002)
(Ord. 1985-01, 02-26-1985)
5-20-2. Unlawful to engage in retail beer sales
without a license.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the
business of the sale of beer at retail, in bottles, cans, or
draft, within the corporate limits of Tooele City without
first having procured a license from Tooele City for each
place of sale. All licenses shall comply with the
provisions of the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act,
implementing regulations, and this Chapter. A license
granted pursuant to this Chapter shall not waive the
licensee’s obligation to comply with applicable state of
Utah laws and regulations.
(Ord. 2005-09, 05-18-2005) (Ord. 2002-05, 04-03-2002)
(Ord. 1985-01, 02-26-1985)
5-20-3. Beer licenses classified.
Licenses issued under the provisions of this
Chapter shall be classified into the following types, which
shall carry the privileges and responsibilities hereinafter
set forth in this Chapter: Class A, Class B, Class C, Class
D, Class E, Class F, and Seasonal or Event.
(Ord. 2017-16, 05-17-2017) (Ord. 2002-05, 04-03-2002)
(Ord. 1985-01, 02-26-1985)
5-20-4. Class A retailer license.
A Class A license shall entitle the licensee to sell beer
at the establishment described in the license in original
containers for consumption off the premises in accordance
with the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act and this
Chapter; provided, however, that it shall be unlawful for
the licensee to sell or distribute beer in any container
larger than 2 liters.
(Ord. 2017-16, 05-17-2017) (Ord. 2002-05, 04-03-2002)
(Ord. 1985-01, 02-26-1985)
5-20-5. Class B restaurant license.
(1) A Class B license shall entitle the licensee to
sell beer in the original containers at the establishment for
consumption at the licensed establishment.
(2) Only bona fide restaurants, where a variety of
hot food is prepared and cooked, and where complete
meals are served to the general public in connection with
indoor dining accommodations, shall be entitled to Class
B licenses. All Class B licensees shall maintain records,
including invoices, vouchers, and receipts, which shall
disclose the gross dollar sales of food served for
consumption on the licensed premises during each and
every month of the year. In those licensed establishments
which are also licensed by the state of Utah to allow
consumption of liquor on the premises, the sale of
5-40 (November 20, 2019)
carbonated and noncarbonated soft drinks, soda water,
water, and other mixers shall not constitute the sale of
food within the meaning of this Chapter, and such
licensees shall maintain a separate record which shall
disclose the gross sales of such mixers during each and
every month of the year. The licensee shall make all gross
dollar sales records available for inspection and audit by
the City within 48 hours of the City’s written request to
inspect and audit the records. Failure of a licensee to
properly maintain or make available records of gross
dollar sales for inspection and audit shall be cause for
revocation of the Class B license. If an audit or inspection
discloses that the sales of food served for consumption on
any licensed premises hereunder are less than 60% of the
gross dollar sales for any month, the licensee shall be
required to submit to the Department, within 15 days from
the date of written notice mailed to the licensee of the
results of the inspection and audit, a written plan detailing
all corrective actions to be taken by the licensee to comply
with the provisions of the Class B license. Failure to
submit the plan in a timely and complete manner, or
failure to adhere to the substance and timing of the plan,
shall be grounds for license suspension.
(3) No person under the age of 21 years shall serve
beer under this license.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2017-16, 05-17-2017)
(Ord. 2002-05, 04-03-2002) (Ord. 1985-01, 02-26-1985)
5-20-6. Class C tavern license.
A Class C license shall entitle the licensee to sell beer
on draft or in the original containers for consumption on
or off the establishment premises. No person under the
age of 21 years shall sell or serve beer under this license.
(Ord. 2017-16, 05-17-2017) (Ord. 2002-05, 04-03-2002)
(Ord. 85-01, 02-26-1985)
5-20-7. Class D private facility license.
A Class D license shall entitle the licensee to sell beer
for consumption on the licensed premises of a privatelyowned
recreational facility, such as a bowling alley. No
person under the age of 21 years of age may serve beer
under this license. All sales and deliveries under this
license shall be made directly to the consumer.
(Ord. 2017-16, 05-17-2017) (Ord. 2002-05, 04-03-2002)
(Ord. 1985-01, 02-26-1985)
5-20-8. Class E public facility license.
A Class E license shall entitle the licensee to sell beer
for consumption on publicly-owned recreational facilities,
such as a municipal golf course; provided, however, that
no such Class E license shall be issued unless the
prospective licensee shall first obtain a concession
contract from the public body owning the recreation
facility involved. No person under the age of 21 years of
age may serve beer under this license. All sales and
deliveries under this license shall be made directly to the
consumer.
(Ord. 2017-16, 05-17-2017) (Ord. 2002-05, 04-03-2002)
(Ord. 1985-01, 02-26-1985)
5-20-9. Class F brew pub license.
(1) A Class F license shall entitle the licensee that
operates a brew pub or micro-brewery to sell beer in
conjunction with the sale of food. No person under the
age of 21 years shall sell or serve beer under this license.
(2) Definitions.
(a) Brew pub. A restaurant-type establishment
which also has a beer brewery, producing beer for sale and
consumption on site or for retail carry-out sale in
containers holding less than 2 liters.
(b) Micro-brewery. A brew pub which markets
beer wholesale in barrels (31 U.S. gallons each).
(Ord. 2017-16, 05-17-2017) (Ord. 2002-05, 04-03-2002)
5-20-10. Combination B and C license.
A Combination B and C license shall entitle the
licensee to sell beer pursuant to both Class B and Class C
licenses, at the same establishment; provided, however,
that the restaurant and tavern facilities are designed and
separated according to state of Utah laws and regulations.
The Class B licensed portion of the establishment shall
comply with the Class B license requirements. The Class
C licensed portion of the establishment shall comply with
the Class C license requirements. A Combination B and
C license may be approved in conjunction with a Class F
brew pub license.
(Ord. 2002-05, 04-03-2002)
5-20-11. Seasonal or Event license.
A Seasonal or Event license shall apply to all limitedduration
activities, promotions, and sporting events. This
license is temporary in nature and shall be issued for a
maximum of 30 days. The licensee shall be entitled to sell
beer on draft for consumption on or off the premises. The
licensee may also sell beer in the original container;
provided, however, that it shall be unlawful for the
licensee to sell or distribute beer in any container larger
than one-half gallon. No person under the age of 21 years
of age shall serve beer under this license.
(Ord. 2017-16, 05-17-2017) (Ord. 2002-05, 04-03-2002)
(Ord. 1985-01, 02-26-1985)
5-20-12. Liquor license.
Any license for liquor consumption license shall be
obtained from the State of Utah. A liquor license shall
entitle the licensee to permit customers, members, guests,
visitors, or other persons to possess or consume liquor at
the licensed establishment. No person under the age of 21
years of age shall serve liquor under this license.
(Ord. 2017-16, 05-17-2017) (Ord. 2002-05, 04-03-2002)
(Ord. 1985-01, 02-26-1985)
5-20-13. Application for license; general
requirements.
(1) Application for any license issued pursuant to
this Chapter shall be upon a form furnished by the
5-41 (November 20, 2019)
Department, signed under oath by the applicant.
(2) The applicant shall be either the majority owner
of the establishment or the senior individual charged with
operating the establishment.
(3) The following information shall be shown on or
attached to the application form:
(a) Age of applicant; if the applicant is a
business association, then the age of the senior individual
charged with operation of the establishment;
(b) Citizenship of applicant; if the applicant is
a business association, then the citizenship of the senior
individual charged with operation of the establishment;
(c) Certified copy of applicant’s criminal
history, the certification being within 30 days of
submitting the completed application to the Department ;
if the applicant is a business association, then the criminal
history of the senior individual charged with operation of
the establishment; and,
(d) Copies of other alcohol licenses issued to the
applicant for the 3 years previous to the date of
application. If copies are unavailable, the applicant shall
supply a complete list of said licenses, including the type
of license, the licensed address, and licensing jurisdiction.
(e) Copies of all information provided to the
state of Utah pursuant to state alcoholic beverage
licensing requirements.
(f) The names of all owners, managers, officers,
directors, or other persons with control over the operation
of the establishment.
(g) If the applicant is a business association,
copies of an enterprise’s current articles of incorporation,
by-laws, partnership agreement, and other documents
governing the enterprise.
(h) Other information reasonably required by
the Department.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2017-16, 05-17-2017)
(Ord. 2002-05, 04-03-2002) (Ord. 1999-02, 01-20-1999)
(Ord. 1985-01, 02-26-1985)
5-20-14. Referral to police department.
All applications filed in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter shall be referred to the Police
Department for inspection. After inspection, the Police
Department shall return the application to the Department,
together with any recommendation regarding an
application’s approval, together with any supporting
information or documentation.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2005-09, 05-18-2005)
(Ord. 2002-05, 04-03-2002) (Ord. 1999-02, 01-20-1999)
5-20-15. Grounds for denial.
A license applied for pursuant to this Chapter shall be
denied upon the occurrence of any one of the following
grounds for denial:
(1) Conviction of any felony criminal offense,
federal or of any state, within 10 years of the date of
application;
(2) Conviction of any alcohol-related misdemeanor
criminal offense, federal or of any state, within 5 years of
the date of application;
(3) Conviction of any misdemeanor criminal offense
involving moral turpitude within 5 years of the date of
application; a criminal offense involving moral turpitude
shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(a) sexual crimes, such as lewdness;
(b) theft crimes, such as retail theft; and,
(c) honesty crimes, such as providing false
information to a peace officer;
(4) Knowingly providing false information on or
with the license application, or to the Department or
Police Department in reference to the license application;
(5) Proximity. The proximity restrictions contained
in Utah Code §32B-1-202, as amended, shall apply to
establishments licensed pursuant to this Chapter. A
Combination B and C license establishment and a Class F
license brew pub establishment shall be considered
restaurants for purposes of proximity;
(6) Any violations of the terms of any alcohol
license issued by another jurisdiction within 2 years of the
date of application;
(7) Any undisclosed violations of the terms of any
alcohol license issued by another jurisdiction within 5
years of the date of application; and,
(8) Any violation of the terms of any license issued
pursuant to this Chapter within 2 years of the date of
application. If the violation resulted in a license
revocation, the time period shall be 3 years.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2017-16, 05-17-2017)
(Ord. 2002-05, 04-03-2002)
5-20-16. Approval or denial of license; appeal.
(1) A license shall be denied by the Business
License Specialist, in consultation with the Director, upon
a finding by a preponderance of the evidence of any one
of the grounds listed in Section 5-20-15, herein.
(2) A license not approved within 15 days of return
of the application by the Police Department to the
Department shall be deemed denied.
(3) (a) An applicant whose license has been denied
may appeal in writing to the Director within ten days after
the denial. The appeal need not be on a particular form,
but must state the specific basis of the appeal. The
Director shall promptly issue a written decision.
(b) An applicant whose appeal has been denied
by the Director may appeal to the Administrative Hearing
Officer, pursuant to Chapter 1-28, by filing with the City
Recorder a written appeal within ten days after the
Director’s denial.
(4) A license applicant whose application has been
denied pursuant to Section 5-20-15(4), herein, shall be
ineligible to apply for another license for 1 year from the
date of denial.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2017-16, 05-17-2017)
(Ord. 2005-09, 05-18-2005) (Ord. 2002-05, 04-03-2002)
5-20-17. License renewals.
5-42 (November 20, 2019)
(1) Application to renew any license issued pursuant
to this Chapter shall be upon a renewal form furnished by
the Department, signed under oath by the applicant.
(2) Renewal applications received after November
30 of each calendar year shall comply with the
requirements of Section 5-20-13, herein. Any licensee
whose license expires shall immediately close the licensed
establishment. Failure to do so shall be a violation of this
Chapter.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2002-05, 04-03-2002)
(Ord. 1985-01, 02-26-1985)
5-20-18. Transfer of license.
A licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter shall not
be transferred to a new location or licensee.
(Ord. 2002-05, 04-03-2002) (Ord. 1985-01, 02-26-1985)
5-20-19. License fees.
(1) License application fees shall be paid at the time
of application, in amounts established by resolution of the
City Council.
(2) Exemption from the payment of the above fees
shall be pursuant to Section 5-1-7, above.
(Ord. 2002-05, 04-03-2002) (Ord. 1987-24, 01-02-1988)
Ord. (1985-01, 02-26-1985)
5-20-20. Referral to health department.
(1) Prior to the issuance of a business license for the
establishment premises, the Department shall request
inspection by the Health and Community Development
Departments.
(2) Among other things, said Departments shall
inspect the establishment and require compliance with
health and safety provisions of all codes applicable in
Tooele City.
(3) Any fees charged by said Departments shall be
in addition to the licensing fees established herein.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2002-05, 04-03-2002)
(Ord. 1999-02, 01-20-1999)
5-20-21. Class C tavern license restriction.
There shall be no more than 2 establishments licensed
with a Class C tavern license on any lineal block in Tooele
City. A lineal block is hereby defined to be both sides of
the street between the beginning and ending of any series
of street numbers measured East, West, North, or South,
according to the present street numbering system of
Tooele City, having a common number preceding the last
two digits contained therein or, in the case the street
numbers do not contain 3 or more digits, the whole of
such series of street numbers, as for example: from 0 to
99 West or from 200 to 299 South, and excluding all side
streets which intersect any other major street at a point
beginning and of a lineal block, as measured on said
major street. No such designated establishment shall be
allowed on side streets which are excluded from being
lineal blocks in the preceding sentence. A corner
establishment shall be included in the particular lineal
block indicated by its street address. The provisions of
this Section shall in no way affect the rights of present
licensees to continue their operations, so long as their
licenses remain in good standing, and to have their license
renewed as provided by law until removed or terminated
for any reason whatsoever.
(Ord. 2017-16, 05-17-2017) (Ord. 2002-05, 04-03-2002)
(Ord. 1985-01, 02-26-1985)
5-20-22. Expiration of license.
All licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this
Chapter shall expire on the 31st day of December of each
year and shall be issued for 1 year, except the following:
(1) Seasonal or Event Licenses. Seasonal or Event
licenses shall be issued for a maximum of 30 days.
(2) Licensee Ceases Operation.
(a) Any and all licenses issued pursuant to this
Chapter shall expire if the licensee ceases to operate the
licensed establishment.
(b) "Ceases to operate" for purposes of this
Chapter shall include but not be limited to the following:
(i) Licensee sells the business including all
assets;
(ii) The licensed establishment closes for
business for 30 days or more, unless a building permit has
been obtained from the City for construction at the
licensed premises;
(iii) Licensee's lease has expired or been
terminated at that location; and/or,
(iv) Licensee does not possess a valid
current Tooele City business license to conduct business
at that location.
(Ord. 2017-16, 05-17-2017) (Ord. 2002-05, 04-03-2002)
(Ord. 1985-01, 02-26-1985)
5-20-23. Display of licenses.
Each license issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be
displayed at all times on the licensed premises in a place
readily visible to the public.
(Ord. 2002-05, 04-03-2002) (Ord. 1985-01, 02-26-1985)
5-20-24. Periodic inspection of premises by police
department.
As an express condition of license approval, each
licensee agrees that the Police Department shall be
permitted to have access to all establishments licensed
pursuant to this Chapter. The Police Department shall
make periodic inspections of said premises and report its
findings to the Department by way of a police inspection
report.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2002-05, 04-03-2002)
(Ord. 1985-01, 02-26-1985)
5-20-25. License Suspension.
(1) The occurrence of one or more of the following
shall result in the suspension of a license issued pursuant
to this Chapter:
(a) a second or subsequent violation of any of
5-43 (November 20, 2019)
the provisions of this Chapter; or,
(b) failure to submit the plan required by
Section 5-20-5, herein, in a timely and complete manner,
or failure to adhere to the substance and timing of the
plan.
(2) Upon the occurrence of a violation under
Subsection (1), herein, the Department shall cause to be
mailed a Notice of Suspension. The notice shall state the
following:
(a) the grounds upon which the license has been
suspended;
(b) the length and commencement date of the
suspension;
(c) the right to appeal the suspension;;
(d) that the licensee may continue to serve and
sell alcohol pursuant to the terms of the license and the
provisions of this Chapter until the commencement of the
suspension.
(3) (a) An applicant whose license has been
suspended may appeal in writing to the Director within ten
days after the date of the Notice of Suspension. The
appeal need not be on a particular form, but must state the
specific basis of the appeal. The Director shall promptly
issue a written decision.
(b) An applicant whose appeal has been denied
by the Director may appeal to the Administrative Hearing
Officer, pursuant to Chapter 1-28, by filing with the City
Recorder a written appeal within ten days after the
Director’s denial.
(4) A suspension shall become effective at 8:00 a.m.
on the eighth day after the date of the Notice of
Suspension.
(5) A suspension shall be tolled during the pendency
of any appeal.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2005-09, 05-18-2005)
(Ord. 2002-05, 04-03-2002)
5-20-26. License Revocation.
(1) The occurrence of one or more of the following
shall result in a 1-year revocation of a license issued
pursuant to this Chapter:
(a) A fourth violation of the provisions of this
Chapter;
(b) Failure to maintain, or to make available for
inspection and audit, records of gross dollar sales, as
required by Section 5-20-5, herein.
(c) Discovery that the license applicant
knowingly provided false information on or with the
license application or to the Department or Police
Department in reference to the license application.
(2) Upon the occurrence of any of the above, the
Department shall cause to be mailed a Notice of
Revocation. The notice shall state the following:
(a) the grounds upon which the license has been
revoked;
(b) the length of the revocation;
(c) the right to appeal the revocation; and,
(d) that the licensee may continue to serve and
sell alcohol pursuant to the terms of the license and the
provision of this Chapter until the commencement of the
revocation.
(3) (a) An applicant whose license has been
revoked may appeal in writing to the Director within ten
days after the date of the Notice of Revocation. The
appeal need not be on a particular form, but must state the
specific basis of the appeal. The Director shall promptly
issue a written decision.
(b) An applicant whose appeal has been denied
by the Director may appeal to the Administrative Hearing
Officer, pursuant to Chapter 1-28, by filing with the City
Recorder a written appeal within ten days after the
Director’s denial.
(4) A revocation shall become effective at 8:00 on
the eighth calendar day after the date of the Notice of
Revocation.
(5) A revocation shall be tolled during the pendency
of any appeal.
(6) Any licensee whose license is revoked shall be
ineligible to re-apply for a license under this Chapter until
the expiration of 1 year from the date of the Notice of
Revocation or City Council decision upholding the
revocation.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2017-16, 05-17-2017)
(Ord. 2005-09, 05-18-2005) (Ord. 2002-05, 04-03-2002)
(Ord. 1985-01, 02-26-1985)
5-20-27. Unlawful to sell beer or liquor without
license.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell beer or
liquor on any premises without a license to do so, or in
any period during which a license is suspended or
revoked.
(Ord. 2002-05, 04-03-2002) (Ord. 1985-01, 02-26-1985)
5-20-27a. Unlawful to sell beer or liquor to minors.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell beer or
liquor to any person under the age of 21 years.
(Ord. 2005-09, 05-18-2005)
5-20-27b. Unlawful for minor to sell beer or liquor.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, manager
or lessee, or any agent, partner, or associates of any
establishment, to knowingly permit or allow any person
under the age of 21 years to sell beer or liquor, except as
otherwise permitted by State Law.
(Ord. 2005-09, 05-18-2005)
5-20-27c. Unlawful to fail to notify law enforcement
of criminal activity.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, manager,
or lessee, or any agent, partner, or associates of any
establishment, to fail to promptly notify law enforcement
officials of criminal activity that said persons knew or
should have known was occurring on the premises.
(Ord. 2005-09, 05-18-2005)
5-44 (November 20, 2019)
5-20-28. Unlawful to allow consumption of liquor
without license.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, manager,
or lessee, or any agent, partner, or associate of any
establishment to knowingly permit or allow customers,
members, guests, or any other person to consume liquor as
defined in this Title without first obtaining a license under
this Chapter.
(Ord. 2005-09, 05-18-2005) (Ord. 2002-05, 04-03-2002)
(Ord. 1985-01, 02-26-1985)
5-20-29. Unlawful to consume liquor at unlicensed
establishment.
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume liquor
in an unlicensed establishment that is subject to licensure
under this Chapter or the laws of the State of Utah.
(Ord. 2002-05, 04-03-2002) (Ord. 1985-01, 02-26-1985)
5-20-30. Unlawful to store liquor.
It shall be unlawful for any person to store any liquor
at an establishment licensed by this Chapter except at
those establishments which are licensed as private clubs
under Title 16 of the Utah State Code, or restaurants as
provided for in Title 32 of the Utah State Code.
(Ord. 2002-05, 04-03-2002) (Ord. 1985-01, 02-26-1985)
5-20-31. Minimum light and open view required in
licensed premises.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to own,
operate, or manage any establishment licensed for the sale
of beer without complying with the following lighting and
view requirements:
(a) During business hours a minimum of 1
candle power light measured at a level 5 feet above the
floor shall be maintained.
(b) No enclosed booths, blinds, or stalls shall be
erected or maintained.
(c) A clear, unobstructed view of all portions of
the interior shall be available at all times from a point
within the licensed premises at or near the main public
entrance.
(Ord. 2017-16, 05-17-2017) (Ord. 2002-05, 04-03-2002)
(Ord. 1985-01, 02-26-1985)
5-20-32. Presence of minors in certain establishments
prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of
21 years to enter or be at or about any establishment
licensed as a Class C license for the sale of beer, or to
drink beer or any intoxicating liquor in such licensed
premises.
(Ord. 2017-16, 05-17-2017) (Ord. 2002-05, 04-03-2002)
(Ord. 1985-01, 02-26-1985)
5-20-33. Unlawful to permit minors in a Class C
establishment.
It shall be unlawful for any licensee of an
establishment holding a Class C license for the sale of
beer, or any operator, agent or employee of such licensee
to permit any person under the age of 21 years to remain
in or about such licensed premises. As a requirement for
entering in or remaining in any Class C premises, the
business, its employee or agent may require the
presentation of a valid picture identification which
indicates the bearer's date of birth.
(Ord. 2017-16, 05-17-2017) (Ord. 2002-05, 04-03-2002)
(Ord. 1985-01, 02-26-1985)
5-20-34. Presence of minors in lounge or bar areas
unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21
to be in any lounge or bar area in premises licensed with
a Seasonal license for the sale of beer or in or around any
lounge or bar area in premises licensed with a liquor
consumption license.
(Ord. 2017-16, 05-17-2017) (Ord. 2002-05, 04-03-2002)
(Ord. 1985-01, 02-26-1985)
5-20-35. Unlawful to permit intoxicated person on
licensed premises.
It shall be unlawful for any person licensed to sell
beer, or licensed for liquor consumption, or for any of his
agents or employees, to serve beer or liquor to intoxicated
persons or to allow intoxicated persons to remain in or
about any licensed premises.
(Ord. 2002-05, 04-03-2002) (Ord. 1985-01, 02-26-1985)
5-20-36. Sale or disposition of beer between certain
hours unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any employee,
agent, or lessee thereof to sell, dispose of, give away or
deliver any beer or to permit the consumption of beer or
liquor on the licensed premises between the hours of 1:00
a.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any day. It shall be unlawful for the
holder of a Class C license or any employee or agent
thereof to allow the public, excluding employees
employed on that date, to enter in or remain on the
premises between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. of
any day. Provided, however, that on New Year's Day the
sale and consumption of beer or liquor on licensed
premises may be permitted until 4:00 a.m. of said day as
a limited exception to the foregoing requirement.
(Ord. 2017-16, 05-17-2017) (Ord. 2002-05, 04-03-2002)
(Ord. 1985-01, 02-26-1985)
5-20-37. Sanctions.
(1) A violation of any of the provisions herein by an
employee or agent of the licensee or establishment shall
be punished civilly as follows:
(a) First violation: $100 fine;
(b) Second and subsequent violations which
occur within a 24 month period of the first violation:
(i) Second violation: $200 fine;
(ii) Third violation: $300 fine;
(iii) Fourth and subsequent violations: $500
fine per violation.
5-45 (November 20, 2019)
(2) A violation of any of the provisions herein by
any employee or agent of the licensee shall be deemed a
violation by the licensee, and shall be punished civilly as
follows:
(a) First violation: $500 fine;
(b) Second or subsequent violations which occur
within a 24 month period of the first violation:
(i) Second violation: $1,000 fine, plus a 7-
day suspension of the establishment’s license, unless the
licensee can demonstrate that adequate training was
provided to the offending individual;
(ii) Third violation: $1,500 fine, plus a
thirty-day suspension of the establishment’s license,
unless the licensee can demonstrate that adequate training
was provided to the offending individual;
(iii) Fourth violation: license revocation.
(3) For purposes of determining the number of
licensee violations, violations by any one employee or
agent are cumulative with violations by any other
employee or agent.
(4) Notice of violation shall be provided by the
Police Department upon a citation form approved by the
Police Department.
(5) A licensee may appeal the citation to the
Director, who shall uphold, modify, or reject the citation
and the sanctions imposed.
(6) A licensee may appeal the decision of the
Director to the Administrative Hearing Officer under
Chapter 1-28.
(7) Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to
exempt any person from further civil or criminal liability.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2017-16, 05-17-2017)
(Ord. 2005-09, 05-18-2005) (Ord. 2002-05, 04-03-2002)
5-20-38. Regulation of kegs and other large
containers.
The sale of beer in kegs and other large containers
shall be pursuant to the provisions of the Utah Alcoholic
Beverage Control Act (U.C.A. Title 32B, as amended).
(Ord. 2017-16, 05-17-2017) (Ord. 2002-05, 04-03-2002)
5-46 (November 20, 2019)
CHAPTER 21. TOWING COMPANIES
5-21-1. Purpose and intent.
5-21-2. License required.
5-21-3. Definitions.
5-21-4. Insurance, renewal and denial of license.
5-21-5. Fees.
5-21-6. Rates and charges.
5-21-7. Accountability and inspection.
5-21-8. Notice requirements.
5-21-9. Regulations.
5-21-10. Revocation or suspension.
5-21-11. Penalty.
5-22-12. Appeal.
5-21-1. Purpose and intent.
(1) It is hereby declared by the Tooele City
Council that, pursuant to the authority granted by state
law and the city charter, in order to protect the public,
to protect the rights of persons whose cars may be
towed, and to preserve the peace of the community, the
licensing and regulation of business enterprises engaged
in the practice of towing, removing, and storing of
motor vehicles from public rights-of-way and from
private property are matters affecting the public interest,
and any person desiring to conduct such a business
enterprise shall be required to obtain a business license
and to obey the regulations of this Chapter and this
Title.
(2) The purpose of this Chapter is, further, to
provide a uniform system for the licensing and
regulation of business enterprises which are engaged in
or which intend to engage in the practice of towing,
removing, and storing of motor vehicles which are
parked illegally or dangerously in the public right-ofway
or which are parked on private property, allegedly
without permission of the owner of the private property,
or parked allegedly beyond the time paid for or
authorized.
(Ord. 2016-12, 07-06-2016) (Ord. 1988-27, 09-07-
1988)
5-21-2. License required.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any business enterprise
to engage in the business of towing, removing, and
storing of motor vehicles, which are parked illegally or
dangerously in the public right-of-way or which are
parked on private property without the permission of
the owner of the private property, without first having
secured a business license from the city to do so, if the
business has a business location in Tooele City.
(2) There is no requirement that employees of
such business enterprise have a business license
otherwise required by this Title. The business
enterprise itself shall apply for, obtain, and maintain the
business license.
(Ord. 2016-12, 07-06-2016) (Ord. 1988-27, 09-07-
1988)
5-21-3. Definitions.
As used in this Chapter :
(1) “Business Enterprise” means a unit of
economic organization or activity in the form of person,
firm, partnership, corporation, trust, association, or
other business entity.
(2) “Property Owner” means any person in lawful
possession of private property, including but not limited
to the legal title holder, lessee, or property manager. In
no case shall any owner, operator, or agent of a business
enterprise engaged in the towing of vehicles be
considered a property owner unless they are the legal
title holder or in possession of said property.
(3) “Removing” means the act of changing, by
towing, the location of a parked vehicle from its
location in the public right-of-way or on private
property to a storage site.
(4) “Storing” means to place and to leave a towed
vehicle at a site where a business enterprise exercises
control and supervision over the vehicle.
(5) “Towing” means drawing or pulling a vehicle
by means of another vehicle equipped with booms, car
carriers, winches, or other similar equipment.
(Ord. 2016-12, 07-06-2016) (Ord. 1988-27, 09-07-
1988)
5-21-4. Issuance, renewal and denial of license.
(1) The Department, in consultation with the
Police Department, shall approve the issuance or
renewal of a business license hereunder where the
Department finds:
(a) that the applying business enterprise does
not have as an officer, director, partner, manager, or
sole proprietor,, a person who is or was an officer,
director, partner, manager, or sole proprietor of a
business enterprise which has had its towing license
revoked by action of Tooele City within five years of
the date of application, or who has been convicted of
any theft-related crime or a crime involving violence
within seven years of the date of the application; and,
(b) that the tow or storage yard has been
inspected and found to be in compliance with the
requirements of this Chapter, the fire code, and all other
applicable state and local laws and regulations.
(2) A business license issued or renewed pursuant
to the provisions of this Title shall not be assignable or
transferable from one business enterprise to another
business enterprise.
(3) The business license shall remain valid
through December 31st of any given year unless sooner
revoked or suspended.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2016-12, 07-06-
2016) (Ord. 1988-27, 09-07-1988)
5-47 (November 20, 2019)
5-21-5. Fees.
In accordance with the policy of the City, the costs
of the enforcement of laws regulating towing businesses
shall be borne by the business license applicant,
licensee, or permittee, and current costs shall be
reflected in the fees required for such license or permit.
(Ord. 2016-12, 07-06-2016) (Ord. 1988-27, 09-07-
1988)
5-21-6. Rates and charges.
It shall be unlawful to:
(1) Tow or remove or store a vehicle unless the
business enterprise shall file and keep on record with
the Department and the Police Department a complete
copy of the current rates charged for the towing and
storage of vehicles and copies of all written contracts or
agreements between the business enterprise and
property owners which relate to the towing and removal
of vehicles.
(2) Tow or remove or store a vehicle unless the
current rates charged for the towing and storage of
vehicles are posted in an open and conspicuous public
place on the premises from which the vehicle is
removed and of the business enterprise doing the
towing.
(3) Pay or rebate money, or solicit or offer the
payment or rebate of money, or other valuable
consideration, to property owners for the privilege of
towing or removing vehicles from their property.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2016-12, 07-06-
2016) (Ord. 1988-27, 09-07-1988)
5-21-7. Accountability and inspection.
A record of all towing and storage transactions
relating to the impounding of vehicles from private
property shall be maintained and kept on file in the
office of the business enterprise. Such records shall
include consecutively numbered receipts for all
transactions, and shall be available for inspection during
normal working hours of the business by the
Department or the Police Department.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2016-12, 07-06-
2016) (Ord. 1988-27, 09-07-1988)
5-21-8. Notice requirements.
It shall be unlawful to tow or remove or store a
vehicle unless notice is posted on the private property
from which the towing, removing, or storing is made.
Such notice shall fulfill the requirements of state law.
(Ord. 2016-12, 07-06-2016) (Ord. 1988-27, 09-07-
1988)
5-21-9. Regulations.
It shall be unlawful to:
(1) Tow or remove or store a vehicle except upon
the express written authorization issued to the business
enterprise by the person in lawful possession of the
private property or his agent or employee. Such
authorization shall include the make, model, and license
number of the vehicle to be towed and shall be signed
by the property owner or his agent or employee
immediately prior to or at the time of towing.
(2) Tow or remove or store a vehicle where the
registered owner or other legally authorized person in
control of the vehicle arrives at the scene of potential
towing prior to towing or removal and promptly
removes the vehicle or establishes authorization for the
vehicle’s presence.
(3) Tow or remove a vehicle occupied by a person
or persons.
(4) Tow or remove or store a vehicle unless the
towing business enterprise notifies the city police
department immediately upon arrival at the garage.
Such notification shall include the storage site, the time
the vehicle was towed or removed, and the make,
model, color, license plate number and vehicle
identification number of the vehicle. The person
making the notification shall obtain the name of the
person at the police department to whom such
information was reported and indicate the name on a
trip record, together with an indication of the date and
time of the day in hours and minutes that the vehicle
was removed, and the authorizing party.
(5) Tow or remove or store a vehicle unless the
vehicle is towed directly to the business enterprise's
garage or yard, not including any temporary holding or
public area.
(6) Store a vehicle in a garage or yard located
further than 5 miles from the point of removal unless no
closer facility is available. If no garage or yard is
located within a 5-mile radius of the point of removal,
the closest available garage shall be utilized; however,
in no case shall a vehicle be towed further than 10 miles
from the point of tow. If the business enterprise doing
the towing owns no garage or yard within 5 miles, any
other available storage garage or yard within 5 miles
may be used.
(7) Store a vehicle in a building or fenced area
that does not comply with the following requirements:
(a) If stored in an area other than a building,
the yard shall be surrounded on all sides by a fence of
approved construction not less than 6 feet high and
maintained in good condition.
(b) The business name, address, and telephone
number shall be displayed on the exterior of such
building or fence in such a manner to be visible for 50
feet and in compliance with city sign ordinances.
(c) Exterior portions of such business must be
maintained free of oil, parts, and wash.
(d) No vehicle or part thereof may be placed
closer than 2 feet from any fence or wall.
(e) Tow or remove or store a vehicle without
5-48 (November 20, 2019)
24-hour telephone access and vehicle release
availability. During nonbusiness hours, tow companies
shall not be required to release vehicles except upon
request of a police supervisor.
(Ord. 2016-12, 07-06-2016) (Ord. 1988-27, 09-07-
1988)
5-21-10. Revocation or suspension.
In addition to the grounds enumerated elsewhere in
this Chapter and in Chapter 1 of this Title, in the event
that any person holding a license or permit issued
pursuant to this Chapter is convicted of any of those
crimes enumerated in Section 4 of this Chapter or
repeatedly fails to comply with city or state vehicle
code regulations regarding towing and storage of
vehicles, the Director may, in addition to other
penalties provided by this Code, suspend or revoke the
business license or permit.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2016-12, 07-06-
2016) (Ord. 1988-27, 09-07-1988)
5-21-11. Penalty.
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any
provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a class "B"
misdemeanor, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
(Ord. 2016-12, 07-06-2016) (Ord. 1988-27, 09-07-
1988)
5-22-12. Appeal.
The licensee may appeal the Director’s decision to
revoke or suspend the license to the Administrative
Hearing Officer, under Chapter 1-28, by filing a written
appeal with the City Recorder, within ten days of the
Director’s notice of revocation or suspension.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019)
(November 20, 2019) 5-49
CHAPTER 22. ICE CREAM TRUCKS
5-22-1. Definitions.
5-22-2. Duty of approaching vehicles.
5-22-3. License and insurance.
5-22-3.1. Application for license.
5-22-3.2. License Fee.
5-22-3.3. Review of application and issuance of
license.
5-22-3.4. Denial of license and right of appeal.
5-22-3.5. Photographs and identity badges.
5-22-4. Required equipment.
5-22-5. Inspection.
5-22-6. Restrictions.
5-22-7. Backing restricted.
5-22-8. Penalty.
5-22-1. Definitions.
(1) "Ice cream truck" means every motor vehicle in
which ice cream, popsicles, ice sherbets or frozen
desserts of any kind are carried for purposes of retail
sale on the city streets.
(2) "Vend" or "vending" means offering ice cream,
popsicles, ice sherbets or frozen desserts for sale from a
motor vehicle on the city streets.
(3) "Operator" includes every person, firm or
corporation who operates, or who owns, leases,
contracts or in any other fashion permits a person to
operate, any ice cream truck for the purpose of vending.
(Ord. 1988-22, 10-05-1988)
5-22-2. Duty of approaching vehicles.
A driver of a vehicle meeting or overtaking from
either direction an ice cream truck stopped on the street
may proceed past such truck at a reasonable and prudent
speed, not exceeding fifteen miles per hour, and shall
yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian who crosses the
roadway to or from the ice cream truck.
(Ord. 1988-22, 10-05-1988)
5-22-3. License and insurance.
(1) It shall be unlawful to vend from an ice cream
truck without having a business license therefor.
(2) No business license shall be issued to a vendor
selling from an ice cream truck unless a certificate is
furnished to the City showing that the vendor is carrying
the following minimum amounts of insurance: public
liability insurance in an amount of not less than $1
million for injuries, including those resulting in death,
resulting from any one occurrence and on account of
any one accident; property damage insurance in an
amount of not less than $100,000 for damages on
account of any one accident or occurrence.
(3) Certificates shall contain an agreement signed
by the insurance company that prior to modification,
cancellation, or termination of the subject policy,
written notice shall be sent to the Department by the
insurance company.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2016-11, 07-06-16)
(Ord. 2012-37, 12-05-2012) (Ord. 1988-22, 10-05-
1988)
5-22-3.1. Application for license.
All applications for a license under this Chapter
shall be made to and upon forms provided by the
Department. Each application form shall require
disclosure and reporting by the applicant of the
following information:
(1) contact information, including the applicant’s
true, correct, and legal name; the applicant’s telephone
number, home address, and mailing address; and, the
address to which all notices are to be sent;
(2) proof of identity by a valid driver license
issued by any state;
(3) proof of permitting, as applicable, by the
Department of Health of the state of Utah and Tooele
County;
(4) responses to the following questions regarding
disqualifying conditions as follows:
(a) has the applicant been criminally
convicted of felony homicide, physically abusing,
sexually abusing, or exploiting a minor, sale or
distribution of controlled substances, or sexual assault
of any kind?
(b) are any criminal charges currently pending
against the applicant for felony homicide, physically
abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting a minor, sale or
distribution of controlled substances, or sexual assault
of any kind?
(c) has the applicant been criminally
convicted of a misdemeanor within the past five (5)
years involving a crime of moral turpitude, or violent or
aggravated conduct involving persons or property?
(d) is the applicant currently subject to a
protective order based on physical or sexual abuse
issued by a court of competent jurisdiction?
(5) execution and affirmation under oath and on
penalty of perjury that based on the applicant’s present
information and belief the information provided is
complete, truthful, and accurate; and,
(6) a copy of the applicant’s current criminal
history on file at the Utah Department of Public Safety
Bureau of Criminal Identification. The criminal history
is classified as a private and protected record.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2012-37, 12-05-
2012)
5-22-3.2. License Fee.
The license fee shall be that established in Section
5-1-10 (License fees).
(Ord. 2012-37, 12-05-2012)
(November 20, 2019) 5-50
5-22-3.3. Review of application and issuance of
license.
(1) Within five business days of receipt of the
completed application and applicable documentation,
the Department shall review the application for
completeness and shall take such other reasonable
action to verify the information appearing on the
application.
(2) The Department shall issue a business license
to the applicant if the information is complete and
verified and the license fee has been paid, and if no
disqualifying condition exists.
(3) The license shall show the name of the licensee
and the business permitted to be carried on thereunder
and the date of expiration of such license.
(4) Licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter shall
expire on December 31 of each year.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2012-37, 12-05-
2012)
5-22-3.4. Denial of license and right of appeal.
(1) The Department shall refuse to issue a license
to an applicant for any of the following disqualifying
conditions:
(a) the information submitted by the applicant
is incomplete, incorrect, or misrepresented;
(b) the applicant has answered affirmatively to
any of the questions set forth in Section 5-22-3.1(4); or,
(c) the applicant fails to pay the requisite
license and identify badge fees.
(2) (a) Any applicant whose application has been
denied can file a written appeal with the Director within
ten days after the denial. The appeal need not be on a
particular form, but must state the specific basis of the
appeal. The Director shall promptly issue a written
decision.
(b) An applicant whose appeal has been
denied by the Director may appeal to the Administrative
Hearing Officer, pursuant to Chapter 1-28, by filing
with the City Recorder a written appeal within ten days
after the Director’s denial.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2012-37, 12-05-
2012)
5-22-3.5. Photographs and identity badges.
Before commencing work, each ice cream truck
driver shall:
(1) furnish to the Department two recent
photographs, one of which shall be affixed to the
identity badge issued to the licensee and the other of
which shall be retained in the records of the
Department;
(2) obtain an identity badge from the Department
at a cost of $10.00 in addition to the license fee, and
wear the identity badge at all times while vending from
an ice cream truck; and,
(3) obtain a new identity badge each year that the
ice cream truck business is licensed.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2016-11, 07-06-16)
(Ord. 2012-37, 12-05-2012)
5-22-4. Required equipment.
In addition to other equipment required by law,
every ice cream truck shall be equipped with:
(1) Signal lamps mounted at the same level and as
high and as widely spaced laterally as practicable.
These lamps shall be five to seven inches in diameter
and shall display two alternately flashing amber lights
visible from the front and rear of the vehicle, both lights
visible at 500 feet in normal sunlight upon a straight and
level street.
(2) A convex mirror mounted on the front so the
driver in a normal seating position can see the area in
front of the truck obscured by the hood.
(Ord. 2012-37, 12-05-2012) (Ord. 1988-22, 10-05-
1988)
5-22-5. Inspection.
Every ice cream truck shall be subject to City
inspection once each year prior to its use in the City
for the purpose of determining whether it complies with
this Chapter and other applicable state and local laws.
(Ord. 2012-37, 12-05-2012) (Ord. 1988-22, 10-05-
1988)
5-22-6. Restrictions.
(1) A person shall vend only when the ice cream
truck is lawfully stopped.
(2) A person shall vend only from the side of the
truck away from moving traffic and as near as possible
to the curb or side of the street.
(3) A person shall not vend to a person standing in
the roadway.
(4) A person shall not stop on the left side of a
one-way street to vend.
(Ord. 1988-22, 10-05-1988)
5-22-7. Backing restricted.
The driver of an ice cream truck shall not back the
truck in order to make or attempt to make a sale.
(Ord. 2016-11, 07-06-16) (Ord. 2012-37, 12-05-2012)
(Ord. 1988-22, 10-05-1988)
5-22-8. Penalty.
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any
provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of a class C
misdemeanor punishable as provided in Section 1-4-3
(Penalties). A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
(Ord. 2012-37, 12-05-2012) (Ord. 1988-22, 10-05-
1988)
5-51 (November 20, 2019)
CHAPTER 23. SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
5-23-1. Title for citation.
5-23-2. Purpose.
5-23-3. Legislative finding.
5-23-4. Definitions.
5-23-5. Classification of sexually oriented businesses.
5-23-6. License requirements.
5-23-7. Issuance of sexually oriented business license
and sexually oriented business employee
license.
5-23-8. Inspection of sexually oriented business
premises .
5-23-9. Expiration of licenses.
5-23-10. Suspension.
5-23-11. Revocation or denial.
5-23-12. Hearing on revocation, suspension or denial;
appeal.
5-23-13. Transfer of license.
5-23-14. Hours of operation.
5-23-15. Location and distance requirements.
5-23-16. Live public nudity and semi-nudity.
5-23-17. Interior design requirements pertaining to
sexually oriented businesses featuring live
semi-nudity.
5-23-18. Regulations pertaining to sexually oriented
businesses that exhibit Sexually Explicit Films
or Videos.
5-23-19. Loitering and exterior monitoring.
5-23-20. Zoning, exterior design.
5-23-21. Penalties and enforcement.
5-23-22. Applicability to existing businesses.
5-23-23. Persons under 18.
5-23-24. Severability.
5-23-1. Title for Citation.
The ordinance codified in this Chapter shall be known
as the “Sexually Oriented Business Ordinance.”
(Ord. 2003-23, 09-03-2003) (Ord. 1998-37, 11-18-1998)
5-23-2. Purpose.
This Chapter establishes reasonable and uniform
regulations governing the time, place, and manner of
operation of sexually oriented businesses within Tooele
City. Its purpose is to prevent or control the deleterious
secondary effects associated with sexually oriented
businesses. The provisions of this Chapter are not designed
to regulate the content of constitutionally protected speech
or unreasonably restrict access to legal sexually-oriented
entertainment.
(Ord. 2003-23, 09-03-2003) (Ord. 1998-37, 11-18-1998)
5-23-3. Legislative finding.
The Tooele City Council makes the following
legislative findings:
(1) Sexually oriented businesses are associated with
numerous secondary effects which include but are not
limited to the following:
(a) increased rates of crime against persons and
property (robberies, assaults, etc.) in neighborhoods in
which sexually oriented businesses are located; 1
(b) increased rates of prostitution, sexual assault,
and other sexually-related crimes, including the use of
public and quasi-public areas such as parking lots, alleys,
and alcoves for illicit sexual conduct;2
(c) the acceleration of blight within neighborhoods
in which sexually oriented businesses are located;3
(d) the degradation of property values of
properties surrounding sexually oriented businesses;4
(e) the appearance of commercial “dead zones”
and the proliferation of vacancies in business districts
surrounding sexually oriented businesses ;5
(f) unsanitary, unhealthy conditions on the
premises of sexually oriented businesses and the spread of
sexually transmitted diseases, including AIDS and other
diseases transmitted through contact with bodily fluids;6 and,
(g) the attraction of undesirable transient
populations seeking opportunities to engage in illicit
1see Report to the American Center for Law and
Justice on the Secondary Impacts of Sex Oriented
Businesses (1996) Adult Entertainment Businesses in
Indianapolis, an Analysis (1984) Report on Adult
Oriented Businesses in Austin (1986) Final Report to the
City of Garden Grove: The Relationship Between Crime
and Adult business Operations on Garden Grove
Boulevard (1991) Adams County Nude Entertainment
Study (Colorado 1991).
2Report on the Secondary Effects of the
Concentration of Adult Use Establishments in the Times
Square Area (1994) Adult Cabarets, Factual Record
(Phoenix, Arizona 1997) Quality of Life: A Look At
Successful Abatement of Adult Oriented Nuisances in
Oklahoma City (Oklahoma 1984-89).
3Relationship between Crime and Adult Business
Operations of Garden Grove Boulevard (1986) Des
Moines (Iowa) Adult Use Study (1984) Adult
Entertainment Study, City of New York (1994).
4An analysis of the Relationship Between Adult
Entertainment Establishments, Crime, and Housing
Values (Minneapolis 1980) The Relationship Between
Crime and Adult Business Operations on Garden Grove
Boulevard; Report on Adult Oriented Businesses in
Austin (Texas 1986) Adult Businesses in Indianapolis
(Indiana 1984).
5Study and Recommendations for Adult
Entertainment Businesses in the Town of Islip (New York,
1980) Des Moines (Iowa)Adult Use Study (1984).
6Adult Cabarets, Factual Record (Phoenix,
Arizona 1997).
5-52 (November 20, 2019)
behavior.7
(2) These negative secondary effects raise issues of
substantial governmental concern.
(3) Imposing narrowly tailored licensing requirements
upon sexually oriented businesses and their owners,
operators, and employees is an appropriate and reasonable
means of enforcing regulatory controls aimed at addressing
secondary effects.
(4) Requiring owners, operators, performers, and other
key employees in sexually oriented businesses to make
certain disclosures which are substantially related to the
government’s significant interest in preventing criminal
activity and controlling the spread of disease.
(5) Imposing interior design requirements upon
sexually oriented businesses will assist managers in
supervising the activities of patrons and employees, thereby
helping prevent illicit behavior from occurring on the
premises.
(6) Studies have shown that when multiple sexually
oriented businesses are located in close proximity to each
other, the impact of secondary effects on the surrounding
neighborhood is intensified and multiplied.8
(7) Imposing reasonable distance requirements
between sexually oriented business locations is an
appropriate means of preventing the concentration of
secondary effects.
(8) It is appropriate and reasonable to limit sexually
oriented businesses to zones in which they are least likely to
negatively impact residential neighborhoods, children, or
retail commercial activities; zoning restrictions should be
crafted in such a way as to minimize the impact of
secondary effects upon vulnerable populations without
unreasonably restricting access to those seeking legal
sexually oriented entertainment or materials.
(9) Sexual acts, including masturbation and oral sex,
frequently occur in booths and other unregulated spaces
within sexually oriented businesses; this results in the
accumulation of semen and creates unsanitary conditions.
(10) AIDS, syphilis, and gonorrhea are spread
primarily through sexual contact.
(11) Prohibiting sexual acts, regulating other forms of
physical contact between employees and patrons, and
requiring the elimination of certain closed spaces within
sexually oriented businesses will reduce risks to the public
health.
(12) The following cases establish parameters for the
regulation of sexually oriented businesses:
Young v. American Mini Theatres, 427 US 50 (1976) City
of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, 475 US 41 (1986) FW/PBS,
Inc. v. City of Dallas, 493 US 215 (1990) Barnes v. Glen
Theatre, Inc., 501 US 560 (1991) City of Erie v. Pap’s
A.M., 529 U.S. 277 (2000) American Target Advertising,
Inc. v. Giani, 199 F.3d 1241 (10th cir. 2000) Dodgers Bar
& Grill v. Johnson County, 32 F.2d 1281 (10th Cir. 1994).
(Ord. 2003-23, 09-03-2003) (Ord. 1998-37, 11-18-1998)
5-23-4. Definitions.
(1) “Adult Arcade” shall mean any place to which the
public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slugoperated
or electronically, electrically, or mechanically
controlled still or motion picture machines projectors, or
other image-producing devices are regularly maintained to
show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one
time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis upon matter exhibiting or
describing “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas.”
(2) “Adult Bookstore, Adult Novelty Store or Adult
Video Store” shall mean any commercial establishment
which has a significant or substantial portion of its stock-intrade,
derives a significant or substantial portion of its
revenues, devotes a significant or substantial portion of its
interior business or advertising, or maintains a substantial
section of its sales or display space to the sale or rental of
any one or more of the following in exchange for any form
of consideration:
(a) Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed
matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures video
cassettes, compact discs, slides, or other visual
representations which are characterized by their emphasis
upon the exhibition or description of “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas;”
(b) Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which
are designed for use or marketed primarily for stimulation of
human genital organs or for sadomasochistic use.
(3) “Adult Cabaret” shall mean any club, bar, juice bar,
restaurant, or similar commercial establishment, whether or
not alcoholic beverages are served, which regularly features
any of the following:
(a) persons who appear in a state of semi-nudity;
(b) live performances which are characterized by
the exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or “specified
sexual activities”;
(c) films, motion pictures videocassettes, slides, or
other photographic reproductions which are characterized by
their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
(4) “Adult Motel” shall mean any motel, hotel, or
similar commercial establishment which: (a) offers public
accommodations, for any form of consideration, and which
regularly provides patrons with closed circuit television
transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides,
digital recordings, photographic reproductions, or other
similar materials which are characterized by their emphasis
upon the exhibition or description of “specified sexual
7Report on Adult Oriented Businesses in Austin,
Texas (1986) Report on the Secondary Effects of the
Concentration of Adult Use Establishments in the Times
Square Area (1999) Proposed Land Use Code Text
Amendments, Adult Cabarets (Seattle, 1989), citing City
of Bothel Police Dept. Investigations (1984) Report To:
The American Center for Law and Justice on the
Secondary Impacts of Sex Oriented Businesses (1996).
8Report of the Attorney General’s Working
Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses
(Minnesota 1989).
5-53 (November 20, 2019)
activities” or “specified anatomical areas” and which
regularly advertises the availability of such material by
means of a sign visible from the public right-of-way, or by
means of any off-premises advertising, including but not
limited to newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets,
radio or television, and (b) offers a sleeping room or rooms
for rent for a period of time less than ten (10) hours.
(5) “Adult Theater” shall mean a theater, concert hall,
auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which, for
any form of consideration, regularly features persons who
appear in a state of “semi nudity” as defined herein or live
performances which are characterized by their emphasis
upon the exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or
“specified sexual activities.”
(6) “Controlling Interest” shall mean the power,
directly or indirectly, to direct the operation, management,
or policies of a business or entity, or to vote twenty percent
(20%) or more of any class of voting securities of a
business. The ownership, control, or power to vote twenty
percent or more of any class of voting securities of a
business shall be presumed, subject to rebuttal, to be the
power to direct the management, operation, or policies of
the business.
(7) “Distinguished or Characterized by an Emphasis
Upon” shall mean the dominant or principal theme of the
object described by such phrase. For instance, when the
phrase refers to films which are “distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis upon the exhibition or
description of ‘specified anatomical areas’ or ‘specified
sexual activities,’” the films so described are those whose
dominant or principal character and theme are the exhibition
or description of “specified anatomical areas” or “specified
sexual activities.”
(8) “Employ, Employee, and Employment” shall
describe and pertain to any person who performs any service
on the premises of a sexually oriented business, on a fulltime,
part-time, or contract basis, whether or not the person
is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent,
or otherwise. Employee does not include a person
exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the
premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
(9) “Establish” or “Establishment” shall mean and
include any of the following:
(a) The opening or commencement of any sexually
oriented business as a new business;
(b) The conversion of an existing business,
whether or not a sexually oriented business, to a sexually
oriented business;
(c) The addition of any sexually oriented business
to any other existing sexually oriented business; or
(d) The relocation of any sexually oriented
business.
(10) “Administrative Hearing Officer” shall mean a
person designated by the Mayor under Chapter 1-28 of this
Code.
(11) “Licensee” shall mean a person in whose name a
license to operate a sexually oriented business has been
issued, as well as any individual listed as an applicant on the
application for a sexually oriented business license. In the
case of an “employee,” it shall mean the person whose name
the sexually oriented business employee license has been
issued.
(12) “Nude, Nudity, or State of Nudity” shall mean a
state of dress or undress in which any portion of a person’s
genitals, vulva, pubic area, anus, cleft of the buttocks, or any
portion of the nipple or areola of the female breast is
exposed to view or is covered with a covering which is less
than fully opaque.
(13) “Operate” or “cause to operate” shall mean to
cause to function or to put or keep in a state of doing
business.
(14) “Operator” means any person or persons on the
premises of a sexually oriented business who is authorized
to exercise overall operational control of the business or
who causes it to function; a person may be an operator of a
sexually oriented business regardless of whether the person
is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business.
(15) “Semi-nude” or “State of Semi-nudity” shall mean
a state of dress in which opaque clothing covers no more
than a male person’s genitals, anus, anal cleft and pubic
area, and a female person’s genitals, anus, anal cleft, vulva,
and breasts below a horizontal line across the top of the
areolae, as well as portions of the body covered by
supporting straps or devices. This definition shall not be
construed to include any portion of the cleavage of the
female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, bathing suit,
or other apparel, provided that no part of the areola of the
breast is exposed.
(16) “Semi-nude Model Studio” shall mean any place
where a person or persons regularly appear in a state of
semi-nudity in exchange for money or any other form of
consideration for the purpose of being observed, sketched,
drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly
depicted by other persons. It shall be a defense to
prosecution for violation of this ordinance that a person
appearing in a state of semi-nudity did so in a modeling
class operated:
(a) By a college, junior college, or university
supported entirely or partly by taxation;
(b) By a private college or university which
maintains and operates educational programs for academic
credit, which credit is transferrable to a college, junior
college, or university supported either entirely or partly by
taxation; or
(c) Within a structure:
(i) which does not have a sign or other
advertising that is visible from the exterior of the building
that indicates that a semi-nude person is available for
viewing; and,
(ii) as a condition of viewing semi-nude
models, a student must enroll in a class at least three days in
advance of the start of the class.
(17) “Sexual Encounter Establishment” means a
business or commercial establishment that offers as one of
its principal business purposes, for any form of
consideration, a place in which two or more persons may
congregate, associate, or consort while one or more of the
persons is semi-nude, or for the purpose of engaging in
“specified sexual activities”, as defined herein. This
definition shall exclude establishments in which medical
5-54 (November 20, 2019)
practitioners, psychologists, psychiatrists, or other similar
professional persons licensed by the state engage in
medically approved and recognized sexual therapy.
(18) “Sexually Oriented Business” shall mean an adult
arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video
store, adult cabaret, adult motel, or adult entertainment outcall
service in the form of semi-nude dancing or exhibition,
adult motion picture theater, adult theater, semi-nude model
studio, or sexual encounter establishment.
(19) “Sexually Oriented Entertainment Activity” means
the sale, rental, or exhibition of books, films, live
performances, video cassettes, magazines, periodicals,
digital images, or other similar media which are
characterized by an emphasis on the exposure or display of
specified sexual activity, as defined herein.
(20) “Specified Anatomical Areas” shall mean any one
of the following or the collective combination of more than
one of the following: the genitals, anal cleft, and anus of a
male person, and the genitals, anal cleft, anus, vulva, and
female breast or breasts below a horizontal line across the
top of the areolae of a female person.
(21) “Specified Criminal Activity” shall mean a
conviction for any of the following offenses within the
periods of time indicated below:
(a) prostitution, patronizing a prostitute, aiding
prostitution, exploiting prostitution, aggravated exploitation
of prostitution, or sexual solicitation; distributing
pornographic material, inducing acceptance of pornographic
material, dealing in harmful material to a minor, distribution
of a pornographic film, indecent public displays, or
distribution of pornographic material through cable
television; lewdness, sexual battery, lewdness involving a
child, unlawful sexual activity with a minor, sexual abuse of
a minor, unlawful sexual conduct with a 16 or 17 year old,
rape, rape of a child, object rape, object rape of a child,
forcible sodomy, sodomy upon a child, forcible sexual
abuse, sexual abuse of a child, aggravated sexual abuse of a
child, or aggravated sexual assault; distribution of a
controlled substance; or criminal attempt, conspiracy, or
solicitation of commit any of the foregoing offenses, or
offenses in other jurisdictions involving the same or similar
elements, regardless of the exact title of the offense; and
(b) less than two years have elapsed sine the
date of conviction or the date of release from confinement
imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the
conviction was a misdemeanor offense;
(c) less than five years have elapsed since the
date of conviction or the date of release from confinement
for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the
conviction is for a felony offense; or
(d) less than five years have elapsed since the
date of the last conviction or the date of release from
confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later
date, if the convictions are for two or more misdemeanor
offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring
within any 24 month period.
(e) The fact that a conviction is being appealed
shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant.
(22) “Specified Sexual Activity” shall mean any of the
following:
(a) sex acts, including intercourse, oral copulation,
masturbation, or sodomy;
(b) excretory functions as a part of or in
connection with any of the activities described in (a) above;
(c) the erotic fondling or other erotic touching by
one person of the genitals, pubic area, anus, or female breast
or breasts of another.
(23) “Transfer of Ownership or Control” of a sexually
oriented business shall mean any of the following:
(a) the sale, lease or sublease of the business;
(b) the transfer of securities which constitute a
controlling interest in the business, whether by sale,
exchange, or similar means; or
(c) the establishment of a trust, gift, or other
similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control
of the business, except for the transfer by bequest or other
operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the
ownership or control.
(24) “Viewing Room” shall mean the room, booth, or
area where a patron of a sexually oriented business would
ordinarily be positioned while watching a film, video, digital
recording, or other visual display.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2003-23, 09-03-2003)
(Ord. 1998-37, 11-18-1998)
5-23-5. Classification of sexually oriented businesses.
Sexually oriented businesses shall be classified as
follows:
(1) Adult arcades;
(2) Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores, adult video
stores;
(3) Adult cabarets;
(4) Adult motels;
(5) Adult motion picture theaters;
(6) Adult theaters;
(7) Semi-nude model studios; and,
(8) Sexual encounter establishments.
(Ord. 2003-23, 09-03-2003) (Ord. 1998-37, 11-18-1998)
5-23-6. License requirements.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a
sexually oriented business in Tooele City without a valid
sexually oriented business license.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to be an
“employee”, as defined in this Chapter, of a sexually
oriented business in Tooele City without a valid sexually
oriented business employee license.
(3) An applicant for a sexually oriented business
license or a sexually oriented business employee license
shall file in person at the Department a completed
application made on a form provide by the Department. The
application shall be signed by the applicant and notarized.
(4) An application shall be considered complete when
it contains the information required in Paragraphs (a)
through (i) as set forth below:
(a) the applicant’s full legal name and any other
names or aliases used in the preceding five years;
(b) current business address or other mailing
address of the applicant;
(c) written proof of age, in the form of a copy of
5-55 (November 20, 2019)
a birth certificate or driver’s license or other document
containing picture identification which was issued by an
official governmental agency;
(d) if the application is for a sexually oriented
business license, the business name, location, legal
description, mailing address and phone number (if one
currently exists) of the proposed sexually oriented business;
(e) if the application is for a sexually oriented
business license, the name and address of the registered
agent or other authorized agent;
(f) a statement disclosing whether the applicant
has been convicted of an offense which constitutes specified
criminal activity, as defined under this Chapter, including
disclosure of the specific offense or offenses involved, and
the date, place, time, and jurisdiction in which each offense
occurred; the applicant must also disclose whether the
applicant currently holds or has previously held a sexually
oriented business license or sexually oriented business
employee license, whether in Tooele City or in another
jurisdiction or state, which has been denied, suspended, or
revoked within the past two years; if so, the applicant shall
disclose the name and location of the business, the
jurisdiction which imposed the penalty, the date of the
violation(s) and the grounds for the revocation, suspension,
or denial; the applicant shall make the same disclosures as
a licensee if the applicant is or was a partner, officer,
director, or stockholder with a controlling interest in a
sexually oriented business which was the subject of a
sexually oriented business license suspension, revocation, or
denial within the last two years;
(g) if the application is for a sexually oriented
business license, a certification signed by the applicant
certifying that the location of the proposed sexually oriented
business is not located within 500 feet of any church,
synagogue, mosque, temple, or other building used primarily
for religious worship, or any public or private educational
facility, including child day care facilities, pre-schools,
elementary schools, intermediate schools, high schools,
vocational schools, colleges, or universities, or any public
recreational facility, including public parks, playgrounds,
picnic areas, athletic fields, libraries, or other similar
facilities.
(h) a sketch or diagram showing the configuration
of the premises, including a statement of total floor space
occupied by the business; the sketch or diagram need not be
professionally prepared but shall be drawn to a designated
scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches, showing
all doors, windows, walls, partitions and other features; and
(i) the signature of the applicant if the proposed
sexually oriented business will be operated by an individual,
or the signatures of each officer, director, general partner,
and other individuals who will participate directly in
decisions relating to the management and control of the
business if the proposed business will be operated by an
entity other than an individual.
(5) The information provided pursuant to paragraphs
(a) through (i) of this subsection shall be supplemented in
writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
Department within ten working days of any change of
circumstances which would render the information originally
submitted false or incomplete.
(6) A license or permit required by this article is in
addition to any other licenses or permits required by Tooele
City, Tooele County, or the State of Utah. Persons engaged
in the operation of sexually oriented businesses or employed
as sexually oriented business employees shall comply with
all applicable local, state, and federal laws, ordinances and
statutes, including zoning ordinances and other land use
restrictions.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2003-23, 09-03-2003)
(Ord. 1998-37, 11-18-1998)
5-23-7. Issuance of sexually oriented business license
and sexually oriented business employee license.
(1) Upon the filing of a completed sexually oriented
business license application, as set forth in §5-23-6, the
Department shall immediately issue a temporary license to
the applicant. The temporary license shall expire upon the
final decision of the Department to deny or grant the
sexually oriented business license. Within forty days of the
initial filing date of the completed application, the
Department shall issue a license to the applicant or issue to
the applicant a letter of intent to deny the application. The
Department shall approve the issuance of the license unless
one or more of the following is found by a preponderance of
the evidence to be true:
(a) an applicant is less than eighteen years of age;
(b) an applicant has failed to provide information
as required under §5-23-6 of this Chapter or has falsely
answered a question or otherwise provided false information
on the sexually oriented business license application form;
(c) the required application fee has not been paid;
(d) an applicant has been convicted of an offense
which constitutes specified criminal activity, as defined in
this Chapter, or has failed to comply with §5-23-7(1) or has
committed a violation of §5-23-10(2) within the last year;
(e) the sexually oriented business premises is not
in compliance with interior configuration requirements as set
forth in this Chapter.
(2) The sexually oriented business license shall state in
a conspicuous place on the front of the license the legal
name of the business, the issuance date, the expiration date,
the category of sexually oriented business as designated
under this Chapter, and the address of the sexually oriented
business. The sexually oriented business license shall be
posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the
sexually oriented business premises so that it is easily
readable at all times to those entering the premises. Lighting
shall be adequate in the area in which the license is located
or the license shall be illuminated so that it is easily
readable.
(3) Each applicant for a sexually oriented business
license shall pay an initial administrative fee of $200.
Licensees shall pay a renewal fee of $100 in connection with
the annual renewal of the sexually oriented business license.
(4) Upon the filing of a completed application for a
sexually oriented business employee license, the Department
shall issue a temporary license to the applicant. The
temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of the
5-56 (November 20, 2019)
Department to deny or grant the sexually oriented business
employee license. Within forty days of the date that a
completed application is filed, the Department shall either
issue a licence or issue a written notice of intent to deny a
license to the applicant. The Department shall approve the
issuance of a license unless one or more of the following is
found by a preponderance of the evidence to be true:
(a) the applicant is less than eighteen years of age;
(b) the applicant has failed to provide information
required under §5-23-6 or has answered a question falsely or
otherwise provided false information on the application
form;
(c) the license application fee has not been paid;
(d) the applicant has been convicted of specified
criminal activity, as defined in this Chapter, or has failed to
comply with §5-23-7(1) or has violated §5-23-10(2) within
the last year.
(5) A sexually oriented business employee license
which is granted pursuant to this Chapter shall state the
name of the individual for whom it is issued in a
conspicuous manner on the front of the license. The
issuance date and expiration date shall also appear in a
conspicuous place on the license. A sexually oriented
business employee shall keep the sexually oriented business
employee license on his or her person or on the premises
where he or she is performing or working and shall produce
the license upon request of a law enforcement official or
Department official charged with compliance enforcement.
(6) Each applicant for a sexually oriented business
employee license shall pay an initial administrative fee of
$100. Licensees shall pay a renewal fee of $50 in
connection with the annual renewal of the sexually oriented
business employee license.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2003-23, 09-03-2003)
(Ord. 1998-37, 11-18-1998)
5-23-8. Inspection of sexually oriented business
premises.
(1) Sexually oriented business operators and sexually
oriented business employees shall permit law enforcement
officers and agents of Tooele City who are performing
functions connected with the enforcement of this Chapter to
inspect the portions of the sexually oriented business
premises in which patrons are permitted for the purpose of
ensuring compliance with this Chapter. Inspections shall be
permitted at any time the sexually oriented is occupied by
patrons or open for business. A licensee’s knowing or
intentional refusal to permit such an inspection shall
constitute a violation of this section.
(2) The provisions of this Section do not apply to areas
of an adult motel which are occupied by a tenant for use as
a residence or habitation.
(Ord. 2003-23, 09-03-2003) (Ord. 1998-37, 11-18-1998)
5-23-9. Expiration of licenses.
Each license issued pursuant to this Chapter shall
remain valid for a period of one calendar year from the date
of issuance unless otherwise suspended or revoked. Such
licenses may be renewed only by making application and
paying the requisite fee as provided in §5-23-7. Application
for renewal shall be made prior to the expiration of the
license. If a license expires before a completed renewal
application is submitted, the applicant shall pay the initial
application renewal fee and the applicant shall be otherwise
processed as an initial application.
(Ord. 2003-23, 09-03-2003) (Ord. 1998-37, 11-18-1998)
5-23-10. Suspension.
(1) If the Director determines that a licensed sexually
oriented business has violated a provision of this Chapter or
allowed a sexually oriented business employee to violate a
provision of this Chapter while upon the business premises,
the Department shall issue a written notice of intent to
suspend the sexually oriented business license for a period
not to exceed thirty days. The Department shall state the
basis for seeking to suspend the license in the notice of
intent.
(2) If the Director determines that a licenced sexually
oriented business employee has violated a provision of this
Chapter, the Department shall issue a written notice of intent
to suspend the sexually oriented business employee license
for a period not to exceed thirty days. The Department shall
state the basis for seeking to suspend the license in the
notice of intent.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2003-23, 09-03-2003)
(Ord. 1998-37, 11-18-1998)
5-23-11. Revocation or denial.
(1) If the Director determines that a licensed sexually
oriented business has violated a provision of this Chapter or
allowed a sexually oriented business employee to violate a
provision of this Chapter, and the business’s sexually
oriented business license has been suspended within twelve
months preceding the date of the violation, the Department
shall issue a written notice of intent to revoke the sexually
oriented business license. The Department shall state the
basis for seeking to revoke the license in the notice of intent.
(2) If the Director determines that a licensed sexually
oriented business employee has violated a provision of this
Chapter, and the employee’s sexually oriented business
employee license has been suspended within twelve months
preceding the date of the violation, the Department shall
issue a written notice of intent to revoke the sexually
oriented business employee license. The Department shall
state the basis for seeking to revoke the license in the notice
of intent.
(3) The Department shall issue written notice of intent
to revoke or deny a sexually oriented business license or
sexually oriented business employee license if he or she
determines that:
(a) the licensee has knowingly given false
information on the license application or license renewal
application;
(b) the sexually oriented business licensee has
knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled
substances on the premises, or in the case of a licensed
sexually oriented business employee, the employee has
illegally possessed, used, or sold controlled substances on
the premises;
(c) the sexually oriented business licensee has
5-57 (November 20, 2019)
knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises, or in the
case of a licensed sexually oriented business employee, the
employee has engaged in prostitution while licensed as a
sexually oriented business employee;
(d) any owner, officer, partner, operator, or other
person with a controlling interest in a licensed sexually
oriented business has knowingly engaged in the business of
prostitution;
(e) the sexually oriented business licensee
operated the sexually operated business during a period of
time when the sexually oriented business license was
suspended;
(f) the holder of a sexually oriented business
employee license has worked as a sexually oriented business
employee during a period when the licence was suspended;
(g) the sexually oriented business licensee has
committed an act in violation of 18 U.S.C. §2257 upon the
business premises; or
(h) the sexually oriented business licensee has
knowingly allowed any specified sexual activity to occur in
or on the premises.
(2) For purposes of this section, an act by any
employee that constitutes grounds for revocation of that
employee’s license shall also be imputed to the sexually
oriented business for purposes of revocation proceedings if
the Administrative Hearing Officer determines by a
preponderance of the evidence that an officer, director, or
general partner, or an employee who managed, supervised,
or controlled the operation of the business knowingly
allowed such an act to occur on the premises.
(3) The fact that any relevant conviction is being
appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the
license.
(4) Once the Administrative Hearing Officer revokes
a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and a
licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business
license or sexually oriented business employee licence for
one year from the date that revocation becomes effective.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2003-23, 09-03-2003)
(Ord. 1998-37, 11-18-1998)
5-23-12. Hearing on revocation, suspension or denial;
appeal.
(1) Once the Director has made the determination that
grounds exist to suspend or revoke a sexually oriented
business license or sexually oriented business employee
license, or to deny a license application for a sexually
oriented business license or sexually oriented business
employee license, the Department shall notify the applicant
or licensee in writing of its intent to revoke or suspend the
license or deny the application. The notice shall include the
following:
(a) a written statement which specifies the grounds
for the Department’s action; and
(b) a statement that the licensee or applicant shall
have ten business days from the date that notice is received
to contest the Department’s intended action by submitting a
written statement explaining why the license should not be
revoked , suspended, or denied.
(2) Notice of intent to deny, suspend, or revoke a
sexually oriented business license or sexually oriented
business employee license shall be sent by certified mail to
the licensee’s or applicant’s most current address on file in
the Department, or by personal service upon the applicant or
licensee, or in the case of a sexually oriented business, upon
an employee, operator, officer or other appropriate
representative who is present upon the business premises at
the time of service. If the licensee or applicant cannot be
served after reasonable efforts or the certified mail receipt
is returned to the City unsigned, the notice shall be
published twice a week for two weeks in a newspaper of
general circulation. Once publication is complete, the
licensee or applicant shall be deemed notified for purposes
of this Chapter.
(3) If the licensee/applicant submits a written response
within the time prescribed in subsection (2), the Department
shall schedule a hearing and notify the licensee/applicant of
the hearing date within five business days of receiving the
written response. The Administrative Hearing Officer shall
conduct the hearing no more than fifteen business days from
the date that the written response is received. At the
hearing, the Administrative Hearing Officer shall allow the
Department the opportunity to present evidence with respect
to the Department’s intended action. The Administrative
Hearing Officer shall then provide the licensee/applicant
with the opportunity to present evidence, call witnesses, and
make arguments pertaining to the basis for the Department’s
intended action.
(4) If the licencee/applicant does not submit a written
response to the Department within the time period
prescribed in subsection (2), the Department shall
immediately send written notice by certified mail to the
licensee’s last known address to inform the licensee or
applicant that the license has been suspended, revoked, or
denied. The suspension, revocation, or denial shall take
effect five business days after mailing. Suspension,
revocation, or denial shall take effect regardless of whether
the licensee or applicant accepts service of the notice.
(5) If after a hearing the Administrative Hearing
Officer determines by a preponderance of the evidence that
grounds exist, as set forth in this Chapter, to suspend,
revoke, or deny a license, the Administrative Hearing
Officer shall prepare a written opinion which sets forth the
Administrative Hearing Officer’s findings. The
Administrative Hearing Officer shall send by certified mail
a copy of the written opinion to the last known address of
the licensee/applicant within 5 business days of the
conclusion of the hearing. The decision of the
Administrative Hearing Officer to suspend, revoke, or deny
a license shall take effect five business days from the date
that notice is mailed, regardless of whether the
licensee/applicant accepts service of the notice.
(6) If after a hearing the Administrative Hearing
Officer determines by a preponderance of the evidence that
grounds do not exist which justify the suspension,
revocation, or denial of the license, the Administrative
Hearing Officer shall prepare a written opinion which sets
forth the Administrative Hearing Officer’s findings. The
Administrative Hearing Officer shall immediately inform the
Department of the findings, and send a written copy by
5-58 (November 20, 2019)
certified mail to the licensee’s/applicant’s last known
address within five business days of the hearing.
(7) Once the Administrative Hearing Officer has
communicated to the Department that grounds do not exist
to justify the suspension, revocation, or denial of the license,
the Department shall immediately withdraw the notice of
intent to suspend or revoke, or in the case of a denial, shall
immediately issue a license to the applicant.
(8) An applicant or licensee whose application for a
license has been denied or whose license has been
suspended or revoked shall have the right to appeal such
action to a court of competent jurisdiction. Upon the filing
of any court action to appeal, challenge, restrain, or
otherwise enjoin the Department’s action to suspend or
revoke a license, the Department shall immediately issue a
provisional license. The provisional license shall allow the
party appealing the Department’s action to continue to
operate a sexually oriented business or work as a sexually
oriented business employee until 30 calendar days after the
court enters a final judgment on the case.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2003-23, 09-03-2003)
(Ord. 1998-37, 11-18-1998)
5-23-13. Transfer of License.
Sexually oriented business licenses and sexually
oriented business employee licenses are not transferable. A
sexually oriented business license does not permit the
operation of a sexually oriented business at any location
other than the address designated on the sexually oriented
business license application form.
(Ord. 2003-23, 09-03-2003) (Ord. 1998-37, 11-18-1998)
5-23-14. Hours of Operation.
It shall be unlawful to operate a sexually oriented
business between the hours of 11:00 P.M. and 10:00 A.M.,
except that a sexually oriented business which holds a
license from the State of Utah to sell alcoholic beverages
may remain open to sell alcoholic beverages under the terms
of the license, but shall not offer sexually oriented
entertainment after 11:00 P.M.
(Ord. 2003-23, 09-03-2003) (Ord. 1998-37, 11-18-1998)
5-23-15. Location and Distance Requirements.
(1) No sexually oriented business shall operate or be
established with 500 feet of any of the following:
(a) churches, synagogues, mosques, temples, or
other buildings used primarily for religious worship and
activities;
(b) public or private educational facilities
including child day-care facilities, pre-schools, elementary
schools, intermediate schools, and high schools, including
school grounds and athletic facilities which are used
primarily in connection with school-related activities;
(c) public recreation areas or facilities including
but not limited to parks, playgrounds, picnic areas, athletic
fields or courts, libraries, public trail systems, community
centers, and other analogous facilities;
(d) privately owned amusement parks or
recreation facilities.
(2) No sexually oriented business shall operate or be
established within 200 feet of a boundary of a residential
zoning district.
(3) No sexually oriented business shall be located
within 500 feet of any other sexually oriented business.
(4) For purposes of this Chapter, measurements shall
be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures, objects, or boundaries, from the nearest portion
of the building or structure which houses the sexually
oriented business to the nearest property line of the property
in question.
(Ord. 2003-23, 09-03-2003) (Ord. 1998-37, 11-18-1998)
5-23-16. Live public nudity and semi-nudity.
(1) It shall be a violation of this Chapter for any
patron, sexually oriented business employee, or other person
in or upon any portion of the sexually oriented business
premises that is accessible to any patron to knowingly
appear in a state of nudity, or otherwise render himself or
herself nude by removing or manipulating clothing or
otherwise exposing to view any anatomical areas that are
included in the definition of nudity, as set forth herein,
except exposure within public lavatory facilities that occurs
incident to the use of toilets or urinals for the purpose for
which they are designed.
(2) It shall be a violation of this Chapter for any person
to knowingly appear in a state of semi-nudity on the business
premises, unless the person is a licensed sexually oriented
business employee who, while appearing in a state of seminudity,
is upon a stage which is elevated at least three feet
from the floor and remains at least three feet from any
patron.
(3) It shall be a violation of this Chapter for any
sexually oriented business employee to knowingly receive
any pay or gratuity directly from any patron; it shall be a
violation for any patron to give or attempt to give any
gratuity directly to any sexually oriented business employee
while the employee is in a semi-nude state upon the premises
of a sexually oriented business premises.
(4) It shall be a violation of this Chapter for any
sexually oriented business employee, while in a state of
semi-nudity, to knowingly touch any patron or any patron’s
clothing.
(5) It shall be a violation of this Chapter for any
sexually oriented business or sexually oriented business
employee to knowingly allow any specified sexual activity
to occur either in or upon the premises of a sexually oriented
business.
(6) A sexually oriented business featuring any live,
semi-nude appearance by a sexually oriented business
employee or employees shall ensure that the manager’s
station or stations required under this Chapter are manned at
any time that a patron is present on the premises.
(7) A sexually oriented business featuring live seminude
entertainment shall post a sign in a conspicuous place
which sets forth provisions (1) through (4) of this Section;
the dimensions and print of the sign shall be of a size and
type that is easily readable to patrons entering the
establishment.
(8) A sexually oriented business that is subject to this
Section shall expel for the balance of the business day any
5-59 (November 20, 2019)
patron who violates the rules articulated in provisions (1)
through (4).
(Ord. 2003-23, 09-03-2003) (Ord. 1998-37, 11-18-1998)
5-23-17. Interior design requirements pertaining to
sexually oriented businesses featuring live semi-nudity.
(1) The design and construction of all sexually oriented
businesses in which any sexually oriented business employee
will appear in a state of semi-nudity shall include the
following elements:
(a) a performance stage or stages that are elevated
at least 36 inches above the height of the patron seating area;
the stage or stages shall be separated from the patron seating
area by a wall, railing, or other suitable barrier that is
permanently attached to the floor and that is at least 36
inches high; the barrier shall be located at least three feet
from the edge of the stage so as to create a buffer zone of at
least three feet between the stage and any patron seating
area;
(b) a manager’s station that is constructed in such
a manner as to provide a clear, unobstructed view of the
stage, the performers, the patrons, and every portion of the
business premises that is accessible to the public, with the
exception of the lavatory facilities; if the interior of the
business premises is configured in such a way that a single
manager cannot effectively monitor every portion of the
business premises from a single vantage point, cameras and
monitors shall be installed within the manager’s station so
that all parts of the premises can be viewed from a single
location, or in the alternative, multiple managers’ stations
shall be constructed in such a way that the managers’
stations collectively provide a view of every portion of the
business premises.
(c) overhead lighting fixtures that provide
sufficient lighting at an intensity of not less than one foot
candle power measured at floor level in every portion of the
building to which the public is admitted, including
restrooms.
(2) All sexually oriented businesses in which any
sexually oriented business employee will appear in a state of
semi-nudity upon the business premises shall submit with
the sexually oriented business license application a diagram
of the premises accurately depicting the dimensions and
configuration of the interior, including the location of all
manager’s stations, cameras, monitors, viewing areas, patron
seating areas, stages, rooms, barriers, doors, exits, entry
points, permanent displays, and lighting fixtures; the
diagram need not be an architect or engineer prepared
blueprint, but shall be drawn to scale to an accuracy of plus
or minus six inches and designate the orientation of the
premises toward abutting streets.
(Ord. 2003-23, 09-03-2003) (Ord. 1998-37, 11-18-1998)
5-23-18. Regulations pertaining to sexually oriented
businesses that exhibit Sexually Explicit Films or Videos.
(1) A person who operates or causes to be operated a
sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, that
exhibits any motion picture recorded on film, video cassette,
digital medium, or other format, and the motion picture is
characterized by an emphasis on the display of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply
with the following requirements if the motion picture is
exhibited in any viewing room which occupies less than one
hundred fifty square feet of floor space:
(a) Each application for a sexually oriented
business license shall contain a diagram of the premises
showing the location of all manager’s stations, viewing
rooms, restrooms, overhead lighting fixtures, surveillance
cameras and monitors, and portions of the premises which
will be off limits to patrons. The diagram shall also depict
the place where the sexually oriented business license will
be posted. The diagram need not be a blueprint prepared by
an architect or engineer, but shall be drawn to a designated
scale and depict the dimensions of all interior spaces to an
accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The diagram shall be
oriented toward the north or toward a designated street and
accurately depict the front entrance and all other points of
access to the interior.
(b) No restroom shall contain monitoring or
surveillance equipment.
(c) No applicant or licensee shall alter the
configuration or location of a manager’s station or viewing
room without re-submitting an amended diagram and
receiving approval through the Department.
(d) It shall be the duty of the operator and of any
employees present on the premises to ensure that no patron
is permitted access to any area of the premises which has
been designated as an area in which patrons are not
permitted as designated on the diagram submitted with the
license application.
(e) The interior premises shall be equipped with
overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate
all places to which patrons are permitted access at an
illumination intensity of not less than one foot candle power
as measured at floor level. It shall be the duty of the
operator and any employees present on the premises to
ensure that the required illumination is maintained at all
times that the premises is occupied by patrons or open for
business.
(f) The operator and any employees present shall
ensure that no sexual activity occurs on the business
premises.
(g) The operator and any employees present shall
ensure that no openings of any kind are created or allowed
to exist between viewing rooms. No person shall make or
attempt to make an opening between viewing rooms.
(h) If the operator or any employee observes two
or more patrons in a viewing room or discovers any person
making or attempting to make an opening between viewing
rooms shall immediately exclude the offending parties from
the premises for the rest of the business day.
(i) If the operator or any employee discovers an
opening of any kind between viewing rooms, he or she shall
immediately secure the affected rooms and prevent patrons
from entering until the wall has been repaired in a manner
that is as substantial as the original wall construction.
(j) The operator or an employee acting on behalf
of the operator shall inspect the walls for openings at least
once every business day.
(k) The operator shall post conspicuous signs in
5-60 (November 20, 2019)
well-lighted areas of the business stating the following:
(i) no loitering is permitted in viewing rooms;
(ii) occupancy in viewing rooms is limited to
one person;
(iii) sexually activity on the premises is
prohibited;
(iv) making openings between viewing rooms
is prohibited.
(v) violators will be required to leave the
premises for the balance of the business day;
(vi) violations of the rules stated herein
constitute criminal offenses which will be reported and
prosecuted.
(l) Floor coverings in viewing rooms shall be
made of nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces. Rugs or
carpeting are prohibited.
(m) The operator and employees shall ensure that
all wall surfaces or seating surfaces in viewing rooms are
constructed of or permanently covered by nonporous, easily
cleanable material; viewing rooms shall not have any
exposed plywood, fiberboard, unpainted drywall, fabric,
cloth upholstery, carpeting or other materials which absorb
liquids or are difficult to clean.
(n) The operator shall maintain a regular cleaning
schedule which shall cause viewing rooms and other places
in which patrons view sexually oriented materials to be
cleaned at least twice a day. The operator shall cause a
cleaning log to be kept, and shall allow City Officials to
inspect the log upon request. Cleaning shall include the
entire interior of any viewing room with disinfectant,
including the floors, walls, seats, monitors, cameras,
counters, windows, and other surfaces.
(o) The interior of the premises shall be
configured in such a manner that every area of the premises
in which patrons are permitted can be viewed without
obstruction from a manager’s station, including the interior
of each viewing room but excluding restrooms. If multiple
manager’s stations must be employed, the interior shall be
configured in such a way as to provide an unobstructed view
of every portion of the premises to which patrons are
permitted from at least one of the manager’s stations.
(p) It shall be unlawful for an operator or
employee to fail to perform any of the responsibilities
outlined in this Section or to operate a sexually oriented
business or maintain the sexually oriented business premises
in violation of this section.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2003-23, 09-03-2003)
(Ord. 1998-37, 11-18-1998)
5-23-19. Loitering, exterior monitoring.
(1) The operator of a sexually oriented business shall
have a duty to:
(a) initiate and enforce a policy which prohibits
loitering on or about the business premises, and which
comports with the requirements of (b) and (c) below;
(b) post conspicuous signs which state that no
loitering shall be permitted;
(c) designate one or more employees to monitor
the activities of persons on the premises of the sexually
oriented business by visually inspecting the property at least
once every ninety minutes or by continuously using video
cameras which afford coverage of the entire property,
including the exterior; if video surveillance is used, the
monitor or monitors shall be located within a manager’s
station and shall be in operation at all times that the business
is open for operation; and,
(d) provide lighting of the exterior premises to
facilitate inspections for loitering and discourage clandestine
behavior.
(Ord. 2003-23, 09-03-2003) (Ord. 1998-37, 11-18-1998)
5-23-20. Zoning, exterior design
(1) Sexually oriented businesses are permitted in the
industrial zone, as set forth in Title 7 of this Code, subject to
the distance and location restrictions set forth in Subsection
5-23-20.
(2) All windows, doors, and other apertures to the
premises shall be darkened or covered with blinds, curtains,
or other suitable coverings in such a manner that people on
the outside cannot see sexually oriented materials, displays,
entertainment, or activities occurring within the building.
(3) The area immediately behind the entry door or
doors to the sexually oriented business shall be screened
with a partition, wall, or other non-transparent barrier so that
people on the outside of the building cannot see into the
interior when the door is open.
(Ord. 2003-23, 09-03-2003) (Ord. 1998-37, 11-18-1998)
5-23-21. Penalties and enforcement.
(1) A violation of any provision of this Chapter or the
failure to perform any duty imposed by this Chapter shall
constitute a class B misdemeanor. Each day that a violation
exists shall constitute a separate offense.
(2) The City Attorney’s Office is hereby authorized to
initiate legal proceedings to prosecute, enjoin, restrain, and
correct violations of this Chapter.
(Ord. 2003-23, 09-03-2003) (Ord. 1998-37, 11-18-1998)
5-23-22. Applicability to existing businesses.
(1) Upon adoption, the provisions of this Chapter shall
apply to the activities of all sexually oriented businesses,
sexually oriented business employees, and sexually oriented
business operators, including sexually oriented businesses
which commenced operation on or before the effective date
of this Chapter.
(2) All sexually oriented businesses, sexually oriented
business employees, and sexually oriented business
operators currently doing business within Tooele City are
hereby granted a temporary license which shall continue in
effect for one-hundred and eighty days from the date that
this Chapter takes effect. No sexually oriented business,
sexually oriented business employee, or sexually oriented
business operator may continue to feature sexually oriented
entertainment, perform, or otherwise engage in sexually
oriented business activity once the temporary license has
lapsed, without first obtaining a license as required under
this Chapter.
(Ord. 2003-23, 09-03-2003) (Ord. 1998-37, 11-18-1998)
5-61 (November 20, 2019)
5-23-23. Persons under 18.
It shall be a violation for a sexually oriented business
or any sexually oriented business employee who is employed
by the sexually oriented business to recklessly or knowingly
allow a person under the age of 18 years to enter into or
remain within the sexually oriented business premises.
(Ord. 2003-23, 09-03-2003) (Ord. 1998-37, 11-18-1998)
5-23-24. Severability.
This Chapter and each section, subsection, and
provision thereof are independent divisions and
subdivisions; it is the express intent of the legislative body
that if any provision, subsection or section is declared to be
invalid, the remaining provisions shall remain in effect, and
shall stand independent of the any portion held to be invalid
as if enacted by the legislative body without the invalidated
portions.
(Ord. 2003-23, 09-03-2003) (Ord. 1998-37, 11-18-1998)
(March 24, 2017) 5-62
CHAPTER 24. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
RIGHTS-OF-WAY
5-24-1. Declaration of Finding and Intent.
5-24-2. Finding Regarding Compensation.
5-24-3. Finding Regarding Local Concern.
5-24-4. Finding Regarding Promotion of
Telecommunications Services.
5-24-5. Findings Regarding Franchise Standards.
5-24-6. Power to Manage Rights-of-Way.
5-24-7. Scope of Ordinance.
5-24-8. Excluded Activity.
5-24-9. Defined Terms.
5-24-10. Franchise Required.
5-24-11. Compensation and other payments.
5-24-12. Franchise applications.
5-24-13. Construction and technical requirements.
5-24-14. Relocation of the System.
5-24-15. Franchise, license, transfer or sale.
5-24-16. Oversight and regulation.
5-24-17. Rights of city.
5-24-18. Obligation to notify.
5-24-19. General provisions.
5-24-20. Federal, state and city jurisdiction.
5-24-1. Declaration of Finding and Intent.
(1) Findings Regarding Rights-of-Way. Tooele City
finds that the Rights-of-Way within the City:
(a) are critical to the travel and transport of
persons and property in the business and social life of the
City;
(b) are intended for public uses and must be
managed and controlled consistent with that intent;
(c) can be partially occupied by the facilities of
utilities and other public service entities delivering utility
and public services rendered for profit, to the
enhancement of the health, welfare, and general economic
well-being of the City and its citizens; and
(d) are a unique and physically limited resource
requiring proper management to maximize the efficiency
and to minimize the costs to the taxpayers of the foregoing
uses and to minimize the inconvenience to and negative
effects upon the public from such facilities' construction,
placement, relocation, and maintenance in the
Rights-of-Way.
(Ord. 97-42, 12-03-97)
5-24-2. Finding Regarding Compensation.
The City finds that the City should receive fair and
reasonable compensation for use of the Rights-of-Way.
(Ord. 97-42, 12-03-97)
5-24-3. Finding Regarding Local Concern.
The City finds that while Telecommunications
Systems are in part an extension of interstate commerce,
their operations also involve Rights-of-Way, municipal
franchising, and vital business and community services,
which are of local concern.
(Ord. 97-42, 12-03-97)
5-24-4. Finding Regarding Promotion of
Telecommunications Services.
The City finds that it is in the best interests of its
taxpayers and citizens to promote the rapid development
of Telecommunications Services, on a nondiscrimination
basis, responsive to community and public interest, and to
assure availability for municipal, educational and
community services.
(Ord. 97-42, 12-03-97)
5-24-5. Findings Regarding Franchise Standards.
(1) The City finds that it is in the interests of the
public to Franchise and to establish standards for
franchising Providers in a manner that:
(a) fairly and reasonably compensates the City
on a competitively neutral and non-discriminatory basis as
provided herein;
(b) encourages competition by establishing
terms and conditions under which Providers may use the
Rights-of-Way to serve the public;
(c) fully protects the public interests and the
City from any harm that may flow from such commercial
use of Rights-of-Way;
(d) protects the police powers and
Rights-of-Way management authority of the City, in a
manner consistent with federal and state law;
(e) otherwise protects the public interests in the
development and use of the City infrastructure;
(f) protects the public's investment in
improvements in the Rights-of-Way; and
(g) ensures that no barriers to entry of
Telecommunications Providers are created and that such
franchising is accomplished in a manner that does not
prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting
Telecommunication Services, within the meaning of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 ("Act") [P.L. No.
104-104].
(Ord. 97-42, 12-03-97)
5-24-6. Power to Manage Rights-of-Way.
The City adopts this Telecommunications Ordinance
pursuant to its power to manage the Rights-of-Way,
pursuant to common law, the Utah Constitution and
statutory authority, and receive fair and reasonable
compensation for the use of Rights-of-Way by Providers
as expressly set forth by Section 253 of the Act.
(Ord. 97-42, 12-03-97)
5-24-7. Scope of Ordinance.
This Ordinance shall provide the basic local scheme
for Providers of Telecommunications Services and
Systems that require the use of the Rights-of-Way,
including Providers of both the System and Service, those
Providers of the System only, and those Providers who do
not build the System but who only provide Services. This
Ordinance shall apply to all future Providers and to all
Providers in the City prior to the effective date of this
Ordinance, whether operating with or without a Franchise.
(Ord. 2018-17, 12-19-2018) (Ord. 97-42, 12-03-97)
(March 24, 2017) 5-63
5-24-8. Excluded Activity.
(1) Cable TV. This Ordinance shall not apply to
cable television operators otherwise regulated by the
"Cable Television Ordinance".
(2) Wireless Services. This Ordinance shall not
apply to:
(a) Personal Wireless Service Facilities, which
are regulated by Chapter 7-27 of the Tooele City Code.
(b) Wireless Communication Facilities, which
are regulated by Chapter 5-27 of the Tooele City Code.
(3) Provisions Applicable to Excluded Providers.
Providers excused by other law that prohibits the City
from requiring a Franchise shall not be required to obtain
a Franchise, but all of the requirements imposed by this
Ordinance through the exercise of the City's police power
and not preempted by other law shall be applicable.
(Ord. 2018-17, 12-19-2018) (Ord. 97-42, 12-03-97)
5-24-9. Defined Terms.
(1) Definitions. For purposes of this Ordinance, the
following terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives
shall have the meanings set forth in this Section, unless
the context clearly indicates that another meaning is
intended. Words used in the present tense include the
future tense; words in the single number include the plural
number; words in the plural number include the singular.
The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is
permissive. Words not defined shall be given their
common and ordinary meaning.
(a) "Application" means the process by which
a Provider submits a request and indicates a desire to be
granted a Franchise to utilize the Rights-of-Way of all, or
a part, of the City. An Application includes all written
documentation, verbal statements and representations, in
whatever form or forum, made by a Provider to the City
concerning: the construction of a Telecommunications
System over, under, on or through the Rights-of-Way; the
Telecommunications Services proposed to be provided in
the City by a Provider; and any other matter pertaining to
a proposed System or Service.
(b) "City" means Tooele City, Utah.
(c) "Completion Date" means the date that a
Provider begins providing Services to customers in the
City.
(d) "Construction Costs" means all costs of
constructing a System, including make ready costs, other
than engineering fees, attorneys or accountants fees, or
other consulting fees.
(e) "Control" or "Controlling Interest" means
actual working control in whatever manner exercised,
including, without limitation, working control through
ownership, management, debt instruments or negative
control, as the case may be, of the System or of a
Provider. A rebuttable presumption of the existence of
Control or a Controlling Interest shall arise from the
beneficial ownership, directly or indirectly, by any Person,
or group of Persons acting in concert, of more than 25%
of any Provider (which Person or group of Persons is
hereinafter referred to as "Controlling Person"). "Control"
or "Controlling Interest" as used herein may be held
simultaneously by more than one Person or group of
Persons.
(f) "FCC" means the Federal Communications
Commission, or any successor thereto.
(g) "Franchise" means the rights and obligation
extended by the City to a Provider to own, lease,
construct, maintain, use or operate a System in the
Rights-of-Way within the boundaries of the City. Any
such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not
mean or include:
(i) any other permit or authorization required
for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business
within the City required by the ordinances and laws of the
City;
(ii) any other permit, agreement or
authorization required in connection with operations on
Rights-of-Way or public property including, without
limitation, permits and agreements for placing devices on
or in poles, conduits or other structures, whether owned
by the City or a private entity, or for excavating or
performing other work in or along the Rights-of-Way.
(h) "Franchise Agreement" means a contract
entered into in accordance with the provisions of this
Ordinance between the City and a Franchisee that sets
forth, subject to this Ordinance, the terms and conditions
under which a Franchise will be exercised.
(i) "Gross Revenue" includes all revenues of a
Provider that may be included as gross revenue within the
meaning of Chapter 26, Title 11 Utah Code annotated,
1953, as amended.
(j) "Infrastructure Provider" means a Person
providing to another, for the purpose of providing
Telecommunication Services to customers, all or part of
the necessary System which uses the Rights-Of-Way.
(k) "Open Video Service" means any video
programming services provided to any Person through the
use of Rights-of-Way, by a Provider that is certified by
the FCC to operate an Open Video System pursuant to
sections 651, et seq., of the Telecommunications Act (to
be codified at 47 U.S.C. Title VI, Part V), regardless of
the System used.
(l) "Open Video System" means the system of
cables, wires, lines, towers, wave guides, optic fiber,
microwave, laser beams, and any associated converters,
equipment, or facilities designed and constructed for the
purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying or
distributing Open Video Services to or from subscribers
or locations within the City.
(m) "Operator" means any Person who provides
Service over a Telecommunications System and directly
or through one or more Persons owns a Controlling
Interest in such System, or who otherwise controls or is
responsible for the operation of such a System.
(n) "Ordinance" or "Telecommunications
Ordinance" means this Telecommunications Ordinance
concerning the granting of Franchises in and by the City
for the construction, ownership, operation, use or
maintenance of a Telecommunications System.
(o) "Person" includes any individual,
corporation, partnership, association, joint stock company,
trust, or any other legal entity, but not the City.
(p) "Personal Wireless Services Facilities" has
(March 24, 2017) 5-64
the same meaning as provided in Section 704 of the Act
(47 U.S.C. 332(c)(7)(c)), which includes what is
commonly known as cellular and PCS Services that do not
install any System or portion of a System in the
Rights-of-Way.
(q) "Provider" means an Operator ,
Infrastructure Provider, Resaler, or System Lessee.
(r) "PSC" means the Public Service
Commission, or any successor thereto.
(s) "Resaler" refers to any Person that provides
local exchange service over a System for which a separate
charge is made, where that Person does not own or lease
the underlying System used for the transmission.
(t) "Rights-of-Way" means the surface of and
the space above and below any public street, sidewalk,
alley, or other public way of any type whatsoever, now or
hereafter existing as such within the City.
(u) "Signal" means any transmission or
reception of electronic, electrical, light or laser or radio
frequency energy or optical information in either analog
or digital format.
(v) "System Lessee" refers to any Person that
leases a System or a specific portion of a System to
provide Services.
(w) "Telecommunications" means the
transmission, between or among points specified by the
user, of information of the user's choosing (e.g., data,
video, and voice), without change in the form or content
of the information sent and received.
(x) "Telecommunications System" or "System"
means all conduits, manholes, poles, antennas,
transceivers, amplifiers and all other electronic devices,
equipment, Wire and appurtenances owned, leased, or
used by a Provider, located in the Rights-of-Way and
utilized in the provision of Services, including fully digital
or analog, voice, data and video imaging and other
e n h a n c e d Te l e c ommu n i c a t i o ns Se r v i c e s .
Telecommunications System or Systems also includes an
Open Video System.
(y) "Telecommunications Service(s)" or
"Services" means any telecommunications services
provided by a Provider within the City that the Provider
is authorized to provide under federal, state and local law,
and any equipment and/or facilities required for and
integrated with the Services provided within the City,
except that these terms do not include "cable service" as
defined in the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984,
as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection
and Competition Act of 1992 (47 U.S.C. § 521, et seq.),
and the Telecommunications Act of 1996.
Telecommunications System or Systems also includes an
Open Video System.
(z) "W i r e " me a n s f i b e r o p t i c
Telecommunications cable, wire, coaxial cable, or other
transmission medium that may be used in lieu thereof for
similar purposes.
(Ord. 2018-17, 12-19-2018) (Ord. 97-42, 12-03-97)
5-24-10. Franchise Required.
(1) Non-Exclusive Franchise. The City is
empowered and authorized to issue non-exclusive
Franchises governing the installation, construction, and
maintenance of Systems in the City's Rights-of-Way, in
accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. The
Franchise is granted through a Franchise Agreement
entered into between the City and Provider.
(2) Every Provider Must Obtain. Except to the extent
preempted by federal or state law, as ultimately
interpreted by a court of competent jurisdiction, including
any appeals, every Provider must obtain a Franchise prior
to constructing a Telecommunications System or
providing Telecommunications Services using the
Rights-of-Way, and every Provider must obtain a
Franchise before constructing an Open Video System or
providing Open Video Services via an Open Video
System. Any Open Video System or Service shall be
subject to the customer service and consumer protection
provisions applicable to the Cable TV companies to the
extent the City is not preempted or permitted as ultimately
interpreted by a court of competent jurisdiction, including
any appeals. The fact that particular Telecommunications
Systems may be used for multiple purposes does not
obviate the need to obtain a Franchise for other purposes.
By way of illustration and not limitation, a cable operator
of a cable system must obtain a cable franchise, and,
should it intend to provide Telecommunications Services
over the same System, must also obtain a
Telecommunications Franchise.
(3) Nature of Grant. A Franchise shall not convey
title, equitable or legal, in the Rights-of-Way. A Franchise
is only the right to occupy Rights-of-Way on a
non-exclusive basis for the limited purposes and for the
limited period stated in the Franchise; the right may not be
subdivided, assigned, or subleased. A Franchise does not
excuse a Provider from obtaining appropriate access or
pole attachment agreements before collocating its System
on the property of others, including the City's property.
This section shall not be construed to prohibit a Provider
from leasing conduit to another Provider, so long as the
Lessee has obtained a Franchise.
(4) Current Providers. Except to the extent exempted
by federal or state law, any Provider acting without a
Franchise on the effective date of this Ordinance shall
request issuance of a Franchise from the City within 90
days of the effective date of this Ordinance. If such
request is made, the Provider may continue providing
service during the course of negotiations. If a timely
request is not made, or if negotiations cease and a
Franchise is not granted, the Provider shall comply with
the provisions of Section 5-24-17(3).
(5) Nature of Franchise. The Franchise granted by
the City under the provisions of this Ordinance shall be a
nonexclusive Franchise providing the right and consent to
install, repair, maintain, remove and replace its System on,
over and under the Rights-of-Way in order to provide
Services.
(6) Regulatory Approval Needed. Before offering or
providing any Services pursuant to the Franchise, a
Provider shall obtain any and all regulatory approvals,
permits, authorizations or licenses for the offering or
provision of such Services from the appropriate federal,
state and local authorities, if required, and shall submit to
(March 24, 2017) 5-65
the City upon the written request of the City evidence of
all such approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses.
(7) Term. No Franchise issued pursuant to this
Ordinance shall have a term of less than 5 years or greater
than15 years. Each Franchise shall be granted in a
nondiscriminatory manner.
(Ord. 2018-17, 12-19-2018) (Ord. 97-42, 12-03-97)
5-24-11. Compensation and other payments.
(1) Compensation. As fair and reasonable
compensation for any Franchise granted pursuant to this
Ordinance, a Provider shall have the following
obligations:
(2) Application Fee. In order to offset the cost to the
City to review an Application for a Franchise and in
addition to all other fees, permits or charges, a Provider
shall pay to the City, at the time of Application, $500 as
a non-refundable Application fee.
(3) Franchise Fees. The Franchise fee, if any, shall
be set forth in the Franchise Agreement. The obligation to
pay a Franchise fee shall commence on the Completion
Date. The Franchise fee is offset by any
telecommunication service provider tax collected by the
City under Chapter 5-18c (Telecommunication Service
Providers Tax).
(4) Excavation Permits. The Provider shall also pay
fees required for an excavation permit as provided in Title
4 Chapter 9 of the Tooele City Code.
(5) Timing. Unless otherwise agreed to in the
Franchise Agreement, all Franchise Fees shall be paid on
a monthly basis within 45 days of the close of each
calendar month.
(6) Fee Statement and Certification. Unless a
Franchise Agreement provides otherwise, each fee
payment shall be accompanied by a statement showing the
manner in which the fee was calculated and shall be
certified as to its accuracy.
(7) Future Costs. A Provider shall pay to the City or
to third parties, at the direction of the City, an amount
equal to the reasonable costs and reasonable expenses that
the City incurs for the services of third parties (including
but not limited to attorneys and other consultants) in
connection with any renewal or Provider-initiated
renegotiation, or amendment of this Ordinance or a
Franchise, provided, however, that the parties shall agree
upon a reasonable financial cap at the outset of
negotiations. In the event the parties are unable to agree,
either party may submit the issue to binding arbitration in
accordance with the rules and procedures of the American
Arbitration Association. Any costs associated with any
work to be done by the City’s Public Works Department
to provide space on City owned poles shall be borne by
the Provider.
(8) Taxes and Assessments. To the extent taxes or
other assessments are imposed by taxing authorities, other
than the City on the use of the City property as a result of
a Provider's use or occupation of the Rights-of-Way, the
Provider shall be responsible for payment of its pro rata
share of such taxes, payable annually unless otherwise
required by the taxing authority. Such payments shall be
in addition to any other fees payable pursuant to this
Ordinance.
(9) Interest on Late Payments. In the event that any
payment is not actually received by the City on or before
the applicable date fixed in the Franchise, interest thereon
shall accrue from such date until received at the rate
charged for delinquent state taxes.
(10) No Accord and Satisfaction. No acceptance by
the City of any fee shall be construed as an accord that the
amount paid is in fact the correct amount, nor shall such
acceptance of such fee payment be construed as a release
of any claim the City may have for additional sums
payable.
(11) Not in Lieu of Other Taxes or Fees. The fee
payment is not a payment in lieu of any tax, fee or other
assessment except as specifically provided in this
Ordinance, or as required by applicable law. By way of
example, and not limitation, excavation permit fees and
fees to obtain space on the City owned poles are not
waived and remain applicable.
(12) Continuing Obligation and Holdover. In the
event a Provider continues to operate all or any part of the
System after the Term of the Franchise, such operator
shall continue to comply with all applicable provisions of
this Ordinance and the Franchise, including, without
limitation, all compensation and other payment provisions
throughout the period of such continued operation,
provided that any such continued operation shall in no
way be construed as a renewal or other extension of the
Franchise, nor as a limitation on the remedies, if any,
available to the City as a result of such continued
operation after the term, including, but not limited to,
damages and restitution.
(13) Costs of Publication. A Provider shall assume
any publication costs associated with its Franchise that
may be required by law.
(Ord. 2018-17, 12-19-2018) (Ord. 97-42, 12-03-97)
5-24-12. Franchise applications.
(1) Franchise Application. To obtain a Franchise to
construct, own, maintain or provide Services through any
System within the City, to obtain a renewal of a Franchise
granted pursuant to this Ordinance, or to obtain the City
approval of a transfer of a Franchise, as provided in
Subsection 5-24-15(2), granted pursuant to this
Ordinance, an Application must be filed with City on a
form approved by the City. The Application form may be
changed by the Mayor so long as such changes request
information that is consistent with this Ordinance.
(2) Application Criteria. In making a determination
as to an Application filed pursuant to this Ordinance, the
City may, but shall not be limited to, request the following
from the Provider:
(a) A copy of the order from the PSC granting
a Certificate of Convenience and Necessity.
(b) Certification of the Provider's financial
ability to compensate the City for Provider's intrusion,
maintenance and use of the Rights-of-Way during the
Franchise term proposed by the Provider;
(c) Provider's agreement to comply with the
requirements of this Ordinance.
(3) Franchise Determination. The City, in its
(March 24, 2017) 5-66
discretion, shall determine the award of any Franchise on
the basis of these and other considerations relevant to the
use of the Rights-of-Way, without competitive bidding.
(Ord. 2018-17, 12-19-2018) (Ord. 97-42, 12-03-97)
5-24-13. Construction and technical requirements.
(1) General Requirement. No Provider shall receive
a Franchise unless it agrees to comply with each of the
terms set forth in this Section governing construction and
technical requirements for its System, in addition to any
other reasonable requirements or procedures specified by
the City or the Franchise, including requirements
regarding locating and sharing in the cost of locating
portions of the System with other Systems or with City
utilities. A Provider shall obtain an excavation permit,
pursuant to the excavation ordinance, before commencing
any work in the Rights-of-Way.
(2) Quality. All work involved in the construction,
maintenance, repair, upgrade and removal of the System
shall be performed in a safe, thorough and reliable manner
using materials of good and durable quality. If, at any
time, it is determined by the FCC or any other agency
granted authority by federal law or the FCC to make such
determination, that any part of the System, including,
without limitation, any means used to distribute Signals
over or within the System, is harmful to the public health,
safety or welfare, or quality of service or reliability, then
a Provider shall, at its own cost and expense, promptly
correct all such conditions.
(3) Licenses and Permits. A Provider shall have the
sole responsibility for diligently obtaining, at its own cost
and expense, all permits, licenses or other forms of
approval or authorization necessary to construct, maintain,
upgrade or repair the System, including but not limited to
any necessary approvals from Persons and/or the City to
use private property, easements, poles and conduits. A
Provider shall obtain any required permit, license,
approval or authorization, including but not limited to
excavation permits, pole attachment agreements, etc.,
prior to the commencement of the activity for which the
permit, license, approval or authorization is required.
(Ord. 97-42, 12-03-97)
5-24-14. Relocation of the System.
(1) New Grades or Lines. If the grades or lines of
any Rights-of-Way are changed at any time in a manner
affecting the System, then a Provider shall comply with
the requirements of the excavation ordinance.
(2) The City Authority to Move System in case of an
Emergency. The City may, at any time, in case of fire,
disaster or other emergency, as determined by the City in
its reasonable discretion, cut or move any parts of the
System and appurtenances on, over or under the
Rights-of-Way of the City, in which event the City shall
not be liable therefor to a Provider. The City shall notify
a Provider in writing prior to, if practicable, but in any
event as soon as possible and in no case later than the next
business day following any action taken under this
Section. Notice shall be given as provided in Section 5-
24-19.
(3) A Provider Required to Temporarily Move
System for Third Party. A Provider shall, upon prior
reasonable written notice by the City or any Person
holding a permit to move any structure, and within the
time that is reasonable under the circumstances,
temporarily move any part of its System to permit the
moving of said structure. A Provider may impose a
reasonable charge on any Person other than the City for
any such movement of its Systems.
(4) Rights-of-Way Change - Obligation to Move
System. When the City is changing a Rights-of-Way and
makes a written request, a Provider is required to move or
remove its System from the Rights-of-Way, without cost
to the City, to the extent provided in the excavation
ordinance. This obligation does not apply to Systems
originally located on private property pursuant to a private
easement, which property was later incorporated into the
Rights-of-Way, if that private easement grants a superior
vested right. This obligation exists whether or not the
Provider has obtained an excavation permit.
(5) Protect Structures. In connection with the
construction, maintenance, repair, upgrade or removal of
the System, a Provider shall, at its own cost and expense,
protect any and all existing structures belonging to the
City and all designated landmarks, as well as all other
structures within any designated landmark district. A
Provider shall obtain the prior written consent of the City
to alter any water main, power facility, sewerage or
drainage system, or any other municipal structure on, over
or under the Rights-of-Way of the City required because
of the presence of the System. Any such alteration shall be
made by the City or its designee on a reimbursable basis.
A Provider agrees that it shall be liable for the costs
incurred by the City to replace or repair and restore to its
prior condition in a manner as may be reasonably
specified by the City, any municipal structure or any other
Rights-of-Way of the City involved in the construction,
maintenance, repair, upgrade or removal of the System
that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of any
work thereon by or on behalf of a Provider pursuant to the
Franchise.
(6) No Obstruction. In connection with the
construction, maintenance, upgrade, repair or removal of
the System, a Provider shall not unreasonably obstruct the
Rights-of-Way of fixed guide way systems, railways,
passenger travel, or other traffic to, from or within the
City without the prior consent of the appropriate
authorities.
(7) Safety Precautions. A Provider shall, at its own
cost and expense, undertake all necessary and appropriate
efforts to prevent accidents at its work sites, including the
placing and maintenance of proper guards, fences,
barricades, security personnel and suitable and sufficient
lighting, and such other requirements prescribed by
OSHA and Utah OSHA. A Provider shall comply with all
applicable federal, state and local requirements including
but not limited to the National Electric Safety Code.
(8) Repair. After written reasonable notice to the
Provider, unless, in the sole determination of the City, an
eminent danger exists, any Rights-of-Way within the City
which are disturbed or damaged during the construction,
maintenance or reconstruction by a Provider of its System
(March 24, 2017) 5-67
may be repaired by the City at the Provider's expense, to
a condition as good as that prevailing before such work
was commenced. Upon doing so, the City shall submit to
such a Provider an itemized statement of the cost for
repairing and restoring the Rights-of-Ways intruded upon.
The Provider shall, within30 days after receipt of the
statement, pay to the City the entire amount thereof.
(9) System Maintenance. A Provider shall:
(a) Install and maintain all parts of its System in
a non-dangerous condition throughout the entire period of
its Franchise.
(b) Install and maintain its System in
accordance with standard prudent engineering practices
and shall conform, when applicable, with the National
Electrical Safety Code and all applicable other federal,
state and local laws or regulations.
(c) At all reasonable times, permit examination
by any duly authorized representative of the City of the
System and its effect on the Rights-of-Way.
(10) Trimming of Trees. A Provider shall have the
authority to trim trees, in accordance with all applicable
utility restrictions, ordinance and easement restrictions,
upon and hanging over Rights-of-Way so as to prevent the
branches of such trees from coming in contact with its
System.
(Ord. 2018-17, 12-19-2018) (Ord. 97-42, 12-03-97)
5-24-15. Franchise, license, transfer or sale.
(1) Notification of Sale.
(a) Notification and Election. When a Provider
is the subject of a sale, transfer, lease, assignment,
sublease or disposed of, in whole or in part, either by
forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale,
consolidation or otherwise, such that it or its successor
entity is obligated to inform or seek the approval of the
PSC, the Provider or its successor entity shall promptly
notify the City of the nature of the transaction. The
notification shall include either:
(i) the successor entity's certification that
the successor entity unequivocally agrees to all of the
terms of the original Provider's Franchise Agreement, or
(ii) the successor entity's Application in
compliance with Section 5-24-12 of this Ordinance.
(2) Transfer of Franchise. Upon receipt of a
notification and certification, the City designee shall send
notice affirming the transfer of the Franchise to the
successor entity. If the City has good cause to believe that
the successor entity may not comply with this Ordinance
or the Franchise Agreement, it may require an Application
for the transfer. The Application shall comply with
Section 5-24-12.
(3) If PSC Approval No Longer Required. If the
PSC no longer exists, or if its regulations or state law no
longer require approval of transactions described in
Section 5-24-7, and the City has good cause to believe
that the successor entity may not comply with this
Ordinance or the Franchise Agreement, it may require an
Application. The Application shall comply with this
Section.
(4) Events of Sale. The following events shall be
deemed to be a sale, assignment or other transfer of the
Franchise requiring compliance with Section 7.1:
(a) the sale, assignment or other transfer of all
or a majority of a Provider's assets to another Person;
(b) the sale, assignment or other transfer of
capital stock or partnership, membership or other equity
interests in a Provider by one or more of its existing
shareholders, partners, members or other equity owners so
as to create a new Controlling Interest in a Provider;
(c) the issuance of additional capital stock or
partnership, membership or other equity interest by a
Provider so as to create a new Controlling Interest in such
a Provider; or
(d) the entry by a Provider into an agreement
with respect to the management or operation of such
Provider or its System.
(Ord. 2018-17, 12-19-2018) (Ord. 97-42, 12-03-97)
5-24-16. Oversight and regulation.
(1) Insurance, Indemnity, and Security. Prior to the
execution of a Franchise, a Provider will deposit with the
City an irrevocable, unconditional letter of credit or surety
bond as required by the terms of the Franchise, and shall
obtain and provide proof of the insurance coverage
required by the Franchise. A Provider shall also indemnify
the City as set forth in the Franchise.
(2) Oversight. The City shall have the right to
oversee, regulate and inspect periodically the
construction, maintenance, and upgrade of the System,
and any part thereof, in accordance with the provisions of
the Franchise and applicable law. A Provider shall
establish and maintain managerial and operational
records, standards, procedures and controls to enable a
Provider to prove, in reasonable detail, to the satisfaction
of the City at all times throughout the Term, that a
Provider is in compliance with the Franchise. A Provider
shall retain such records for not less than the applicable
statute of limitations.
(3) Maintain Records. A Provider shall at all times
maintain:
(a) On file with the City, a full and complete set
of plans, records and "as-built" hard copy maps and, to
the extent the maps are placed in an electronic format,
they shall be made in electronic format compatible with
the City's existing GIS system, of all existing and
proposed installations and the types of equipment and
Systems installed or constructed in the Rights-of-Way,
properly identified and described as to the types of
equipment and facility by appropriate symbols and marks
which shall include annotations of all Rights-of-Ways
where work will be undertaken. As used herein, "as-built"
maps includes "file construction prints." Maps shall be
drawn to scale. "As-built" maps, including the compatible
electronic format, as provided above, shall be submitted
within 30 days of completion of work or within 30 days
after completion of modification and repairs. "As- built"
maps are not required of the Provider who is the
incumbent local exchange carrier for the existing System
to the extent they do not exist.
(b) Throughout the term of the Franchise, a
Provider shall maintain complete and accurate books of
account and records of the business, ownership, and
(March 24, 2017) 5-68
operations of a Provider with respect to the System in a
manner that allows the City at all times to determine
whether a Provider is in compliance with the Franchise.
Should the City reasonably determine that the records are
not being maintained in such a manner, a Provider shall
alter the manner in which the books and/or records are
maintained so that a Provider comes into compliance with
this Section. All financial books and records which are
maintained in accordance with the regulations of the FCC
and any governmental entity that regulates utilities in the
State of Utah, and generally accepted accounting
principles shall be deemed to be acceptable under this
Section.
(4) Confidentiality. If the information required to be
submitted is proprietary in nature or must be kept
confidential by federal, state or local law, upon proper
request by a Provider, such information shall be classified
as a Protected Record within the meaning of the Utah
Government Records Access and Management Act
("GRAMA"), making it available only to those who must
have access to perform their duties on behalf of the City,
provided that a Provider notifies the City of, and clearly
labels the information which a Provider deems to be
confidential, proprietary information. Such notification
and labeling shall be the sole responsibility of the
Provider.
(5) Provider's Expense. All reports and records
required under this Ordinance shall be furnished at the
sole expense of a Provider, except as otherwise provided
in this Ordinance or a Franchise.
(6) Right of Inspection. For the purpose of verifying
the correct amount of the franchise fee, the books and
records of the Provider pertaining thereto shall be open to
inspection or audit by duly authorized representatives of
the City at all reasonable times, upon giving reasonable
notice of the intention to inspect or audit the books and
records, provided that the City shall not audit the books
and records of the Provider more often than annually. The
Provider agrees to reimburse the City the reasonable costs
of an audit if the audit discloses that the Provider has paid
95% or less of the compensation due the City for the
period of such audit. In the event the accounting rendered
to the City by the Provider herein is found to be incorrect,
then payment shall be made on the corrected amount
within 30 calendar days of written notice, it being agreed
that the City may accept any amount offered by the
Provider, but the acceptance thereof by the City shall not
be deemed a settlement of such item if the amount is in
dispute or is later found to be incorrect.
(Ord. 2018-17, 12-19-2018) (Ord. 97-42, 12-03-97)
5-24-17. Rights of city.
(1) Enforcement and Remedies.
(a) Enforcement - City Designee. The City is
responsible for enforcing and administering this
Ordinance, and the City or its designee, as appointed by
the Mayor, is authorized to give any notice required by
law or under any Franchise Agreement.
(b) Enforcement Provision. Any Franchise
granted pursuant to this Ordinance shall contain
appropriate provisions for enforcement, compensation,
and protection of the public, consistent with the other
provisions of this Ordinance, including, but not limited to,
defining events of default, procedures for accessing the
Bond/Security Fund, and rights of termination or
revocation.
(2) Force Majeure. In the event a Provider's
performance of any of the terms, conditions or obligations
required by this Ordinance or a Franchise is prevented by
a cause or event not within a Provider's control, such
inability to perform shall be deemed excused and no
penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof.
For the purpose of this section, causes or events not within
the control of a Provider shall include, without limitation,
acts of God, strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances,
failure or loss of utilities, explosions, acts of public
enemies, and natural disasters such as floods, earthquakes,
landslides, and fires.
(3) Extended Operation and Continuity of Services.
(a) Continuation After Expiration. Upon either
expiration or revocation of a Franchise granted pursuant
to this Ordinance, the City shall have discretion to permit
a Provider to continue to operate its System or provide
Services for an extended period of time not to exceed six
(6) months from the date of such expiration or revocation.
A Provider shall continue to operate its System under the
terms and conditions of this Ordinance and the Franchise
granted pursuant to this Ordinance.
(b) Continuation by Incumbent Local Exchange
Carrier. If the Provider is the incumbent local exchange
carrier, it shall be permitted to continue to operate its
System and provide Services without regard to revocation
or expiration, but shall be obligated to negotiate a renewal
in good faith.
(4) Removal or Abandonment of Franchise Property.
(a) Abandoned System. In the event that (1) the
use of any portion of the System is discontinued for a
continuous period of 12 months, and 30 days after no
response to written notice from the City to the last known
address of Provider, or (2) any System has been installed
in the Rights-of-Way without complying with the
requirements of this Ordinance or Franchise, or (3) no
Franchise is granted, a Provider, except the Provider who
is an incumbent local exchange carrier, shall be deemed
to have abandoned such System.
(b) Removal of Abandoned System. The City,
upon such terms as it may impose, may give a Provider
written permission to abandon, without removing, any
System, or portion thereof, directly constructed, operated
or maintained under a Franchise. Unless such permission
is granted or unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance,
a Provider shall remove within a reasonable time the
abandoned System and shall restore, using prudent
construction standards, any affected Rights-of-Way to
their former state at the time such System was installed, so
as not to impair their usefulness. In removing its plant,
structures and equipment, a Provider shall refill, at its own
expense, any excavation necessarily made by it and shall
leave all Rights-of-Way in as good condition as that
prevailing prior to such removal without materially
interfering with any electrical or telephone cable or other
utility wires, poles or attachments. The City shall have the
(March 24, 2017) 5-69
right to inspect and approve the condition of the
Rights-of-Way cables, wires, attachments and poles prior
to and after removal. The liability, indemnity and
insurance provisions of this Ordinance and any security
fund provided in a Franchise shall continue in full force
and effect during the period of removal and until full
compliance by a Provider with the terms and conditions of
this Section.
(c) Transfer of Abandoned System to City.
Upon abandonment of any System in place, a Provider, if
required by the City, shall submit to the City a written
instrument, satisfactory in form to the City, transferring to
the City the ownership of the abandoned System.
(d) Removal of Above-Ground System. At the
expiration of the term for which a Franchise is granted, or
upon its revocation or earlier expiration, as provided for
by this Ordinance, in any such case without renewal,
extension or transfer, the City shall have the right to
require a Provider to remove, at its expense, all
above-ground portions of a System from the
Rights-of-Way within a reasonable period of time, which
shall not be less than180 days. If the Provider is the
incumbent local exchange carrier, it shall not be required
to remove its System, but shall negotiate a renewal in
good faith.
(e) L eaving Und erground Sys tem .
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this
Ordinance, a Provider may abandon any underground
System in place so long as it does not materially interfere
with the use of the Rights-of-Way or with the use thereof
by any public utility, cable operator or other Person.
(Ord. 2018-17, 12-19-2018) (Ord. 97-42, 12-03-97)
5-24-18. Obligation to notify.
Publicizing Work. Before entering onto any private
property, a Provider shall make a good faith attempt to
contact the property owners in advance, and describe the
work to be performed.
(Ord. 97-42, 12-03-97)
5-24-19. General provisions.
(1) Conflicts. In the event of a conflict between any
provision of this Ordinance and a Franchise entered
pursuant to it, the provisions of this Ordinance in effect at
the time the Franchise is entered into shall control.
(2) Severability. If any provision of this Ordinance
is held by any federal, state or local court of competent
jurisdiction, to be invalid as conflicting with any federal
or state statute, or is ordered by a court to be modified in
any way in order to conform to the requirements of any
such law and all appellate remedies with regard to the
validity of the Ordinance provisions in question are
exhausted, such provision shall be considered a separate,
distinct, and independent part of this Ordinance, and such
holding shall not affect the validity and enforceability of
all other provisions hereof. In the event that such law is
subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise
changed, so that the provision which had been held
invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with such law
the provision in question shall return to full force and
effect and shall again be binding on the City and the
Provider, provided that the City shall give the Provider 30
days, or a longer period of time as may be reasonably
required for a Provider to comply with such a rejuvenated
provision, written notice of the change before requiring
compliance with such provision.
(3) New Developments. It shall be the policy of the
City to liberally amend this Ordinance, upon Application
of a Provider, when necessary to enable the Provider to
take advantage of any developments in the field of
Telecommunications which will afford the Provider an
opportunity to more effectively, efficiently, or
economically serve itself or the public.
(4) Notices. All notices from a Provider to the City
required under this Ordinance or pursuant to a Franchise
granted pursuant to this Ordinance shall be directed to the
officer as designated by the Mayor. A Provider shall
provide in any Application for a Franchise the identity,
address and phone number to receive notices from the
City. A Provider shall immediately notify the City of any
change in its name, address, or telephone number.
(5) Exercise of Police Power. To the full extent
permitted by applicable law either now or in the future,
the City reserves the right to adopt or issue such rules,
regulations, orders, or other directives that it finds
necessary or appropriate in the lawful exercise of its
police powers.
(Ord. 2018-17, 12-19-2018) (Ord. 97-42, 12-03-97)
5-24-20. Federal, state and city jurisdiction.
(1) Construction. This Ordinance shall be construed
in a manner consistent with all applicable federal and state
statutes.
(2) Ordinance Applicability. This Ordinance shall
apply to all Franchises granted or renewed after the
effective date of this Ordinance. This Ordinance shall
further apply, to the extent permitted by applicable federal
or state law to all existing Franchises granted prior to the
effective date of this Ordinance and to a Provider
providing Services, without a Franchise, prior to the
effective date of this Ordinance.
(3) Other Applicable Ordinances. A Provider's rights
are subject to the police powers of the City to adopt and
enforce ordinances necessary to the health, safety and
welfare of the public. A Provider shall comply with all
applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the
City pursuant to its police powers. In particular, all
Providers shall comply with the City zoning and other
land use requirements.
(4) City Failure to Enforce. A Provider shall not be
relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the
provisions of this Ordinance or any Franchise granted
pursuant to this Ordinance by reason of any failure of the
City to enforce prompt compliance.
(5) Construed According to Utah Law. This
Ordinance and any Franchise granted pursuant to this
Ordinance shall be construed and enforced in accordance
with the substantive laws of the State of Utah.
(Ord. 97-42, 12-03-97)
5-70 (March 24, 2017)
CHAPTER 25. TRANSIENT ROOM TAX
5-25-1. Title for citation.
5-25-2. Definitions.
5-25-3. Tax imposed.
5-25-4. Collection of tax.
5-25-5. Penalties and interest.
5-25-1. Title for Citation.
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as
the “Transient Room Tax Ordinance.”
(Ord. 2002-16, 08-07-2002)
5-25-2. Definitions.
Any terms not specifically defined herein shall be
construed according to common usage. For the purpose
of this chapter, the following words shall have the
following meanings:
(1) “Public accommodation” means a place providing
temporary sleeping accommodations to the public and
includes:
(a) a motel;
(b) a hotel;
(c) a motor court;
(d) an inn;
(e) a bed and breakfast establishment;
(f) a condominium; and
(g) a resort home.
(2) “Rents” include:
(a) rents; and
(b) timeshare fees or dues.
(3) “Transient” means a person who occupies a public
accommodation for less than 30 consecutive days.
(Ord. 2003-14, 4-16-03); (Ord. 2002-16, 08-07-2002)
5-25-3. Tax imposed.
There is levied a transient room tax on the rents charged
to transients occupying public accommodations in an
amount that is equal to one percent (1%) of the rents
charged.
(Ord. 2002-16, 08-07-2002)
5-25-4. Collection of Tax.
(1) The tax imposed by this chapter shall be due and
payable to the city finance department on a quarterly basis
on or before the thirtieth day of the month following each
calendar quarter, commencing with the 7th day of August,
2002.
(2) Every person or business taxed under this chapter
shall, on or before the thirtieth day of the month following
each calendar quarter, file with the city finance director’s
office a report of its gross revenue for the preceding
quarterly period. The report shall be accompanied by a
remittance of the amount of tax due for the period covered
by the report.
(3) The City may at its discretion opt to contract with
the State Tax Commission to perform any or all of the
functions related to the administration of this chapter.
(Ord. 2002-16, 08-07-2002)
5-25-5. Penalties and interest.
If the transient room tax is not paid within the time
prescribed in this chapter, penalties and interest shall be
assessed as set forth in Sections 59-1-401 and 59-1-402,
Utah Code Ann.
(Ord. 2002-16, 08-07-2002)
(November 20, 2019) 5-71
CHAPTER 5-26. MOBILE FOOD BUSINESSES.
5-26-1. Purpose and intent.
5-26-2. Mobile food business allowed.
5-26-3. Definitions.
5-26-4. Application for a business license.
5-26-5. Fees.
5-26-6. Temporary nature.
5-26-7. Design and operational standards.
5-26-8. Signs.
5-26-9. Professional and personal services
prohibited.
5-26-10. Special events.
5-26-1. Purpose and intent.
The purposes of this Chapter include to provide
clear and concise regulations for mobile food
businesses, to prevent safety, traffic, and health hazards,
and to preserve the peace, safety, health, and welfare of
the community.
(Ord. 2018-12, 09-05-2018)
5-26-2. Mobile food business allowed.
(1) No person shall operate a mobile food
business without first obtaining a business license from
the City in accordance with this Chapter and Chapter 5-
1 (General Provisions).
(2) A separate business license shall be required
for each mobile food vehicle.
(3) A mobile food business may operate within
commercial, industrial, and mixed use zoning districts.
(4) A mobile food business may operate within
Tooele City parks in any zoning district:
(a) pursuant to a permitted special event with
the written authorization of the special event permit
holder; or,
(b) with written authorization of Tooele City
for a City event.
(5) A mobile food business may operate on school
or church owned property in any zoning district:
(a) for a school or church event; and,
(b) with written authorization of the property
owner.
(6) A mobile food business may not operate within
a public right-of-way.
(7) This Chapter shall not apply to vending carts,
ice cream trucks, caterers, agricultural vendors,
solicitors, itinerant or transient merchants, and other
temporary merchants or uses that are regulated
elsewhere in this Title 5.
(Ord. 2018-12, 09-05-2018)
5-26-3. Definitions.
The following terms have the following definitions
for purposes of this Chapter.
“Food Trailer” means a mobile food business that
serves food or beverages from a non-motorized vehicle
larger than 3 feet in width and 8 feet in length that is
normally pulled behind a motorized vehicle. The term
"food trailer" shall not include vending carts, food
trucks, or ice cream trucks.
“Food Truck” means a mobile food business that
serves food or beverages from an enclosed, selfcontained
motorized vehicle. The term "food truck"
shall not include vending carts, food trailers, or ice
cream trucks.
“Mobile Food Business” means a business that
serves food or beverages from a self-contained unit
either motorized or in a trailer on wheels, and is readily
movable, without disassembly, for transport to another
location. The term "mobile food business" does not
include vending carts or ice cream trucks.
“Mobile Food Vehicle” means a food truck or food
trailer.
“Vending Cart” means a non-motorized mobile
device or pushcart smaller than 3 feet in width and 8
feet in length from which limited types of products are
sold or offered for sale directly to any consumer, where
the point of sale is at the cart.
(Ord. 2018-12, 09-05-2018)
5-26-4. Application for a business license.
(1) If a mobile food business has a current
business license from another Utah political
subdivision, the City shall issue a business license upon
the applicant providing the following to the
Department:
(a) a copy of the current business license from
the other Utah political subdivision;
(b) a copy of the current health department
mobile food vehicle permit from a local health
department within the state; and,
(c) a copy of the current approval of a Utah
political subdivision that shows that the mobile food
vehicle passed a fire safety inspection that the other
political subdivision conducted in accordance with Utah
Code Section 11-56-104, as amended.
(2) If a mobile food business does not have a
current business license from another Utah political
subdivision, a mobile food business shall submit the
following information to the Department:
(a) the name and address of the applicant and
the name and address of all employees operating the
mobile food vehicle;
(November 20, 2019) 5-72
(b) a copy of a current health department food
truck permit from the Tooele County Health
Department; and,
(c) a copy of a fire safety inspection
conducted in accordance with Utah Code Section 11-
56-104, as amended.
(3) A mobile food business licensed under
Subsections (1) or (2), above, shall provide the
following information to the City:
(a) the locations where the mobile food
vehicle will operate;
(b) the proposed duration of the business
activity; and,
(c) a simple site plan, where the mobile food
business will operate in the same location for more than
10 hours per week.
(Ord. 2019-26, 11-20-2019) (Ord. 2018-12, 09-05-
2018)
5-26-5. Fees.
(1) A mobile food business applicant shall pay a
business license fee as required by this Chapter and the
Tooele City Fee Schedule. The fee shall be a calendar
year fee for the licensed business and shall not include
an additional fee for mobile food business employees.
The fee is intended to cover the City’s administrative
cost to provide the license.
(2) Notwithstanding the above, the City will not
charge a business license fee for a mobile food business
that demonstrates that it is licensed by another Utah
political subdivision, but may charge a nominal
processing fee.
(Ord. 2018-12, 09-05-2018)
5-26-6. Temporary nature.
All business activity related to a mobile food
business shall be of a temporary nature, the duration of
which shall not extend for more than 16 hours within a
24-hour period at any one location.
(Ord. 2018-12, 09-05-2018)
5-26-7. Design and operational standards.
Mobile food vehicles shall comply with the
following design and operational standards and
requirements:
(1) be designed to meet all applicable health
department requirements;
(2) not have a drive-through;
(3) be kept in good operating condition, including
no visible peeling paint or rust;
(4) locations to be kept clean and free of grease,
refuse, and other debris;
(5) refuse and recycling containers to be provided
for use of patrons; and,
(6) enclosures or canopy extensions to be
integrated into the design of the mobile food vehicle
and to not project onto any portion of a public right-ofway.
(Ord. 2018-12, 09-05-2018)
5-26-8. Signs.
No signs shall be used to advertise the conduct of
the mobile food business other than those which are
physically attached to the food truck or food trailer.
(Ord. 2018-12, 09-05-2018)
5-26-9. Professional and personal services
prohibited.
The performance of professional or personal
services for sale shall not be provided from a food
truck.
(Ord. 2018-12, 09-05-2018)
5-26-10. Special events.
A mobile food business operating at a special event
approved under Chapter 8-16, with the authorization of
the special event permit holder, is exempt from the
licensing requirements of this Chapter; provided
however, that the business shall:
(1) comply with all other requirements of this
Chapter and of Chapter 8-16 (Special Events); and,
(2) have available for City inspection the
following:
(a) a copy of a current health department food
truck permit from a local health department; and,
(b) a copy of a current approval of a Utah
political subdivision that shows that the mobile food
business passed a fire safety inspection conducted in
accordance with Utah Code Section 11-56-104, as
amended.
(Ord. 2018-12, 09-05-2018)
(December 26, 2018)
CHAPTER 27. WIRELESS
COMMUNICATION SERVICES
Article I. Declaration of Findings and Intent—
Scope of Ordinance.
5-27-1. Findings regarding right-of-way.
5-27-2. Scope of ordinance.
5-27-3. Excluded activity.
Article II. Defined Terms.
5-27-4. Definitions.
Article III. Wireless Franchise Required.
5-27-5. Nonexclusive wireless franchise.
5-27-6. Every provider must obtain.
5-27-7. Nature of grant.
5-27-8. Current providers.
5-27-9. Nature of wireless franchise.
5-27-10. Regulatory approval needed.
5-27-11. Term.
Article IV. Compensation and Other Payments.
5-27-12. Compensation.
5-27-13. Timing.
5-27-14. Fee statement and certification.
5-27-15. Future costs.
5-27-16. Taxes and assessments.
5-27-17. Interest on late payments.
5-27-18. No accord and satisfaction.
5-27-19. Not in lieu of other taxes or fees.
5-27-20. Continuing obligation and holdover.
5-27-21. Costs of publication.
Article V. Wireless Franchise Applications.
5-27-22. Wireless franchise application.
5-27-23. Application criteria.
5-27-24. Wireless franchise determination.
5-27-25. Incomplete application.
Article VI. Site Applications.
5-27-26. Franchise necessary.
5-27-27. Site preference.
5-27-28. Poles adjacent to residential properties.
5-27-29. Height and size restrictions.
5-27-30. Safety.
5-27-31. Equipment.
5-27-32. Undergrounding.
5-27-33. Visual impact.
5-27-34. Stealth design/technology.
5-27-35. Lighting.
5-27-36. Signage.
5-27-37. Site design flexibility.
5-27-38. General requirements.
5-27-39. Application review process.
5-27-40. Application consolidation and submission
limit.
5-27-41. Expired application.
5-27-42. Site permit approval.
5-27-43. Site permit renewal.
5-27-44. Exemptions.
5-27-45. Exceptions to standards.
5-27-46. Application to install macrocell or
unpermitted utility pole.
Article VII. Construction and Technical
Requirements.
5-27-47. General requirement.
5-27-48. Quality.
5-27-49. Licenses and permits.
5-27-50. Relocation of the system.
5-27-51. Protect structures.
5-27-52. No obstruction.
5-27-53. Safety precautions.
5-27-54. Damage and repair.
Article VIII. Provider Responsibilities.
5-27-55. System maintenance.
5-27-56. Trimming of trees.
5-27-57. Inventory of existing sites.
Article IX. Wireless Franchise and License
Transferability.
5-27-58. Notification of sale.
5-27-59. Events of sale.
Article X. Oversight and Regulation.
5-27-60. Insurance, indemnity, and security.
5-27-61. Oversight.
5-27-62. Maintain records.
5-27-63. Confidentiality.
5-27-64. Provider’s expense.
5-27-65. Right of inspection.
Article XI. Rights of City.
5-27-66. Enforcement and remedies.
5-27-67. Force majeure.
5-27-68. Extended operation and continuity of
services.
5-27-69. Removal or abandonment of wireless
franchise property.
Article XII. Obligation to Notify.
5-27-70. Publicizing work.
Article XIII. General Provisions.
5-27-71. Conflicts.
5-27-72. Severability.
5-27-73. New developments.
5-27-74. Notices.
5-27-75. Exercise of police power.
Article XIV. Federal, State and City Jurisdiction.
5-27-76. Construction.
5-27-77. Chapter applicability.
(December 26, 2018)
5-27-78. Other applicable ordinances.
5-27-79. City failure to enforce.
5-27-80. Construed according to Utah law.
Article I. Declaration of Findings and Intent—
Scope of Ordinance.
5-27-1. Findings regarding right-of-way.
(1) Tooele City finds that the rights-of-way
within the City:
(a) are critical to the travel and transport of
persons and property in the business and social life of
the City;
(b) are intended for public uses and must be
managed and controlled consistent with that intent;
(c) can be partially occupied by the facilities
of utilities and other public service entities delivering
utility and public services rendered for profit to the
enhancement of the health, welfare, and general
economic well-being of the City and its citizens; and,
(d) are a unique and physically limited
resource requiring proper management to maximize
the efficiency and to minimize the costs to the
taxpayers of the allowed uses and to minimize the
inconvenience to and negative effects upon the public
from such facilities construction, placement,
relocation, and maintenance in the right-of-way.
(2) Finding Regarding Compensation. The City
finds the right to occupy portions of the right-of-way
for limited times for the business of providing personal
wireless services is a valuable use of a unique public
resource that has been acquired and is maintained at
great expense to the City and its taxpayers, and,
therefore, the taxpayers of the City should receive fair
and reasonable compensation for use of the rights-ofway.
(3) Finding Regarding Local Concern. The
City finds that while wireless communication facilities
are in part an extension of interstate commerce, their
operations also involve and affect the rights-of-way,
municipal franchising, and vital business and
community services, which are of local concern.
(4) Finding Regarding Promotion of Wireless
Communication Services. The City finds that it is in
the best interests of its taxpayers and citizens to
promote the rapid and orderly development of wireless
communication services, on a nondiscriminatory
basis, responsive to community and public interests,
and to assure availability for municipal, educational,
and community purposes.
(5) Findings Regarding Franchise Standards.
The City finds that it is in the best interests of the
public to franchise and to establish standards for
franchising providers in a manner that:
(a) compensates the City fairly and
reasonably on a competitively neutral and
nondiscriminatory basis, as provided herein;
(b) encourages competition by establishing
terms and conditions under which providers may use
the rights-of-way to serve the public;
(c) protects fully the public interests and the
City from any harm that may flow from such
commercial use of rights-of-way;
(d) protects the police powers and right-ofway
management authority of the City, in a manner
consistent with federal and state law;
(e) otherwise protects the public interests in
the development and use of the City’s infrastructure;
(f) protects the public’s investment in
improvements in the rights-of-way; and,
(g) ensures that no barriers to entry by
wireless communication service providers are created
and that such franchising is accomplished in a manner
that does not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting
personal wireless services, within the meaning of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 (“Act”) (P.L. No.
96-104).
(6) Power to Manage Rights-of-Way. The City
adopts the wireless communication services ordinance
codified in this Chapter pursuant to its power to
manage the public rights-of-way, pursuant to common
law, the Utah Constitution and statutory authority, and
the City Charter, and to receive fair and reasonable
compensation for the use of rights-of-way by
providers as expressly set forth by Section 253 of the
Act.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-2. Scope of ordinance.
This Chapter shall provide the basic local
framework for providers of wireless communication
services and systems that require the use of the rightof-
way, including providers of both the system and
service, those providers of the system only, and those
providers who do not build the system but who only
provide services. This Chapter shall apply to all
future providers and to all providers in the City
existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this Chapter, whether operating with or
without a wireless franchise as set forth in Section 5-
27-76.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-3. Excluded activity.
(1) Cable TV. This Chapter shall not apply to
cable television operators otherwise regulated by
Chapter 5-18 (Utility License Tax), regarding cable
television services, or to open video system providers
otherwise regulated.
(2) Wireline Services. This Chapter shall not
apply to wireline service facilities.
(December 26, 2018)
(3) Provisions Applicable. All of the
requirements imposed by this Chapter through the
exercise of the City’s police power and not preempted
by other law shall be applicable.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
Article II. Defined Terms.
5-27-4. Definitions.
For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms,
phrases, words, and their derivatives shall have the
meanings set forth in this Section, unless the context
clearly indicates that another meaning is intended.
Words used in the present tense include the future
tense, words in the single number include the plural
number, and words in the plural number include the
singular. The words “shall” and “will” are
mandatory, and “may” is permissive. Words not
defined shall be given their common and ordinary
meaning.
“Antenna” is defined in Utah Code Ann. § 54-21-
101(1), as amended.
“Applicable codes” is defined in Utah Code Ann.
§ 54-21-101(2), as amended.
“Applicable standards” is defined in Utah Code
Ann. § 54-21-101(3), as amended.
“Applicant” is defined in Utah Code Ann. § 54-
21-101(4), as amended.
“Application” is defined in Utah Code Ann. § 54-
21-101(5), as amended.
“Backhaul network” means the lines that connect
a provider’s WCFs to one or more cellular telephone
switching offices or long distance providers, or the
public switched telephone network.
“City” means Tooele City Corporation and
Tooele City, Utah.
“Collocate” is defined in Utah Code Ann. § 54-
21-101(11), as amended. Except as otherwise
allowed by this Chapter, the cumulative impact of
colocation at a site is limited to no more than 6 cubic
feet in volume for antennas and antenna arrays, and no
more than 28 cubic feet in volume of associated
equipment, whether deployed on the ground or on the
structure itself.
“Construction costs” means all costs of
constructing a system, including make ready costs,
other than engineering fees, attorney’s or accountant’s
fees, or other consulting fees.
“Control” or “controlling interest” means actual
working control in whatever manner exercised,
including working control through ownership,
management, debt instruments, or negative control, as
the case may be, of the system or of a provider. A
rebuttable presumption of the existence of control or a
controlling interest shall arise from the beneficial
ownership, directly or indirectly, by any person, or
group of persons acting in concert, of more than 35%
of any provider (which person or group of persons is
hereinafter referred to as “controlling person”).
“Control” or “controlling interest” as used herein may
be held simultaneously by more than one person or
group of persons.
“Distributed antenna system” or “DAS” means a
network consisting of transceiver equipment at a
central hub site to support multiple antenna locations
throughout the desired coverage area.
“FAA” means the Federal Aviation
Administration, or any successor thereto.
“FCC” means the Federal Communications
Commission, or any successor thereto.
“Franchise” means the rights and obligations
extended by the City to a provider to own, lease,
construct, maintain, use, or operate a wireless
communication system in a right-of-way within the
boundaries of the City. Any such authorization, in
whatever form granted, shall not mean or include the
following: (1) any other permit or authorization
required for the privilege of transacting and carrying
on a business within the City required by the
ordinances and laws of the City; or, (2) any other
permit, agreement, or authorization required in
connection with operations on right-of-way or public
property, including permits and agreements for
placing devices on or in poles, conduits, or other
structures, whether owned by the City or a private
entity, or for excavating or performing other work in
or along the right-of-way.
“Franchise agreement” means a contract entered
into in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter
between the City and a provider that sets forth, subject
to this Chapter, the terms and conditions under which
a wireless franchise will be exercised.
“In-strand antenna” means an antenna that is
suspended by or along a wireline between utility poles
and is not physically supported by any attachments to
a base station, utility support structure, or tower. An
in-strand antenna may not exceed 3 cubic feet in
volume. For each in-strand antenna, its associated
equipment, whether deployed on the ground or on the
structure itself, may not be larger than 17 cubic feet in
volume. In calculating equipment volume, the
volume of power meters and vertical cable runs for the
connection of power and other services shall be
excluded. In-strand antennas in the rights-of-way are
exempt from the requirements of Chapter 7-27
(Personal Wireless Telecommunications Facilities),
but shall comply with the provisions of this Chapter.
“Infrastructure provider” means a person
providing to another, for the purpose of providing
personal wireless services to customers, all or part of
the necessary system which uses the right-of-way.
“Macrocell” means a wireless communication
facility that provides radio frequency coverage served
by a high power cell site (tower, antenna, or mast).
(December 26, 2018)
Generally, macro cell antennas are mounted on
ground-based towers, rooftops, and other existing
structures, at a height that provides a clear view over
the surrounding buildings and terrain. Macro cell
facilities are typically greater than 3 cubic feet per
antenna and typically cover large geographic areas
with relatively high capacity and are capable of
hosting multiple wireless service providers. For
purposes of this Chapter, a macrocell is anything other
than a small wireless facility or in-strand antenna. In
addition to the requirements of this Chapter, a
macrocell must comply with the applicable zoning and
land use requirements as Personal Wireless Services
Facilities under Chapter 7-27 (Personal Wireless
Telecommunications Facilities).
“Micro wireless facility” is defined in Utah Code
Ann. § 54-21-101(21), as amended.
“Ordinance” or “wireless ordinance” means the
ordinance concerning the granting of wireless
franchises in and by the City for the construction,
ownership, operation, use, or maintenance of a
wireless communication system.
“Person” includes any individual, corporation,
partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, or
any other legal entity, but not the City.
“Personal wireless services facilities” has the
same meaning as provided in Section 704 of the Act
(47 U.S.C. Section 332(c)(7)(c)), which includes what
is commonly known as cellular services.
“PSC” means the Public Service Commission, or
any successor thereto.
“Right-of-way” is defined in Utah Code Ann. §
54-21-101(24), as amended.
“Site” means the location in the right-of-way of a
wireless communication facility, a utility pole, or their
associated equipment.
“Small wireless facility” is defined in Utah Code
Ann. § 54-21-101(35), as amended. Small wireless
facilities in the rights-of-way are exempt from the
requirements of Chapter 7-27 (Personal Wireless
Telecommunication Facilities).
“Stealth design” means technology or installation
methods that minimize the visual impact of wireless
communication facilities by camouflaging, disguising,
screening, or blending into the surrounding
environment. Examples of stealth design include
facilities disguised as trees (e.g., monopines), utility
and light poles, and street furniture.
“Substantial modification” is defined in Utah
Code Ann. § 54-21-101(26), as amended.
“Telecommunications” means the transmission,
between or among points specified by the user, of
information of the user’s choosing (e.g., data, video,
voice), without change in the form or content of the
information sent and received.
“Telecommunications services” or “services”
means any telecommunications or communications
services provided by a provider within the City that the
provider is authorized to provide under federal, state,
and local law, and any equipment and/or facilities
required for and integrated with the services provided
within the City, except that these terms do not include
“cable service” as defined in the Cable
Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended by
the Cable Television Consumer Protection and
Competition Act of 1992 (47 U.S.C. Section 521, et
seq.), and the Telecommunications Act of 1996.
“Telecommunications system” or “system”
means all conduits, manholes, poles, antennas,
transceivers, amplifiers, and all other electronic
devices, equipment, wire, and appurtenances owned,
leased, or used by a provider, located in the right-ofway
and utilized in the provision of services, including
fully digital or analog, voice, data, and video imaging
and other enhanced telecommunications services.
“Utility pole” or “pole” is defined in Utah Code
Ann. § 54-21-101(28), as amended.
“Transmission equipment” means equipment that
facilitates transmission for any FCC-licensed or
authorized wireless communication service, including
radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic
cable, and regular and backup power supply. The
term includes equipment associated with wireless
communications services, including private,
broadcast, and public safety services, as well as
unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless
services, such as, microwave backhaul.
“Wire” means fiber optic telecommunications
cable, wire, coaxial cable, or other transmission
medium that may be used in lieu thereof for similar
purposes.
“Wireless facility,” “wireless communication
facility,” or “WCF” is defined in Utah Code Ann. §
54-21-101(29), as amended.
“Wireless provider” or “provider” is defined in
Utah Code Ann. § 54-21-101(31), as amended.
“Wireless service” is defined in Utah Code Ann.
§ 54-21-101(32), as amended.
“Wireless support structure” is defined in Utah
Code Ann. § 54-2-101(34), as amended.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
Article III. Wireless Franchise Required.
5-27-5. Nonexclusive wireless franchise.
The City is empowered and authorized to issue
nonexclusive wireless franchises governing the
installation, construction, operation, use, and
maintenance of wireless systems in the City’s rightsof-
way, in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter. The wireless franchise is granted through a
wireless franchise agreement entered into between the
City and provider.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
(December 26, 2018)
5-27-6. Every provider must obtain.
Except to the extent preempted by federal or state
law, every provider must obtain a wireless franchise
prior to constructing, operating, leasing, or subleasing
a wireless communication system or providing
wireless service using the rights-of-way. The fact
that particular telecommunications systems may be
used for multiple purposes does not obviate the need
to obtain a franchise for other purposes. By way of
illustration and not limitation, a cable operator of a
cable system must obtain a cable franchise, and,
should it intend to provide wireless services over the
same system, must also obtain a wireless franchise.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-7. Nature of grant.
A wireless franchise shall not convey title,
equitable or legal, in the rights-of-way. A wireless
franchise is only the right to occupy rights-of-way on
a nonexclusive basis for the limited purpose and for
the limited period stated in the wireless franchise; the
franchise right may not be subdivided, assigned, or
subleased. A wireless franchise does not excuse a
provider from obtaining appropriate access or pole
attachment agreements before collocating its system
on the property of others, including on the City’s
property. This Section shall not be construed to
prohibit a provider from leasing conduit to another
provider, so long as the lessee has obtained a franchise.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-8. Current providers.
Except to the extent exempted by federal or state
law, any provider acting without a wireless franchise
on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
Chapter shall request issuance of a wireless franchise
from the City within 90 days of the effective date of
the ordinance codified in this Chapter. If such request
is made, the provider may continue providing service
during the course of negotiations. If a timely request
is not made, or if negotiations cease and a wireless
franchise is not granted, the provider shall comply
with the provisions of Section 5-27-68 (Extended
operation and continuity of services).
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-9. Nature of wireless franchise.
The wireless franchise granted by the City under
the provisions of this Chapter shall be a nonexclusive
wireless franchise providing the right and consent to
install, repair, maintain, remove, and replace its
system on, over, and under the right-of-way in order to
provide services.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-10. Regulatory approval needed.
Before offering or providing any services
pursuant to the wireless franchise, a provider shall
obtain any and all regulatory approvals, permits,
authorizations, or licenses for the offering or provision
of such services from the appropriate federal, state,
and local authorities, if required, and shall submit to
the City, upon the written request of the City, evidence
of all such approvals, permits, authorizations, or
licenses.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-11. Term.
No wireless franchise issued pursuant to this
Chapter shall have a term of less than 5 years or greater
than 15 years. Each wireless franchise shall be
granted in a nondiscriminatory manner.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
Article IV. Compensation and Other Payments.
5-27-12. Compensation.
As fair and reasonable compensation for any
wireless franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter, a
provider shall have the following obligations:
(1) Application Fees. A provider shall pay the
following application fees for the respective
applications in accordance with Utah Code Ann. § 54-
21-503, as amended:
(a) $100 for each small wireless facility;
(b) $250 for each utility pole associated with
a small wireless facility; and,
(c) $1000 for each utility pole or WCF that
is not permitted under Utah Code Ann. § 54-21-204,
as amended.
(2) Right-of-Way Rate. A provider shall pay a
right-of-way rate of the greater of 3.5% of all gross
revenues related to the provider’s use of the City’s
right-of-way for small wireless facilities or $250
annually for each small wireless facility in accordance
with Utah Code Ann. § 54-21-502(2). A provider
does not have to the pay this rate if it is subject to the
municipal telecommunications license tax under Title
10, Part 4, Municipal Telecommunications License
Tax Act.
(3) Permit Fees. The provider shall also pay
fees required for any permit necessary to install and
maintain the proposed WCF or utility pole.
(4) Authority Pole Collocation Rate. The City
adopts the authority pole collocation rate as
established in Utah Code Ann. § 54-21-504, as
amended.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-13. Timing.
Unless otherwise agreed to in the wireless
franchise agreement, all right-of-way rates shall be
(December 26, 2018)
paid in accordance with Utah Code Ann. § 54-21-502,
as amended.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-14. Fee statement and certification.
Each rate payment shall be accompanied by a
statement showing the manner in which the fee was
calculated and shall be certified as to its accuracy.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-15. Future costs.
A provider shall pay to the City or to third parties,
at the direction of the City, an amount equal to the
reasonable costs and expenses the City incurs for the
services of third parties (including attorneys and other
consultants) in connection with any renewal or
provider-initiated renegotiation, transfer, amendment,
or a wireless franchise; provided, however, that the
parties shall agree upon a reasonable financial cap at
the outset of negotiations.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-16. Taxes and assessments.
To the extent taxes or other assessments are
imposed by taxing authorities, other than the City on
the use of the City property as a result of a provider’s
use or occupation of the right-of-way, the provider
shall be responsible for payment of its pro rata share
of such taxes, payable annually unless otherwise
required by the taxing authority. Such payments shall
be in addition to any other fees payable pursuant to this
Chapter to the extent permitted by law.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-17. Interest on late payments.
In the event that any payment is not actually
received by the City on or before the applicable date
fixed in the wireless franchise, interest thereon shall
accrue from such date until received at the rate charged
for delinquent state taxes.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-18. No accord and satisfaction.
Acceptance by the City of any rate or fee shall not
be construed as an accord that the amount paid is in
fact the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of
such fee payment be construed as a release of any
claim the City may have for additional sums payable.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-19. Not in lieu of other taxes or fees.
A rate or fee payment is not a payment in lieu of
any tax, fee, or other assessment except as specifically
provided in this Chapter, or as required by applicable
law. By way of example and not limitation,
excavation permit fees are not waived and remain
applicable.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-20. Continuing obligation and holdover.
In the event a provider continues to operate all or
any part of the system after the term of the wireless
franchise, such operator shall continue to comply with
all applicable provisions of this Chapter and the
wireless franchise, including, without limitation, all
compensation and other payment provisions
throughout the period of such continued operation;
provided, however, that any such continued operation
shall in no way be construed as a renewal or other
extension of the wireless franchise, nor as a limitation
on the remedies, if any, available to the City as a result
of such continued operation after the term, including
damages and restitution.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-21. Costs of publication.
A provider shall assume any publication costs
associated with its wireless franchise that may be
required by law.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
Article V. Wireless Franchise Applications.
5-27-22. Wireless franchise application.
To obtain a wireless franchise to construct, own,
maintain, or provide services through any wireless
system within the City’s rights-of-way, to obtain a
renewal of a wireless franchise granted pursuant to this
Chapter, or to obtain the City approval of a transfer of
a wireless franchise, as provided in Article IX
(Wireless Franchise and License Transferability),
granted pursuant to this Chapter, an application must
be filed with City.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-23. Application criteria.
In making a determination as to an application
filed pursuant to this Chapter, the City may request
information, including the following, from the
provider.
(1) A copy of the order from the PSC granting a
certificate of convenience and necessity, if any is
necessary for provider’s offering of wireless
communication services within the state of Utah.
(2) An annually renewed performance bond or
letter of credit from a Utah-licensed financial
institution in the amount of $25,000 to compensate the
City for any damage caused by the provider to the
City’s rights-of-way or property during the term of the
franchise agreement or the provider’s abandonment of
WCFs within a year after the expiration or termination
of the franchise agreement.
(3) A copy of the provider’s FCC license or
registration, if applicable.
(December 26, 2018)
(4) An insurance certificate for the provider that
lists the City as an additional insured and complies
with the requirements of the franchise agreement.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-24. Wireless franchise determination.
The City, in its discretion, shall determine the
award of any wireless franchise on the basis of the
considerations contained in this Chapter, and other
considerations relevant to the use of the rights-of-way,
without competitive bidding.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-25. Incomplete application.
The City may deny an applicant’s wireless
franchise application for incompleteness the following
occur.
(1) The application is incomplete.
(2) The City provided notice to the applicant that
the application was incomplete and provided, with
reasonable specificity, the information needed to
complete the application.
(3) The provider did not provide the requested
information within 30 days of the notice.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
Article VI. Site Applications.
5-27-26. Franchise necessary.
Prior to approving a site permit, the applicant
must have a valid franchise agreement granted by
applicable law.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-27. Site preference.
When small wireless facilities are to be
constructed in the rights-of-way, the City’s order of
preference for a provider is as follows.
(1) To install in-strand antennas.
(2) To collocate on existing poles.
(3) To collocate on replacement poles in the
same or nearly the same location and with such heights
as provided in this Chapter or in the franchise.
(4) Lastly, to collocate on new poles.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-28. Poles adjacent to residential properties.
In accordance with Utah Code Ann. § 54-21-
103(6), as amended, a provider may not install a new
utility pole in a right-of-way if the right-of-way is
adjacent to or part of a street or thoroughfare that is 60
feet wide or less, as depicted on the official plat
records or recorded deeds of dedication, and that is
adjacent to single-family residences, multifamily
residences, or undeveloped land that is designated for
residential use by land use plan, zoning ordinance,
zoning map, or deed restriction.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-29. Height and size restrictions.
(1) The height of a new or modified utility pole,
including a collocated WCF, may not exceed 50 feet
above the ground level.
(2) For a utility pole existing on or before
September 1, 2018, an antenna of a WCF may not
extend more than 10 feet above the top of the utility
pole.
(3) A small wireless facility and its associated
equipment may not exceed the dimensions set forth in
Utah Code Ann. § 54-21-101(25), as amended.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-30. Safety.
A WCF, pole, cabinet, or other equipment shall
not violate the requirements in Utah Code Ann. § 54-
21-302, as amended. A small wireless facility, pole,
cabinet, and other equipment may not do any of the
following.
(1) Interfere materially with the safe operation of
traffic control equipment.
(2) Interfere materially with a sight line or clear
zone for vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(3) Interfere materially with compliance with the
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, 42 U.S.C.
Sec. 12101 et seq., or a similar federal or state standard
regarding pedestrian access or movement.
(4) Create a public health or safety hazard.
(5) Obstruct or hinder the usual travel or public
safety of the right-of-way.
(6) Violate any applicable law or legal
obligation.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-31. Equipment.
(1) Due to the limited size and capacity of the
City’s rights-of-way, applicants shall be required to
install any equipment associated with a small wireless
facility according the following requirements, to the
extent operationally and technically feasible and to the
extent permitted by law.
(a) Existing utility poles. If a WCF is
collocated on an existing utility pole, the WCF’s
associated equipment may be installed in one of the
following methods.
(i) Within a pole. Any equipment
installed within a pole may not protrude from the pole
except to the extent reasonably necessary to connect to
power or to a wireline.
(ii) On a pole. Any equipment
enclosure installed on a pole must:
(A) be flush with the pole;
(B) be painted to reasonably match
the color of the pole;
(December 26, 2018)
(C) not exceed in width the
diameter of the pole by more than 3 inches on either
side;
(D) not allow the furthest point of
the enclosure to extend more than 18 inches from the
pole; and,
(E) be installed flush with the grade
or, alternatively, the lowest point may not be lower
than 8 feet from the grade directly below the
equipment enclosure.
(iii) Underground. Any equipment
installed underground shall be located in a park strip
within the City’s rights-of-way and shall be installed
and maintained level with the surrounding grade.
(iv) Private property. For any
equipment installed on private property, the applicant
must provide written permission from the property
owner allowing the applicant to locate facilities on the
property. If equipment is placed in an enclosure, the
enclosure shall be designed to blend in with existing
surroundings, using architecturally compatible
construction, colors, and landscaping, and shall be
located as unobtrusively as possible consistent with
the proper functioning of the WCF. Equipment
placed on private property may be subject to zoning
and land use provisions of Title 7 (Uniform Zoning
Title of Tooele City).
(b) Replacement utility poles. If a WCF is
collocated on a replacement utility pole, the WCF’s
associated equipment may be installed in the following
manner.
(i) To the extent technologically and
economically feasible, a provider must install the
WCF’s associated equipment within the replacement
utility pole in accordance with Subsection (1)(a)(i).
(ii) If the installation of the WCF’s
equipment within the replacement utility pole is not
technologically or economically feasible, a provider
may install the WCF’s associated equipment in
accordance with any of the methods established in
Subsection (1)(a)(ii)-(iv).
(c) New utility poles. If a WCF is
collocated on a new utility pole, a provider must install
the WCF’s associated equipment within the pole in
accordance with Subsection (1)(a)(i) or (iv).
(2) As required for the operation of a WCF or its
equipment, an electric meter may be installed in
accordance with requirements from the electric
provider; provided, however, that the electric meter
must be installed in the location that (1) minimizes its
interference with other users of the City’s rights-ofway,
including pedestrians, motorists, and other
entities with equipment in the right-of-way, and (2)
minimizes any negative aesthetic impact.
(3) The City shall not provide an exemption to
these requirements when there is insufficient room in
the right-of-way to place facilities at ground-level and
comply with ADA requirements, public safety
concerns for pedestrians, cyclists, and motorists, or
other articulable public safety concerns.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-32. Undergrounding.
A provider must underground its equipment in
accordance with Section 7-19-24 (Public utilities), as
amended, and Utah Code Ann. §54-21-207, as
amended.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-33. Visual impact.
(1) Minimization. All WCFs shall be sited and
designed to minimize adverse visual impacts on
surrounding properties and the traveling public to the
greatest extent reasonably possible within 100 feet of
a site, and consistent with the proper functioning of the
WCF.
(2) Integration. WCFs and equipment shall be
integrated through location and design to blend in with
the existing characteristics of the site. Such WCFs
shall be designed to be compatible with the built
environment through matching and complimentary
existing structures and specific design considerations,
such as, architectural designs, height, scale, color, and
texture, or be consistent with other uses and
improvements permitted in the relevant vicinity, e.g.,
city block.
(3) Decorative poles. If a provider must
displace a decorative pole to collocate a small wireless
facility, the replacement pole must reasonably
conform to the design aesthetic of the displaced
decorative pole.
(4) Downtown Overlay. Subject to Utah Code
Ann. § 54-21208, as amended, a provider’s design and
location must be approved prior to collocating a new
small wireless facility or installing a new utility pole
in the Downtown Overlay zoning district (DO) and
any neighboring area within a ¼ mile.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-34. Stealth design/technology.
(1) Stealth design is required, and concealment
techniques must be utilized, consistent with the
proposed location, design, visual environment, and
nearby uses, structures, and natural features. Stealth
design features shall be designed and constructed to
substantially conform to surrounding utility poles,
light poles, or other similar support structures in the
rights-of-way so the WCF is visually unobtrusive.
(2) Stealth design requires screening WCFs in
order to reduce visual impact. The provider must
screen all substantial portions of the facility from
view. Such screening should match the color and
finish of the attached support structure.
(December 26, 2018)
(3) All WCFs shall be fully encased and enclosed
with no exposed wiring.
(4) WCFs and their associated equipment must
be installed flush with any pole or support structure
(including antennas mounted directly above the top of
an existing pole or support structure), and the furthest
point of an antenna or equipment may not extend
beyond 18 inches from the pole or support structure
except if the pole owner requires use of a standoff to
comply with federal, state, or local rules, regulations,
or laws. Any required standoff may not defeat stealth
design and concealment requirements.
(5) Stealth and concealment techniques do not
include incorporating faux-tree designs of a kind that
are not native to the state.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-35. Lighting.
Only such lighting as is necessary to satisfy FAA
requirements is permitted. White strobe lighting will
not be allowed, unless specifically required by the
FAA. Security lighting for the equipment shelters or
cabinets and other on-the-ground ancillary equipment
is permitted, as long as it is down-shielded to keep
light within the boundaries of the site.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-36. Signage.
No facilities may bear any signage or
advertisement except as allowed in Chapter 7-25.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-37. Site design flexibility.
Individual WCF sites vary in the location of
adjacent buildings, existing trees, topography, and
other local variables. By mandating certain design
standards, there may result a project that could have
been less intrusive if the location of the various
elements of the project could have been placed in more
appropriate locations within the right-of-way.
Therefore, the WCF and supporting equipment shall
be installed so as to best camouflage, disguise, or
conceal them, to make the WCF more closely
compatible with and blend into the setting or host
structure, to minimize the visual impact of the WCF,
supporting equipment, and equipment enclosures on
neighboring properties, and to interfere less with
pedestrians, cyclists, motorists, and other users of the
rights-of-way upon approval by the City.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-38. General requirements.
All wireless communication facilities and utility
poles shall be required to obtain a site permit and shall
be subject to the site development standards prescribed
herein. Every site permit application, regardless of
type, shall contain the information required for an
application under this Chapter and the applicable
building codes and shall provide an industry standard
pole load analysis.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-39. Application review process.
(1) Review for completeness. Upon receiving
an application for the collocation of a small wireless
facility or a new, modified, or replacement utility pole,
the City will determine within 30 days if the
application is complete. The City will notify the
applicant whether the application is complete.
(2) Incomplete application. If the City
determines the application is incomplete:
(a) the City will specifically identify the
missing information in the written notification to the
applicant; and,
(b) the review deadline in Subsection (1) is
tolled from the day that the City sends the applicant
written notice of the missing information or as the
applicant and the City agree in writing.
(3) Shot clocks. The City must approve or deny
a complete application within:
(a) 30 days, for the installation of an instrand
antenna;
(b) 60 days, for the collocation of a small
wireless facility; or,
(c) 105 days, for a new, modified, or
replacement utility pole.
(4) Extension. The City may extend the shot
clock deadlines in this Section for an additional 10
business days if the City notifies the applicant before
the day in which the deadline expires.
(5) Deemed approved. If the City fails to
approve or deny an application before its deadline or
extended deadline, the application is deemed
approved.
(6) Denial. The City may deny an application
that fails to meet the requirements of this Chapter. If
the City denies an application, the City will notify the
applicant of the denial and document the basis for the
denial, including any specific laws on which the denial
is based.
(7) Cure. Within 30 days of the City’s denial,
the applicant may cure any deficiency identified in the
City’s denial and resubmit its application without
paying an additional application fee. The resubmitted
application shall highlight the additional and revised
information and materials. The City must approve or
deny the resubmitted application within 30 days of its
receipt. The City may only review the portions of the
application that were missing, deficient, or revised.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
(December 26, 2018)
5-27-40. Application consolidation and submission
limit.
(1) Consolidated application. An applicant may
file a consolidated application for either:
(a) the collocation of up to 25 small wireless
facilities, if all the small wireless facilities in the
application are substantially the same type and are
proposed for collocation on substantially the same
types of structures; or,
(b) the installation, modification, or
replacement of up to 25 utility poles.
(2) A consolidated application may not combine
the collocation of small wireless facilities and the
installation, modification, or replacement of utility
poles.
(3) Submission limit. Within a 30-day period,
an applicant may not file more than one consolidated
application or multiple applications that collectively
seek for a combined total of more than 25 small
wireless facilities and utility poles.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-41. Expired application.
An application expires if the City has notified the
applicant that the application is incomplete and the
applicant fails to respond within 90 days of the City’s
notification.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-42. Site permit approval.
Upon approval of a site permit, a provider:
(1) must complete the work approved within the
scope of the permit and must make the small wireless
facility operational within 270 days after the day on
which the City issues the permit, unless the lack of
commercial power or communications facilities at the
site delays completion, in which case the 270 days
begins to run on the date commercial power or
communications facilities are accessible at the site;
(2) is authorized to operate and maintain any
small wireless facility or utility pole covered by the
permit for a period of 10 years from the date of
approval; and,
(3) is not authorized to provide communications
service within the rights-of-way or to install, place, or
operate any other facility or structure in the rights-ofway.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-43. Site permit renewal.
(1) A provider with a current franchise
agreement may renew an expiring site permit by
submitting an application no sooner than 90 days prior
the expiration of the site permit with the following
information:
(a) the location of the permitted site;
(b) the type of site permit; and,
(c) sufficient evidence that the WCF or
utility pole meets or exceeds the requirements of this
Chapter at the time of renewal.
(2) A site permit renewal may not be approved
unless the covered WCF or utility pole is in
compliance with this Chapter at the time the site
permit renewal application is submitted.
(3) A site permit renewal application will have
the same application fee and review process as a
collocation application.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-44. Exemptions.
(1) In accordance with Utah Code Ann. § 54-21-
303, as amended, a provider is not required to submit
an application, obtain a permit, or pay a rate for:
(a) routine maintenance;
(b) the replacement of a small wireless
facility with a small wireless facility that is:
(i) substantially similar; or,
(ii) smaller in size; or;
(c) the installation, placement, maintenance,
operation, or replacement of a micro wireless facility
that is strung on a cable between existing utility poles
in compliance with the National Electrical Safety
Code.
(2) A provider must obtain a street excavation
permit as required under Chapter 4-9 for any activities
that require excavation or closing of sidewalks or
vehicular lanes in a right-of-way.
(3) A provider must provide the City with 14
days prior written notice, with sufficient supporting
documentation, of any of the activities described in
this Section. For example, the notice of the
replacement of a small wireless facility that is
substantially similar to an existing small wireless
facility must include documentation that demonstrates
that the replacement small wireless facility meets the
requirements of being substantially similar.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-45. Exceptions to standards.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter,
no WCF shall be used or developed contrary to any
applicable development standards unless an exception
has been granted pursuant to this Section. The
provisions of this Section apply exclusively to WCFs
and are in lieu of the generally applicable variance and
design departure provisions in this Code; provided,
however, that this Section does not provide an
exception from this Chapter’s visual impact and
stealth design standards and requirements.
(2) A WCF’s exception is subject to approval by
the City.
(3) An application for a WCF exception shall
include the following.
(December 26, 2018)
(a) A written statement demonstrating how
the exception would meet the standards established in
this Chapter.
(b) A site plan that includes the following:
(i) a description of the proposed
facility’s design and dimensions, as it would appear
with and without the exception;
(ii) elevations showing all components
of the WCF, as it would appear with and without the
exception;
(iii) color simulations of the WCF after
construction demonstrating compatibility with the
vicinity, as it would appear with and without the
exception; and,
(iv) an explanation that demonstrates the
following:
(A) for macrocells, a significant
gap in the coverage, capacity, or technologies of the
service network exists such that users are frequently
unable to connect to the service network, are regularly
unable to maintain a connection, or are unable to
achieve reliable wireless coverage within a building;
(B) the gap can only be filled
through an exception to one or more of the standards
herein;
(C) the exception is narrowly
tailored to fill the service gap such that the WCF
conforms to the standards established in this Chapter
to the greatest extent possible; and,
(D) the manner in which the
applicant proposes to fill the significant gap in
coverage, capacity, or technologies of the service
network is the least intrusive means on the values that
these regulations seek to protect; and,
(v) any other information requested by
the City in order to review the exception.
(4) An application for a WCF exception shall be
granted if the exception is consistent with the purpose
of the standard for which the exception is sought.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-46. Application to install a macrocell or
nonpermitted utility pole.
(1) The City generally does not permit
macrocells and utility poles that are not permitted
under Utah Code Ann. § 54-21-204 within a right-ofway.
The City will only permit a nonpermitted
macrocell or utility pole if required by federal law.
(2) Macrocells and utility poles that are not
permitted under Utah Code Ann. § 54-21-204, as
amended, are not subject to the application approval
process established in Section 5-27-39 (Application
review process). As such, this Section implements, in
part, 47 U.S.C. Section 332(c)(7) of the Federal
Communications Act of 1934, as amended, as
interpreted by the FCC in its Report and Order No. 14-
153.
(3) Application review for nonpermitted
macrocells and utility poles.
(a) The City shall prepare and make publicly
available an application form, the requirements of
which shall be limited to the information necessary for
the City to consider whether an application is a request
to install a nonpermitted macrocell or utility pole.
(b) Upon receipt of an application for a
nonpermitted macrocell or utility pole pursuant to this
Section, the City shall review the application, make a
final decision to approve or disapprove the
application, and advise the applicant in writing of the
City’s final decision.
(c) Within 150 days of the date on which an
applicant submits an application seeking approval of a
nonpermitted macrocell or utility pole under this
Section, the City shall review and act upon the
application, subject to the tolling provisions below.
(d) The 150-day review period begins to run
when the application is filed and may be tolled only by
mutual written agreement between the City and the
applicant, or in cases where the City determines that
the application is incomplete.
(i) To toll the time frame for reason of
incompleteness, the City must provide written notice
to the applicant within 30 days of receipt of the
application, specifically delineating all missing
documents or information required in the application.
(ii) The time frame for review begins
running again when the applicant makes a
supplemental submission in response to the City’s
notice of incompleteness.
(iii) Following a supplemental
submission, the City will notify the applicant within
10 days that the supplemental submission did not
provide the information identified in the original
notice delineating missing information. The time
frame is tolled in the case of second or subsequent
notices pursuant to the procedures identified in this
Section. Second or subsequent notices of
incompleteness need not specify missing documents
or information that were delineated in the original
notice of incompleteness.
(e) Failure to Act. In the event the City
fails to approve or deny a complete application under
this Section within the time frame for review
(accounting for any tolling), the applicant shall be
entitled to pursue all remedies under applicable law.
(4) In addition to the information required in
Section 5-27-38 (General requirements), a
nonpermitted macrocell or utility pole application
must also include the following information.
(a) The manufacturer’s recommended
installation, if any.
(b) A written affirmation for the applicant
that the macrocell or utility pole meets or exceeds all
applicable codes, applicable standards, and federal,
(December 26, 2018)
state, and local requirements, laws, regulations, and
polices.
(c) A map that indicates the type and
separation distance of other WCFs owned or operated
by the same wireless provider from the proposed
WCF.
(d) A visual analysis including to-scale
photo and visual simulations that show unobstructed
before-and-after construction daytime and clearweather
views from at least two angles, together with
a map that shows the location of each view including
all equipment and ground wires. Such visual analysis
must include a description, drawing, and elevations
with the finished color, method of camouflage, and
any illumination.
(e) A detailed explanation justifying why
the WCF is required in the right-of-way. The
applicant must demonstrate in a clear and complete
written alternative sites analysis that multiple
alternatives in the geographic range of the service
coverage objectives of the applicant were considered.
This includes, but is not limited to, explaining why the
installation of permitted small wireless facilities and
the installation of a macrocell on non-right-of-way
property, the latter pursuant to Chapter 7-27 (Personal
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities), are
insufficient. This analysis must include a factually
detailed and meaningful comparative analysis between
each alternative candidate and the proposed site that
explains the substantive reasons why the applicant
rejected the alternative candidate.
(i) A complete alternative sites analysis
provided under this subsection may not include less
than 5 alternative sites unless the applicant provides a
factually detailed rationale for why it could not
identify at least 5 potentially available sites.
(ii) For purposes of disqualifying
potential alternative sites for the failure to meet the
applicant’s service coverage objectives the applicant
must provide the following:
(A) a description of its objective,
whether it be to close a gap or address a deficiency in
coverage, capacity, frequency, or technology;
(B) detailed technical maps or other
exhibits with clear and concise RF data to illustrate
that the objective is not met using the alternative; and,
(C) a description of why the
alternative does not meet the objective.
(f) An explanation that demonstrates the
following.
(i) A significant gap in the coverage,
capacity, or technologies of the service network exists
such that users are frequently unable to connect to the
service network, are regularly unable to maintain a
connection, or are unable to achieve reliable wireless
coverage within a building.
(ii) The gap can only be filled through
an exception to one or more of the standards contained
in this Chapter.
(iii) The exception is narrowly tailored
to fill the service gap such that WCF conforms to the
standards contained in this Chapter to the greatest
extent possible.
(iv) The manner in which the applicant
proposes to fill the significant gap in coverage,
capacity, or technologies of the service network is the
least intrusive means on the values that these
regulations seek to protect.
(g) A noise study for the proposed WCF and
all associated equipment. The application shall
provide manufacturer’s specifications for all noisegenerating
equipment, such as air conditioning units
and back-up generators, and a depiction of the
equipment location in relation to adjoining properties.
The applicant shall provide a noise study prepared and
sealed by a qualified Utah-license Professional
Engineer that demonstrates that the WCF will comply
with the intent and goals of this Chapter.
(h) The proposed WCF may not be closer
than the average distance between existing poles that
are within 1 mile of the proposed site. If no poles
exist within 1 mile of proposed pole site, then all
subsequently placed poles must be at least 250 feet
from each other.
(i) The design of a new pole must comply
with the requirements of this Chapter and be approved
by the City.
(j) An affidavit certifying that the applicant
has posted or mailed notices to property owners within
300 feet of the proposed WCF site.
(i) This requirement is not necessary to
have been completed at the time the application is
submitted, but is required to be completed prior to
approval of a permit.
(ii) The notice shall provide the
following information:
(A) the applicant’s name and
contact information;
(B) a phone number for the
provider by which an individual could request
additional information;
(C) a scaled site plan clearly
indicating the location, type, height, and width of the
proposed tower, separation distances, adjacent
roadways, photo simulations, a depiction of all
proposed transmission equipment, setbacks from
property lines and the nearest buildings, and elevation
drawings or renderings of the proposed tower and any
other structures; and,
(D) language that states “If you
have any public safety concerns or comments
regarding the aesthetics or placement of this wireless
(December 26, 2018)
communication facility, please submit your written
comments within 14 days to:
Tooele City Corporation
ATTN: Community Development Director
90 North Main Street
Tooele, Utah 84074
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
Article VII. Construction and Technical
Requirements.
5-27-47 General requirement.
(1) No provider shall receive a wireless franchise
unless it agrees to comply with each of the terms set
forth in this Chapter governing construction and
technical requirements for its system, in addition to
any other reasonable requirements or procedures
specified by the City or the wireless franchise,
including requirements regarding colocation and cost
sharing.
(2) No antenna, small wireless facility, or other
equipment may be added to City poles without a pole
attachment agreement with the City or where the City
poles are not able to structurally accommodate the
antenna, small wireless facility, or other equipment.
(3) WCFs that lawfully existed prior to the
adoption of this Chapter shall be allowed to continue
their use as they presently exist. This Chapter does
not make lawful any WCF that is not fully approved
on the date the ordinance codified in this Chapter is
adopted, and those pending WCFs will be required to
meet the requirements of this Chapter.
(4) The applicant must comply with all federal
(such as the Americans with Disabilities Act), state,
and local laws and requirements. This includes, but
is not limited to, participating in Blue Stakes of Utah
as required by Utah Code 54-8a-2 through 54-8a-13,
as amended.
(5) In the installation of any WCF within the
rights-of-way, care must be taken to install in such a
way that does not damage, interfere with, or disturb
any other utility or entity that may already be located
in the right-of-way or vicinity. Any damage done to
another utility’s or entity’s property must be
immediately reported to both the City and the owner
of the damaged property, and must be promptly
repaired by the provider, with the provider being
responsible for all costs of repair, including any extra
charges that may be assessed for emergency repairs.
Failure to notify the City and the owner of the
damaged property shall constitute cause for revocation
of the franchise agreement. When approving the
location for a WCF, the location of utilities’ or other
entities’ property, or the need for the location of other
utilities, within the rights-of-way must be considered
before approval to locate the WCF will be given in
order to ensure those other services to the public are
not disrupted.
(6) All WCFs and utility poles must meet or
exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA,
the FCC, and any other agency of the state or federal
government with the authority to regulate WCFs and
utility poles including RF emissions. If such
standards and regulations are changed, and if WCF
equipment is added either through colocation or
replacement, then the owners of the WCFs and utility
poles governed by this Chapter shall bring such WCFs
and utility poles into compliance with such revised
standards and regulations within 6 months of the
effective date of such standards and regulations, unless
a different compliance schedule is mandated by the
controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring
WCFs and utility poles into compliance with such
revised standards and regulations shall constitute
grounds for the removal of the WCF or utility pole at
the owner’s expense.
(7) A WCF or utility pole must comply with all
applicable codes and standards.
(8) All structures shall be constructed and
installed to manufacturer’s specifications, and
constructed to withstand a minimum 100-mile per
hour (mph) wind, or the minimum wind speed as
required by the City’s currently adopted uniform
building code.
(9) The following maintenance requirements
apply to WCFs, as applicable.
(a) All landscaping shall be maintained at all
times and shall be promptly replaced if not successful.
(b) All WCF sites shall be kept clean, neat,
and free of litter and refuse.
(c) A WCF shall be kept clean, painted, and
in good condition at all times. Rusting, dirty, or
peeling facilities are prohibited.
(d) All equipment cabinets shall display a
legible operator’s contact number for reporting
maintenance problems.
(e) The applicant shall provide a description
of anticipated maintenance needs, including frequency
of service, personnel needs, equipment needs, and
potential safety impacts of such maintenance.
(10) Inspections.
(a) The City or its agents shall have
authority to enter onto the right-of-way upon which a
WCF is located to inspect the facility for the purpose
of determining whether it complies with the applicable
codes and applicable standards.
(b) The City reserves the right to conduct
such inspections at any time. In the event such
inspection results in a determination that a violation of
applicable standards set forth by the City has occurred,
the City will notify the provider of the violation.
(December 26, 2018)
(c) Upon receipt of a notice of violation, the
provider will have 30 days from the date of violation
to correct the violation. If the provider fails to correct
the violation within the 30-day period, the City may
remove the violating WCF or utility pole at the
provider’s sole expense.
(d) The City may recover all of its costs
incurred in processing and removing the violation.
(e) Appeals. The provider may appeal a
notice of violation by following the appeals process
found in Chapter 1-28.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-48. Quality.
All work involved in the construction,
maintenance, repair, upgrade, and removal of the
system shall be performed in a safe, thorough, and
reliable manner using materials of good and durable
quality. If, at any time, it is determined by the FCC
or any other agency granted authority by federal law
or the FCC to make such determination, that any part
of the system, including any means used to distribute
signals over or within the system, is harmful to the
public health, safety, or welfare, or quality of service
or reliability, then a provider shall, at its own cost and
expense, promptly correct all such conditions.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-49. Licenses and permits.
A provider shall have the sole responsibility for
diligently obtaining, at its own cost and expense, all
permits, licenses, or other forms of approval or
authorization necessary to construct, maintain,
upgrade, or repair the wireless communication system,
including any necessary approvals from persons,
entities, the City, and other government entities (such
as neighboring cities or the Utah Department of
Transportation) to use private property, easements,
poles, conduits, and right-of-way. A provider shall
obtain any required permit, license, approval, or
authorization, including excavation permits, pole
attachment agreements, etc., prior to the
commencement of the activity for which the permit,
license, approval, or authorization is required.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-50. Relocation of the system.
(1) Generally. The City may require a provider
to relocate or adjust a small wireless facility or utility
pole in a right-of-way in a timely manner and without
cost to the City.
(2) Emergency. The City may, at any time, in
case of fire, disaster, or other emergency, as
determined by the City in its reasonable discretion, cut
or move any parts of the wireless communication
system and appurtenances located on, over, or under
the right-of-way of the City, in which event the City
shall not be liable therefor to a provider. The City
shall notify a provider in writing prior to, if
practicable, but in any event as soon as possible and in
no case later than the next business day following any
action taken under this Section. Notice shall be given
as provided in Section 5-27-74 (Notices).
(3) Temporarily Move System for Third Party.
A provider shall, upon prior reasonable written notice
by the City or by any person holding a permit to move
any structure, and within the time that is reasonable
under the circumstances, temporarily move any part of
its wireless communication system to allow the
moving of the structure. A provider may impose a
reasonable charge on any person other than the City
for any such movement of its systems.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-51. Protect structures.
(1) In connection with the construction,
maintenance, repair, upgrade, or removal of the
wireless communication system, a provider shall, at its
own cost and expense, protect any and all existing
structures.
(2) A provider shall obtain the prior written
consent of the City to alter any water main, power
facility, sewerage or drainage system, or any other
municipal structure or facility located on, over, or
under the right-of-way of the City required because of
the presence of the system. Such consent may be
given at the sole discretion of the City. Any such
alteration shall be made by the City or its designee on
a reimbursable basis.
(3) A provider agrees that it shall be liable for the
costs incurred by the City to replace or repair and
restore to its prior condition in a manner as may be
reasonably specified by the City any municipal
structure or any other right-of-way of the City
involved in the construction, maintenance, repair,
upgrade, or removal of the system that may become
disturbed or damaged as a result of any work thereon
by or on behalf of a provider pursuant to the wireless
franchise.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-52. No obstruction.
In connection with the construction, maintenance,
upgrade, repair, or removal of the system, a provider
shall not unreasonably obstruct the right-of-way of
fixed guide way systems, railways, passenger travel,
or other traffic to, from, or within the City without the
prior consent of the appropriate authorities.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-53. Safety precautions.
A provider shall, at its own cost and expense,
undertake all necessary and appropriate efforts to
prevent accidents at its work sites, including the
(December 26, 2018)
placing and maintenance of proper guards, fences,
barricades, security personnel, suitable and sufficient
lighting, and other requirements prescribed by OSHA
and Utah OSHA. A provider shall comply with all
applicable federal, state, and local requirements
including the National Electric Safety Code, as
amended or superseded.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-54. Damage and Repair.
(1) If a provider’s activity causes damage to a
right-of-way, the provider must repair the right-of-way
to substantially the same condition as before the
damage.
(2) If the provider fails to make a repair required
by the City within a reasonable time after written
notice, the City may make the required repair and
charge the provider the reasonable, documented,
actual cost for the repair.
(3) If the provider’s damage causes an urgent
safety hazard, the City may immediately make the
necessary repair and charge the provider the
reasonable, documented, actual cost for the repair.
(4) The provider shall pay to the City the entire
amount of the repair within 30 days of receiving of the
City’s invoice.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
Article VIII. Provider Responsibilities.
5-27-55. System maintenance.
A provider shall do the following.
(1) Install and maintain all parts of its wireless
communication system in a non-dangerous condition
throughout the entire period of its wireless franchise.
(2) Install and maintain its system in accordance
with standard prudent engineering practices and
comply with all applicable codes and standards.
(3) At all reasonable times, permit examination
by any duly authorized representative of the City of
the system and its effect on the right-of-way.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-56. Trimming of trees.
A provider shall have the authority to prune and
trim trees, in accordance with all applicable utility
restrictions, ordinances, and easement restrictions,
upon and hanging over the rights-of-way so as to
prevent the branches of such trees from coming in
contact with its WCFs. A provider must provide the
City with written notice at least 14 days before
performing any pruning or trimming of trees. All
pruning and trimming performed shall comply with
the City Code, the American National Standard for
Tree Care Operation (ANSI A300), and Best
Management Practices: Utility Pruning of Trees, and
be conducted under the direction of an arborist
certified with the International Society of
Arboriculture.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-57. Inventory of existing sites.
A provider shall provide every July 1st to the City
an inventory of its existing WCFs, and sites approved
for WCFs, that are either within the jurisdiction of the
City or within one mile of the border thereof, including
specific information about the location, height, and
design of each WCF and utility pole. The City may
share such information with other applicants applying
for permits under this Chapter or other organizations
seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of
the City; provided, however, that the City is not, by
sharing such information, in any way representing or
warranting that such sites are available or suitable.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
Article IX. Wireless Franchise and License
Transferability.
5-27-58. Notification of sale.
(1) PSC Approval. When a provider or wireless
communication system is the subject of a sale,
transfer, lease, assignment, sublease, or disposal of, in
whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale
or by ordinary sale, consolidation, or otherwise, such
that it or its successor entity is obligated to inform or
seek the approval of the PSC, the provider or its
successor entity shall promptly notify the City of the
nature of the transaction and, if applicable, request a
transfer of the wireless franchise to the successor
entity. A request for transfer shall include a
certification that the successor entity unequivocally
agrees to all the terms of the original provider’s
wireless franchise agreement.
(2) Transfer of Wireless Franchise. Upon
receipt of a request to transfer a wireless franchise, the
City designee shall, if it approves such transfer, send
notice affirming the transfer of the wireless franchise
to the successor entity. If the City has good cause to
believe that the successor entity may not comply with
this Chapter or the wireless franchise agreement, it
may require an application for the transfer. The
application shall comply with Article V of this
Chapter.
(3) If PSC Approval Is No Longer Required. If
the PSC no longer exists, or if its regulations or state
law no longer require approval of transactions
described in this Section, and the City has good cause
to believe that the successor entity may not comply
with this Chapter or the wireless franchise agreement,
it may require an application to transfer. The
application shall comply with Article V of this
Chapter.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
(December 26, 2018)
5-27-59. Events of sale.
The following events shall be deemed to be a sale,
assignment, or other transfer of the wireless franchise
requiring City approval.
(1) The sale, assignment, or other transfer of all
or a majority of a provider’s assets to another person.
(2) The sale, assignment, or other transfer of
capital stock or partnership, membership, or other
equity interests in a provider by one or more of its
existing shareholders, partners, members, or other
equity owners so as to create a new controlling interest
in a provider.
(3) The issuance of additional capital stock or
partnership, membership, or other equity interest by a
provider so as to create a new controlling interest in
such a provider.
(4) The entry by a provider into an agreement
with respect to the management or operation of such
provider or its system.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
Article X. Oversight and Regulation.
5-27-60. Insurance, indemnity, and security.
(1) A provider will deposit with the City an
irrevocable, unconditional letter of credit or surety
bond as required by the terms of the wireless franchise
and shall obtain and provide proof of the insurance
coverage required by the wireless franchise. A
provider shall also indemnify the City as set forth in
the wireless franchise.
(2) Each permit issued for a WCF or utility pole
located within the right-of-way or on City property
shall be deemed to have as a condition of the permit a
requirement that the applicant defend, indemnify, and
hold harmless the City and its officials, officers,
agents, employees, volunteers, and contractors from
any and all liability, damages, or charges (including
attorneys’ fees and expenses) arising out of claims,
suits, demands, or causes of action as a result of the
permit process, a granted permit, construction,
erection, location, performance, operation,
maintenance, repair, installation, replacement,
removal, or restoration of the WCF or utility pole.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-61. Oversight.
The City shall have the right to oversee, regulate,
and inspect periodically the construction,
maintenance, and upgrade of the wireless
communication system, and any part thereof, in
accordance with the provisions of the wireless
franchise and applicable law. A provider shall
establish and maintain managerial and operational
records, standards, procedures, and controls to enable
a provider to prove, in reasonable detail, to the
satisfaction of the City at all times throughout the term,
that a provider is in compliance with the wireless
franchise. A provider shall retain such records for not
less than the applicable statute of limitations.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-62. Maintain records.
A provider shall at all times maintain the
following.
(1) On file with the City, a full and complete set
of plans, records, and “as-built” hard copy maps and,
to the extent the maps are placed in an electronic
format, they shall be made in electronic format
compatible with the City’s existing GIS system, of all
existing and proposed installations and the types of
equipment and systems installed or constructed in the
rights-of-way, properly identified and described as to
the types of equipment and facility by appropriate
symbols and marks which shall include annotations of
all rights-of-way where work will be undertaken. As
used herein, “as-built” maps includes “file
construction prints.” Maps shall be drawn to scale.
“As-built” maps, including the compatible electronic
format, shall be submitted within 30 days of
completion of work or within 30 days after completion
of modification and repairs. “As-built” maps are not
required of a provider who is an incumbent local
exchange carrier for the existing system to the extent
they do not exist.
(2) Throughout the term of the wireless
franchise, a provider shall maintain complete and
accurate books of account and records of the business,
ownership, and operations of a provider with respect
to the system in a manner that allows the City at all
times to determine whether a provider is in compliance
with the wireless franchise. Should the City
reasonably determine that the records are not being
maintained in such a manner, a provider shall alter the
manner in which the books and/or records are
maintained so that a provider comes into compliance
with this Section. All financial books and records
which are maintained in accordance with the
regulations of the FCC and any governmental entity
that regulates utilities in the state of Utah, and
generally accepted accounting principles, shall be
deemed to be acceptable under this Section.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-63. Confidentiality.
If the information required to be submitted is
proprietary in nature or may be kept confidential under
federal, state, or local law, the provider may make such
a request in accordance with the Utah Government
Records Access and Management Act, Title 63G
Chapter 2 of the Utah Code Ann., as amended
(“GRAMA”). A provider recognizes that the City, as
a governmental entity under GRAMA, cannot
(December 26, 2018)
guarantee the confidentiality of any information in the
City’s possession, and the provider submits such
information at its own risk.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-64. Provider’s expense.
All reports and records required under this
Chapter shall be furnished at the sole expense of a
provider, except as otherwise provided in this Chapter
or a wireless franchise.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-65. Right of inspection.
For the purpose of verifying the correct amount of
the wireless franchise fee, the books and records of the
provider pertaining thereto shall be open to inspection
or audit by duly authorized representatives or agents
of the City at all reasonable times, upon giving
reasonable notice of the intention to inspect or audit
the books and records; provided, however, that the
City shall not audit the books and records of the
provider more often than annually. The provider
agrees to reimburse the City the reasonable costs of an
audit if the audit discloses that the provider has paid
95% or less of the compensation due to the City for the
period of such audit. In the event the accounting
rendered to the City by the provider herein is found to
be incorrect, then payment shall be made on the
corrected amount within 30 calendar days of written
notice, it being agreed that the City may accept any
amount offered by the provider, but the acceptance
thereof by the City shall not be deemed a settlement of
such item if the amount is in dispute or is later found
to be incorrect.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
Article XI. Rights of City.
5-27-66. Enforcement and remedies.
(1) The City is responsible for enforcing and
administering this Chapter, and the City or its
designee, as appointed by the Mayor, is authorized to
give any notice required by law or under any wireless
franchise agreement.
(2) In the event that an individual or entity
violates this Chapter, the City will notify the violating
party of the violation and provide 30 days for the party
to cure the violation.
(3) If the violation is not cured within 30 days,
the City may:
(a) fine the violating party $500 per day
until the violation is cured; and,
(b) terminate or suspend any franchises,
permits, or licenses held by the violating party.
(4) If the violation is not cured within 180 days
of the City’s notice, the City may remove and impound
the violating party’s equipment until the violation has
been cured. In no event shall the City be required to
keep any equipment in impound for longer than 180
days, and the City may dispose of any impounded
equipment after 180 days without penalty.
(5) The violating entity may appeal the City’s
notice of violation within 10 days in accordance with
Chapter 1-28.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-67. Force majeure.
In the event a provider’s performance of any of
the terms, conditions, or obligations required by this
Chapter or a wireless franchise is prevented by a cause
or event not within a provider’s control, such inability
to perform shall be deemed excused and no penalties
or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof. For
the purpose of this Section, causes or events not within
the control of a provider shall include acts of God,
strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances, failure or
loss of utilities, explosions, acts of public enemies, and
natural disasters such as floods, earthquakes,
landslides, and fires.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-68. Extended operation and continuity of
services.
(1) Continuation after Expiration. Upon either
expiration or revocation of a wireless franchise
granted pursuant to this Chapter, the City shall have
the discretion to permit or require a provider to
continue to operate its system or provide services for
an extended period of time not to exceed 6 months
from the date of such expiration or revocation. A
provider shall continue to operate its system under the
terms and conditions of this Chapter and the wireless
franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter.
(2) Continuation by Incumbent Local Exchange
Carrier. If the provider is the incumbent local
exchange carrier, it shall be permitted to continue to
operate its system and provide services without regard
to revocation or expiration, but shall be obligated to
negotiate a renewal in good faith.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-69. Removal or abandonment of WCF.
(1) Abandoned WCF. In the event that (a) the
use of any portion of a WCF is discontinued for a
continuous period of 12 months, and 30 days after no
response to written notice from the City to the last
known address of provider, or (b) any WCF has been
installed in the rights-of-way without complying with
the requirements of this Chapter, or (c) no franchise is
granted, a provider shall be deemed to have abandoned
such WCF.
(2) Removal of abandoned WCF. The City, upon
such terms as it may impose, may give a provider
written permission to abandon, without removing, any
(December 26, 2018)
WCF, or portion thereof, directly constructed,
operated or maintained under a franchise. Unless
such permission is granted or unless otherwise
provided in this Chapter, a provider shall remove
within a reasonable time the abandoned WCF and
shall restore, using prudent construction standards,
any affected rights-of-way to their former state at the
time the WCF was installed, so as not to impair their
usefulness. In removing its WCF, a provider shall
refill, at its own expense, any excavation necessarily
made by it and shall leave all rights-of-way in as good
condition as that prevailing prior to such removal
without materially interfering with any electrical or
telephone cable or other utility wires, poles, or
attachments. The City shall have the right to inspect
and approve the condition of the rights-of-way cables,
wires, attachments, and poles prior to and after
removal. The liability, indemnity, and insurance
provisions of this Chapter and of the franchise, and any
security fund provided in a franchise, shall continue in
full force and effect during the period of removal and
until full compliance by a provider with the terms and
conditions of this Section.
(3) Transfer of abandoned WCF to City. Upon
abandonment of any WCF in place, a provider, if
required by the City, shall submit to the City a written
instrument, satisfactory in form to the City,
transferring to the City the ownership of the
abandoned WCF.
(4) Removal of above-ground system. At the
expiration of the term for which a franchise is granted,
or upon its revocation or earlier expiration, as provided
for by this Chapter, in any such case without renewal,
extension or transfer, the City shall have the right to
require a provider to remove, at its expense, all aboveground
portions of a WCF from the rights-of-way,
including poles, within a reasonable period of time,
which shall not be less than 180 days.
(5) Leaving underground facilities. Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary set forth in this
Chapter, a provider may abandon any underground
facilities in place so long as they do not materially
interfere with the use of the rights-of-way or with the
use thereof by any public utility, cable operator, or
other person.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
Article XII. Obligation to Notify.
5-27-70. Publicizing work.
Before entering onto any private property, a
provider shall make a good faith attempt to contact the
property owners in advance and describe the work to
be performed.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
Article XIII. General Provisions
5-27-71. Conflicts.
In the event of a conflict between any provision of
this Chapter and a wireless franchise entered pursuant
to it, the provisions of this Chapter shall control.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-72. Severability.
If any provision of this Chapter is held by any
federal, state, or local court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid as conflicting with any federal or state
statute, or is ordered by a court to be modified in any
way in order to conform to the requirements of any
such law and all appellate remedies with regard to the
validity of the Chapter provisions in question are
exhausted, such provision shall be considered a
separate, distinct, and independent part of this
Chapter, and such holding shall not affect the validity
and enforceability of all other provisions hereof. In
the event that such law is subsequently repealed,
rescinded, amended, or otherwise changed so that the
provision which had been held invalid or modified is
no longer in conflict with such law, the provision in
question shall return to full force and effect and shall
again be binding on the City and the provider;
provided, however, that the City shall give the
provider 30 days, or a longer period of time as may be
reasonably required for a provider to comply with such
a rejuvenated provision, written notice of the change
before requiring compliance with such provision.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-73. New developments.
It shall be the policy of the City to consider
amendments to this Chapter, upon application of a
provider, when necessary to enable the provider to
take advantage of any developments in the field of
personal wireless services which will afford the
provider an opportunity to more effectively,
efficiently, or economically serve itself or the public,
subject to the purposes of this Chapter.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-74. Notices.
All notices from a provider to the City required
under this Chapter or pursuant to a wireless franchise
granted pursuant to this Chapter shall be directed to
the personnel designated by the Community
Development Director. A provider shall provide in
any application for a wireless franchise the identity,
address, and phone number to receive notices from the
City. A provider shall immediately notify the City of
any change in its name, address, or telephone number.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
(December 26, 2018)
5-27-75. Exercise of police power.
To the full extent permitted by applicable law
either now or in the future, the City reserves the right
to amend this Chapter and/or to adopt or issue such
rules, regulations, orders, or other directives that it
finds necessary or appropriate in the lawful exercise of
its police powers and its power to manage the public
rights-of-way.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
Article XIV. Federal, State, and City Jurisdiction.
5-27-76. Construction.
This Chapter shall be construed in a manner
consistent with all applicable federal and state statutes.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-77. Chapter applicability.
This Chapter shall apply to all wireless franchises
granted or renewed after the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this Chapter. This Chapter
shall further apply, to the extent permitted by
applicable federal or state law, to all existing wireless
franchises granted prior to the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this Chapter and to a provider
providing services, without a wireless franchise, prior
to the effective date of this Chapter.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-78. Other applicable ordinances.
A provider’s rights are subject to the police
powers of the City, as a Charter city and as a Utah
political subdivision, to adopt and enforce ordinances
necessary for the health, safety, and welfare of the
public. A provider shall comply with all applicable
general laws and ordinances enacted by the City
pursuant to its police powers. In particular, all
providers shall comply with the City’s zoning and
other land use ordinances and requirements.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-79. City failure to enforce.
A provider shall not be relieved of its obligation
to comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter
or any wireless franchise granted pursuant to this
Chapter by reason of any failure of the City to enforce
prompt and full compliance.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
5-27-80. Construed according to Utah law.
This Chapter and any wireless franchise granted
pursuant to this Chapter shall be construed and
enforced in accordance with the substantive laws of
the state of Utah. Specifically, in the event of any
conflict between this Chapter with the Small Wireless
Facilities Deployment Act, Title 54 Chapter 21 of the
Utah Code Ann., as amended, the Small Wireless
Facilities Deployment Act shall control.
(Ord. 2018-16, 12-19-2018)
6-1 (March 28, 2017)
TITLE 6. ANIMAL CONTROL
Chapter 1. Animal Control Division;
Powers and Authority.
Chapter 2. Definitions.
Chapter 3. Licensing.
Chapter 4. Animals at Large.
Chapter 5. Nuisance Animals.
Chapter 5a. Repealed. (Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003)
Chapter 5b. Aggressive Animals.
Chapter 6. Rabies Control.
Chapter 7. Impounding.
Chapter 8. Animal Shelter.
Chapter 9. Cruelty to Animals.
Chapter 10. Wild Animals.
Chapter 11. Regulatory Permits; Kennels.
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017)
Chapter 12. Repealed. (Ord. 88-28; 09-07-1988)
Chapter 13. Repealed. (Ord. 88-28; 09-07-1988)
Chapter 14. Repealed. (Ord. 96-02; 02-07-1996)
CHAPTER 1. ANIMAL CONTROL DIVISION;
POWERS AND AUTHORITY
6-1-1. Division of Animal Control.
6-1-2. Powers of Division personnel.
6-1-3. Duties of Division personnel.
6-1-4. Interference with officer prohibited.
6-1-1. Division of Animal Control.
There shall be a Division of Animal Control as a
Division within the Tooele City Police Department.
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017) (Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-03)
(Ord. 1981-14, 05-25-1981)
6-1-2. Powers of Division personnel.
(1) The Division commander and all Division and
Department officers shall take the oath of office and shall
be vested with the power and authority to enforce the
provisions of this Title.
(2) Division and Department officers are hereby
authorized and empowered to apprehend, transport, and
impound any animal found in violation of this Title,
including licensable animals for which no license has been
procured in accordance with this Title, and any licensed or
unlicensed animals for any other violations of this Title.
(3) Division and Department officers shall have the
power to enter into any building or upon any property
within the city when they have probable cause to believe
that there exits in any building and/or upon any property
any violation of the provisions of this Title or other
applicable law, provided that:
(a) If such building and/or property is presently
occupied, enforcement personnel shall first present proper
credentials to the occupant and request entry, explaining
the reasons therefor; and if such building and/or property
is unoccupied, enforcement personnel shall first make a
reasonable effort to locate the owner thereof or other
persons having authority over the building and/or property
and request entry, explaining the reasons therefor. If entry
into said building or upon said property be refused or the
owner of the property or building cannot be located, an
officer shall obtain a warrant for the entry and inspection
of said building and/or said property.
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection
(a), if an officer has probable cause to believe that a
violation of this Title has occurred and that exigent
circumstances exist such that it reasonably appears that a
person or animal may be in peril of death or bodily injury,
the officer shall have the power to immediately enter and
inspect such building and/or property and may use any
reasonable means required to effect such entry and make
such inspection, whether such building and/or property is
occupied or unoccupied, and whether or not permission to
inspect has been obtained. If the building and/or property
is occupied, the officer shall present proper credentials to
the occupant and explain the reasons for the entry.
Additionally, the provisions of Subsection (a) shall not
prohibit the an officer from entering upon unenclosed
private property while pursuing an animal in violation of
this Title.
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017) (Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-03)
(Ord. 1981-14, 05-25-1981)
6-1-3. Duties of Division personnel.
(1) The Division commander will:
(a) Enforce this Title and perform other
responsibilities pursuant thereto.
(b) Supervise Division personnel, including the
operation of the animal shelter.
(c) Keep adequate records of all animals
impounded and all monies collected.
(d) See that all animals and animal holding
facilities in the Division’s jurisdiction are licensed,
controlled, and permitted in accordance with any
applicable laws and regulations.
(e) Establish, in cooperation with the Tooele
City-County Health Department and other interested
governmental agencies, adequate measures for rabies
immunization and control.
(2) Each officer shall:
(a) Enforce this Title in all respects pertaining
to animal control within Tooele City, including the care
and impounding of animals and prevention of cruelty to
animals.
(b) Carry out all duties prescribed or delegated
by the commander.
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017) (Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-03)
(Ord. 1981-14, 05-25-1981)
6-1-4. Interference with officer prohibited.
Any person who intentionally or recklessly interferes
with any officer in the lawful discharge of the officer’s
duties as set forth in Title 6 shall be guilty of a class B
6-2 (March 28, 2017)
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017) (Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-03)
(Ord. 1981-14, 05-25-1981)
(March 6, 2020) 6-3
CHAPTER 2. DEFINITIONS
6-2-1. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise,
the following terms and phrases, as used in this Title, shall
have the meanings hereinafter designated:
"Animal" means any live, non-human vertebrate
creature, whether wild or domesticated.
"Animal boarding establishment" means any
establishment that takes in animals for boarding for profit.
"Animal grooming parlor" means any establishment
maintained for the purpose of offering cosmetological
services to animals for profit.
"Animal shelter" and “shelter” means a public or
private facility owned or operated by a governmental
entity, by an established animal welfare society, or by a
veterinarian and used for the care and custody of seized,
stray, homeless, quarantined, abandoned, or unwanted
dogs, cats or other small domestic animals.
"Animal at large" means any domesticated animal,
whether or not licensed, not under restraint.
"Animal under restraint" means any animal under the
control of as person, except a dog shall not be considered
under restraint unless on a leash or lead, within a secure
enclosure, or otherwise security confined.
"Attack" or "attacking" means any menacing action
by an animal which places a person or another animal in
danger of imminent physical pain or impairment of
physical condition. Actual physical contact shall not be
required to constitute an attack. Attacking shall include
chasing, nipping, or otherwise threatening.
"Bite" or "biting" means an animal’s use of teeth
upon a person or animal whether or not an injury actually
results.
"Cat" means any feline of the domesticated types over
four months of age. Any feline under four months of age
is a kitten.
"Cattery" means a location where a person engages in
boarding, breeding, buying, grooming, sheltering, or
selling cats.
“Community cat” See Utah Code 11-46-302, as
amended.
“Community cat caretaker” See Utah Code 11-46-
302, as amended.
“Community cat colony” See Utah Code 11-46-302,
as amended.
“Community cat program” See Utah Code 11-46-
302, as amended.
“Commander” means the supervisor of the Division
of Animal Control.
“Department” means the Tooele City Police
Department.
“Division” means the Division of Animal Control, a
division of the Tooele City Police Department.
"Dog" means any canis familiaris over four months of
age. Any canis familiaris under four months of age is a
puppy.
"Domesticated animal" means an animal accustomed
to living in or about the habitation of humans and other
animals, including cats, dogs, fowl, horses, swine and
goats.
“Ear-tipping” See Utah Code 11-46-302, as amended.
“Feral” See Utah Code 11-46-302, as amended.
"Guard dog" means a working dog which is kept
under strict control such that it cannot come into direct
contact with the public, including in a fenced run or other
secure enclosure, or on a leash or lead, and located on a
business premises as part of the business premises
security.
"Harbor" means keeping, feeding, maintaining,
sheltering, exercising ownership of, or caring for an
animal.
"Holding facility" means any pet shop, kennel,
cattery, groomery, riding school, stable, animal shelter,
veterinary hospital, humane establishment, shelter, or any
other such facility used for keeping animals.
"Impoundment" means taken into the custody of the
Division or Department.
"Kennel" means a location where a person engages in
boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a
fee or selling dogs.
"Leash or lead" means any chain, rope, or other
similar device used to restrain an animal.
“Officer” means an Animal Control Division officer
and a Department peace officer.
"Person" means an individual and any legal entity,
including a corporation, firm, partnership, or trust.
"Pet" means a domesticated animal kept for pleasure
rather than utility, including, but not limited to birds, cats,
dogs, fish, hamsters, mice, and other animals associated
with the human environment. Pet does not include farm
animals unless expressly included under other provisions
of this Code.
"Pet shop" means any establishment containing cages
or exhibition pens, not part of a kennel or cattery, wherein
dogs, cats, birds, or other pets are kept or displayed for
sale.
"Provoked," “provoking,” or "provocation" means
any act by a person towards a dog or any other animal
done recklessly, knowingly, or intentionally, to tease,
torment, abuse, assault or otherwise cause a reaction by
the dog or other animal, provided however, that any act by
a person done with the intention to discourage or prevent
a dog or other animal from attacking or biting shall not be
considered to be a provocation.
"Quarantine" means the isolation of an animal in a
secure enclosure so that the animal is not subject to
contact with other animals or unauthorized persons.
"Riding school” and “stable" mean an establishment
which provides boarding or riding instruction for any
horse, pony, donkey, mule or burro, or which offers such
animals for hire.
“Service animal” means an animal defined as a
(March 6, 2020) 6-4
service animal by the U.S. Department of Justice, and
includes a dog that is individually trained to do work or
perform tasks for a person with a disability.
“Sponsor of a community cat colony” See Utah Code
11-46-302, as amended.
"Stray" means any animal at large.
“Supervisor” means an animal shelter manager or
officer manager, under the supervision of the commander.
"Wild animal,” and exotic animal" mean any animal
which is not commonly domesticated, or which is of a
predatory nature that would constitute an unreasonable
danger to human life, health or property if not kept or
confined in a safe and secure manner, including those
animals which, as a result of their natural condition,
cannot be vaccinated effectively for rabies. Those
animals, however domesticated, shall include the
following:
(a) Alligators and crocodiles.
(b) Bears (ursidae).
(c) Cat family (felidae). All except the
commonly accepted domesticated cats, and including
cheetah, cougars, leopards, lions, lynx, panthers, mountain
lions, tigers, and wildcats.
(d) Dog family (canidae). All except
domesticated dogs, and including wolf, part wolf, fox, part
fox, coyote and part coyote.
(e) Porcupine (erethizontidae).
(f) Primate (hominiddae). All subhuman
primates, including apes, gorillas, monkeys, and lemurs.
(g) Raccoon (prosynnidae). All raccoons
including eastern raccoon, desert raccoon and ring-tailed
cat.
(h) Skunks, except skunks that are descented
and neutered or spayed.
(i) Venomous fish and piranha.
(j) Venomous snakes and lizards.
(k) Weasels (mustelidae). All weasels,
including martens, wolverines, badgers, otters, ermine,
mink, mongoose, and ferrets, but excepting domesticated
ferrets.
(Ord. 2020-07, 03-04-2020) (Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017)
(Ord. 2008-11, 11-05-2008) (Ord. 2006-19, 08-16-2006)
(Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003) (Ord. 1988-28,09-07-1988)
6-5 (August 27, 2020)
CHAPTER 3. LICENSING
6-3-1. Animal licensing requirements.
6-3-2. License tag.
6-3-3. Licensing exemptions.
6-3-4. Penalties.
6-3-1. Animal licensing requirements.
(1) All dogs and cats within Tooele City must be
licensed each year, except as otherwise provided herein.
(2) Any person owning, possessing, or harboring any
dog or cat shall obtain a license for such animal within 30
days after the dog or cat reaches the age of four months;
or, in the case of a dog or cat over the age of four months,
within 10 days of the acquisition of the dog or cat.
(3) License applications must be submitted annually
to the Finance Department, utilizing a standard form
which includes the name, address, and telephone number
of the applicant; the name, breed, sex, color, and age of
the animal; and full rabies immunization information. The
application shall be accompanied by the prescribed license
fee and by a current rabies vaccination certificate.
(4) Dog and cat license fees shall be as established
by resolution of the City Council.
(5) No dog or cat will be licensed as spayed or
neutered without proof that such surgery was performed.
(6) The license shall be effective from the date of
purchase through the end of February of the following
year, after which a late fee shall be imposed. Licenses for
the following year may be purchased as early as 90 days
prior to the expiration of any year’s license.
(7) No person or persons may own or harbor at any
one residence within Tooele City any combination of dogs
and cats that exceeds a total of 4 animals.
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017) (Ord. 2008-11, 11-05-2008)
(Ord. 2003, 12-17-2003) (Ord. 1994-55, 12-08-1994)
(Ord. 1994-17, 03-15-1994) (Ord. 1988-28, 09-07-1988)
6-3-2. License tag.
(1) Upon payment of the license fee, the Finance
Department shall issue to the owner a certificate and a tag
for each dog and cat licensed. The tag shall have stamped
thereon the license number corresponding with the tag
number of the certificate. The owner shall attach the tag
to the collar or harness of the animal and see that the
collar and the tag are constantly worn. Failure to attach
the tag as provided shall be a violation of this Chapter.
(2) License tags are not transferable from one animal
to another. No refunds will be made on any license fee for
any reason whatsoever. Replacements for lost or
destroyed tags shall be issued upon payment of $5.00 to
the Finance Department.
(3) Removing or causing to be removed, the collar,
harness, or tag from any licensed dog or cat without the
consent of the owner or keeper thereof, except a licensed
veterinarian or Division officer shall be a violation of this
Chapter.
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017) (Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003)
(Ord. 1981-14, 05-25-1981)
6-3-3. Licensing - exemptions.
(1) The licensing and fee provisions of Section 6-3-1
and 6-3-2 herein shall not apply to:
(a) individual dogs and cats within a properly
licensed dog kennel, cattery, or other such establishment
when such dogs or cats are held for resale.
(b) community cats that belong to a community
cat colony as defined by Utah Code 11-46-302, as
amended.
(2) The fee provisions of Sections 6-3-1 and 6-3-2
shall not apply to:
(a) Service animals.
(b) Dogs especially trained and used to assist
officers and other officials of government agencies in the
performance of their official duties.
(3) Nothing in this Section shall be construed so as
to exempt any dog or cat from having a current rabies
vaccination.
(Ord. 2020-07, 03-04-2020) (Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017)
(Ord. 2003-28, 12- 17-2003) (Ord. 1981-14, 05-25-1981)
6-3-4. Penalties.
Every person who violates any provision of this
Chapter is guilty of an Infraction.
(Ord. 2020-33, 08-19-2020) (Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003)
(August 27, 2020) 6-6
CHAPTER 4. ANIMALS AT LARGE
6-4-1. Unlawful to harbor stray animals.
6-4-2. Animals running at large.
6-4-3. Animals on unenclosed premises.
6-4-4. Female animals in heat.
6-4-5. Places prohibited to animals.
6-4-6. Penalties.
6-4-1. Unlawful to harbor stray animals.
It is unlawful for any person to harbor any lost or
strayed animal, except for community cats. Whenever any
animal shall be found which appears to be lost or strayed,
it shall be the duty of the finder to notify the Division
within 24 hours, and the Division shall impound the
animal as herein provided.
(Ord. 2020-07, 03-04-2020) (Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017)
(Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003) (Ord. 1981-14, 05-25-1981)
6-4-2. Animals running at large.
It is unlawful for the owner or person having charge,
care, custody, or control of any animal to allow such
animal to run at large at any time. The owner or person
charged with responsibility for an animal found running at
large shall be strictly liable for a violation of this section
regardless of the precautions taken to prevent the escape
of the animal and regardless of whether or not such person
knows the animal is running at large.
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017) (Ord. 1990-16, 09-11-1990)
6-4-3. Animals on unenclosed premises.
It is unlawful for any person to chain, stake out, or
tether an animal on any unenclosed premises in such a
manner that the animal may go beyond the property line
unless such person has permission of the owners of all
affected adjacent properties.
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017) (Ord. 1981-25, 05-21-1981)
6-4-4. Female animals in heat.
It shall be unlawful for any owner or person having
charge, care, custody, or control of any female animal in
heat, in addition to restraining such animal from running
at large, to fail to cause such animal to be constantly
confined in a building or secure enclosure, except for
planned breeding purposes.
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017) (Ord. 1981-14, 05-25-1981)
6-4-5. Places prohibited to animals.
(1) It is unlawful for any person to take or permit any
animal, whether loose or on a leash or in the arms, in or
about any establishment or place of business where food
or food products are sold or displayed, including, but not
limited to, restaurants, grocery stores, meat markets, and
fruit or vegetable stores.
(2) It is unlawful for any person keeping, harboring,
or having charge, care, custody, or control of any animal
to allow the animal to be within Zone 1 of any designated
groundwater source protection area (within a 100-foot
radius of a wellhead or spring collection area).
(3) This section shall apply to community cat
colonies.
(4) This Section shall not apply to service animals,
as defined.
(Ord. 2020-07, 03-04-2020) (Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017)
(Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003) (Ord. 1981-14, 05-25-1981)
6-4-6. Penalties.
Every person who violates any provision of this
Chapter is guilty of:
(1) an Infraction for domesticated dogs and cats that
are identified as a particular individual’s pets;
(2) a class C misdemeanor for all other animals.
(Ord. 2020-33, 08-27-2020) (Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003)
6-7 (August 27, 2020)
CHAPTER 5. NUISANCE ANIMALS
6-5-1. Repealed.
6-5-2. Repealed.
6-5-3. Nuisance animals.
6-5-4. Repealed.
6-5-5. Repeated offenses.
6-5-6. Penalties.
6-5-1. Repealed.
(Ord. 1996-03, 02-07-1996)
6-5-2. Repealed.
Ord. 1996-03, 02-07-1996)
6-5-3. Nuisance animals.
Any owner or person having charge, care, custody, or
control of an animal or animals causing a nuisance as
defined below shall be in violation of this Chapter and
subject to the penalties provided herein. The following
shall be deemed a nuisance:
(1) Any animal which:
(a) causes damage to the property of anyone
other than its owner;
(b) causes unreasonable fouling of the air by
odors;
(c) causes unsanitary conditions in its
enclosures or surroundings;
(d) creates a breeding place for flies or other
insects;
(e) defecates on any public sidewalk, park strip,
park, or building, or on any private property without the
consent of the owner of such private property, unless the
person owning, harboring, or having care, charge,
custody, or control of such animal shall bag and remove
immediately such defecation to a proper trash receptacle;
(f) barks, whines, howls, or makes other noises
in an excessive, continuous, disturbing, or untimely
fashion;
(g) unreasonably disturbs passersby or chases
passing vehicles;
(h) is in violation of Chapter 5-6b (Aggressive
Animals);
(i) engages in actions during any 12-month
period resulting in 3 or more criminal convictions.
(2) Any animals which, by virtue of the number
maintained, are determined by an officer or the Tooele
County Health Department to be offensive or dangerous
to the public health, welfare, and safety.
(Ord. 2020-33, 08-27-2020) (Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017)
(Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003) (Ord. 1996-03, 02-07-1996)
6-5-4. Repealed.
(Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003)
6-5-5. Repeated offenses.
An animal owner shall forfeit to the City all animals
that, individually or collectively, gave rise to violations of
Title 6 for which convictions entered on 3 or more
separate occasions during a 12-month period against
persons owning, harboring, or having charge, care,
custody, or control of those animals. Upon the third
conviction, the City Attorney may petition a court of
competent jurisdiction to compel forfeiture. After the
court enters the appropriate order, the Division shall
impound all animals that gave rise to the convictions.
Any animal impounded pursuant to this Section shall be
dealt with in accordance with the provisions of this Title
for impounded animals, except that the owner or the
owner’s agent shall not be allowed to redeem the
impounded animal or animals under any circumstances.
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017) (Ord. 2008-11, 11-05-2008)
(Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003) (Ord. 1996-03, 02-07-1996)
(Ord. 1981-14, 05-25-1981)
6-5-6. Penalties.
(1) Every person who violates any provision of
Section 6-5-3 is guilty of a class C misdemeanor.
(2) Each and every day that a violation of Section 6-
5-3 continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017) (Ord. 2003, 12-17-2003)
(Ord. 1996-03, 02-07-1996)
6-8 (March 28, 2017)
CHAPTER 5a. Repealed. (Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003)
6-9 (August 27, 2020)
CHAPTER 5b. AGGRESSIVE ANIMALS.
6-5b-1. Attacking animals.
6-5b-2. Animal bite of a human being.
6-5b-3. Animal bite of another domestic animal.
6-5b-4. Affirmative defenses.
6-5b-5. Impoundment – biting animals.
6-5b-6. Potentially dangerous and dangerous
animals- application for hearing.
6-5b-7. Hearing procedures with the Division.
6-5b-8. Appeal.
6-5b-9. Penalties.
6-5b-10. Law enforcement animals.
6-5b-1. Attacking animals.
Subject to the affirmative defenses of Section 6-5b-4,
any person owning or having charge, care, custody, or
control of any animal is guilty of a class C misdemeanor
if the animal approaches any human being or domesticated
animal upon public or private property in an apparent
attitude of attack. This is a strict liability offense.
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017) (Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003)
6-5b-2. Animal bite of a human being.
Subject to the affirmative defenses of Section 6-5b-4,
any person owning or having charge, care, custody, or
control of an animal that bites any human being upon
public or private property is guilty of a class B
misdemeanor. This is a strict liability offense.
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017) (Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003)
6-5b-3. Animal bite of another domestic animal.
Subject to the affirmative defenses of Section 6-5b-4,
any person owning or having charge, care, custody, or
control of an animal that bites another domestic animal
upon public or private property is guilty of a class C
misdemeanor. This is a strict liability offense.
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017) (Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003)
6-5b-4. Affirmative defenses.
The following are affirmative defenses to prosecution
under Sections 6-5b-1, 6-5b-2, and 6-5b-3:
(1) The victim was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting
the animal or has, in the recent past, tormented, abused, or
assaulted the animal.
(2) The victim was committing or attempting to
commit a crime.
(3) The victim was trespassing on private property
owned, leased, or rented by the person keeping the animal.
(4) The animal was on a substantial leash or lead, or
within fenced private property owned, leased, or rented by
the person keeping the animal, and the animal was
responding to attack or intrusion on the property by
another animal.
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017) (Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003)
6-5b-5. Impoundment – biting animals.
(1) The Division shall immediately impound, or
otherwise quarantaine, an animal where the Division has
reason to believe the animal has bitten a human being or
domesticated animal without provocation.
(2) After 10 days and subject to the terms of Section
6-6-7, the Division shall return the impounded animal to
the animal’s owner or custodian upon payment of the
applicable fees unless a complaint pursuant to Section 6-
5b-6 has been filed. If a complaint has been filed, the
Division shall retain the animal until proceedings are
complete and a final determination has been made whether
the animal is dangerous or potentially dangerous. If the
animal is ultimately declared dangerous or potentially
dangerous, the animal’s owner or custodian shall be
responsible for all expenses of the impoundment.
(3) In lieu of impound, the Division may allow the
animal to be confined at the owner’s or custodian’s
expense in a Division approved kennel or veterinary
facility within the city. The owner or custodian shall not
remove the animal from the kennel or veterinary facility
without the prior written approval of a Division supervisor
or authorized representative.
(4) Any person who owns or possesses the animal to
be impounded and who refuses to surrender the animal
upon demand of the Division is guilty of a class B
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017) (Ord. 2008-11, 11-05-2008)
(Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003)
6-5b-6. Potentially dangerous and dangerous animals -
application for hearing.
(1) Upon written application of the Division or any
other person alleging that an animal is or is not dangerous
or potentially dangerous, the Department hearing
examiner shall conduct a hearing to determine whether an
animal is a potentially dangerous or dangerous animal.
The application must be filed with the Department within
30 days of impoundment of the animal by the Division or
other Division determination that the animal is dangerous
or potentially dangerous. The application shall state the
legal and factual grounds supporting the application. The
hearing examiner will not conduct a hearing on an
application that does not state the legal and factual
grounds supporting the application. The hearing shall be
conducted in accordance with the procedures provided by
Section 6-5b-7.
(2) An animal shall be declared potentially dangerous
if, unprovoked, it:
(a) bit a human being or domesticated animal
whether on public or private property;
(b) chased or approached a person upon public
or private property in an apparent attitude of attack; or,
(c) has a known propensity to attack unprovoked,
or to cause injury or otherwise to threaten the safety of
humans or domesticated animals.
(3) An animal shall be declared dangerous when the
animal has:
6-10 (August 27, 2020)
(a) killed a human being or inflicted injury on a
human being that created or caused protracted physical
pain, permanent disfigurement, or temporary or permanent
impairment of any bodily member or organ;
(b) without provocation, killed a pet or
domesticated animal;
(c) bitten or endangered the safety of humans or
domesticated animals after previously having been found
to be potentially dangerous; or,
(d) done any of the acts listed in subparagraph
(2) that would classify the animal as potentially
dangerous, but after a hearing held pursuant to Section 6-
5b-7, the hearing examiner reasonably believes that the
animal poses an unreasonable risk of inflicting death or
substantial bodily injury on a human being or
domesticated animal.
(4) In making a determination whether an animal is
potentially dangerous or dangerous, the hearing examiner
shall consider each of the following factors:
(a) any previous history of the animal attacking
or biting a human being or domesticated animal;
(b) the nature and extent of injuries inflicted and
the number and ages of victims involved;
(c) the location where the attack took place;
(d) the presence or absence of any provocation or
other circumstance that would justify or explain the bite or
attack;
(e) the extent to which property has been
damaged or destroyed;
(f) whether the animal exhibits any
characteristics of being trained for fighting or attacking,
and any evidence to show such training;
(g) whether the animal exhibits characteristics of
aggressive or unpredictable temperament or behavior in
the presence of human beings or domesticated animals;
(h) whether the animal can be effectively trained
or retrained to change its temperament or behavior;
(i) the manner in which the animal has been kept
by its owner or custodian;
(j) the owner’s or custodian’s past and future
ability and willingness to train and control the animal;
(k) any other relevant information or evidence
regarding the ability of the owner or custodian, or the
Division, to protect the public safety in the future if the
animal is permitted to remain in the city.
(5) If the hearing examiner determines that the animal
is potentially dangerous, and if the owner or custodian is
able and willing to properly train, handle, and maintain the
animal, the hearing examiner may impose reasonable
terms, conditions, and restrictions upon the owner’s or
custodian’s continued possession of the animal and the
training, handling, and maintenance of the animal to
protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
(6) If the hearing examiner determines that the animal
is dangerous, the Division shall order the shelter
supervisor to humanely destroy the animal.
(7) Unless otherwise precluded by order of a court of
competent jurisdiction, the shelter supervisor shall
authorize the destruction of the animal 5 business days
after a final determination either by the Chief of Police (or
designee), or by the Administrative Hearing Officer under
Chapter 1-28, that the animal is dangerous.
(8) Any animal that is determined to be potentially
dangerous by the hearing examiner shall be permanently
identified as such by the Division by the use of
photographs or permanent marking, or both, prior to the
animal’s release from impound or confinement.
(9) Any animal that is determined to be potentially
dangerous, or that is determined to not be dangerous or
potentially dangerous, shall be presumed abandoned if the
animal is not redeemed from impound within 5 business
days of notice of the determination, and may thereafter be
humanely destroyed, adopted, or otherwise disposed of.
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017) (Ord. 2008-11, 11-05-2008)
(Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003)
6-5b-7. Hearing procedures with the Division.
(1) The Chief of Police shall appoint a hearing
examiner who shall exercise all powers relating to the
conduct of the hearing on the application.
(2) After receiving an application alleging that an
animal is dangerous or potentially dangerous, the
Department shall give notice of the hearing to the
applicant and to the owner or custodian of the animal.
The notice shall include the following:
(a) the purpose and reason for holding the
hearing;
(b) the requested remedy or penalty; and,
(c) the time and place where the hearing is to be
held.
(3) At the hearing, the owner of the animal, the
complainant or complainants, if any, and the Division
shall be given an opportunity to present evidence and to
call and cross-examine witnesses.
(4) The hearing examiner may continue the hearing
from time to time upon good cause being shown.
(5) Hearings need not be conducted according to
technical rules relating to evidence or witnesses. Any
relevant evidence shall be admissible if it is the sort of
evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to
rely in conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the
existence of any common law or statutory rule to the
contrary. Hearsay evidence may be admitted for the
purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct
evidence, but generally will not be sufficient in itself to
support a finding. Oral evidence shall be taken only on
oath or affirmation. Other evidence may be admitted
upon proffer.
(6) A recording or transcript of the hearing may be
taken at the expense of the party desiring the record.
(7) The burden is on the Division or complainant to
show by a preponderance of the evidence that the animal
6-11 (August 27, 2020)
should be declared dangerous or potentially dangerous.
(8) Unless otherwise granted additional time by the
Chief of Police, the hearing examiner shall, within 10 days
of the conclusion of any hearing, submit a written report
to the Chief of Police containing a summary of the
evidence and stating the hearing examiner’s findings and
recommendations. The report shall be a public record
and shall be served upon the owner of the animal by
certified mail. A failure by the hearing examiner to
submit a timely report shall not constitute grounds to
challenge, overrule, or otherwise annul the hearing
examiner’s recommendations or the Police Chief’s
subsequent decision.
(9) If the hearing examiner determines that the animal
is potentially dangerous, the hearing examiner shall make
recommendations in accordance with Sections 6-5b-6(5).
Terms, conditions, or restrictions may include the
following:
(a) selection of locations within the owner’s
property or premises where the animal must be kept;
(b) requirements as to size, construction,
materials, and design of an enclosure where the animal
must be kept;
(c) specialized training from a trainer or training
program approved by the Division to correct any of the
animal’s behavioral problems;
(d) prohibiting the addition of any new animal
at the premises;
(e) types and methods of restraint, or muzzling,
or both;
(f) photo identification or permanent marking,
or both, for purposes of identification;
(g) payment of an additional annual $50 license
fee;
(h) procurement and maintenance of a $25,000
liability policy insuring against personal injuries that may
be caused by the animal; and,
(i) revocation of the animal license or permit.
(10) The Chief of Police shall review the hearing
examiner’s findings and recommendations. The Chief of
Police may adopt or reject the findings of the hearing
examiner, or may adopt or modify the recommendations
of the hearing examiner, or may return the matter to the
hearing examiner requesting additional evidence, findings,
and recommendations. The Police Chief’s decision shall
be finalized in writing and shall be served upon the owner
of the animal in person or by certified mail. The Police
Chief’s decision shall be considered issued for purposes
of appeal and enforcement on the date of mailing to the
animal owner.
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017) (Ord. 2008-11, 11-05-2008)
(Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003)
6-5b-8. Appeal.
Appeal of the decision of the Chief of Police shall be
to the Administrative Hearing Officer. The appeal must
be filed with the City Recorder within 10 days of the date
of mailing of the Police Chief’s decision to the animal
owner, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1-28.
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017) (Ord. 2013-07, 04-17-2013)
(Ord. 2012-20, 09-19-12); (Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003)
6-5b-9. Penalties.
It shall be a class B misdemeanor for any person to
own, possess, harbor, or keep any animal:
(1) after a final decision declaring the animal
dangerous; or,
(2) within the city limits in violation of any term,
condition, or limitation imposed upon the owner’s
continued possession or control of the animal pursuant to
a final decision rendered under the provisions of this
Chapter.
Each and every day that a violation of this Chapter
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017) (Ord. 2008-11, 11-05-2008)
(Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003)
6-5b-10. Law enforcement animals.
The provisions of this Title do not apply to dogs used
by law enforcement officers while in the course of
performing police work.
(Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003)
(March 28, 2017) 6-12
CHAPTER 6. RABIES CONTROL
6-6-1. Bites: duty to report.
6-6-2. Rabies vaccinations.
6-6-3. Rabies tag requirements.
6-6-4. Transient animal - exception.
6-6-5. Impoundment of animal without rabies
vaccination tag.
6-6-6. Reporting of rabid animals.
6-6-7. Quarantining and disposition of biting
or rabid animals.
6-6-1. Bites: duty to report.
(1) Any person having knowledge of any individual
or animal having been bitten by an animal of a species
subject to rabies shall report the incident immediately to
the Department.
(2) The owner of an animal that bites a person, and
any person bitten by an animal, shall report the bite to the
Department or the Tooele County Health Department
within 24 hours of the bite, whether or not the biting
animal is of a species subject to rabies.
(3) A physician or other medical person who renders
professional treatment to a person bitten by an animal
shall report the bite and the treatment to the Department
within 24 hours of treatment. He or she shall report the
name, gender, and address of the person bitten as well as
the type and location of the bite. If known, he or she shall
report the name and address of the owner of the animal
that inflicted the bite, the name, species, and breed of the
animal that inflicted the bite, and any other facts that may
assist the Division in ascertaining the immunization status
of the animal.
(4) Any person treating an animal bitten or wounded
by another animal shall report the incident to the
Department. The report shall contain the name and
address of the owner of the bitten or wounded, the name
and address of the owner and description of the animal
which caused the injury, and the location of the incident.
(5) Any person not conforming with the
requirements of this Section shall be in violation of this
Section and subject to a civil penalty of $100.
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017) (Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003)
(Ord. 1981-14, 05-25-1981)
6-6-2. Rabies vaccinations.
(1) Rabies vaccination shall be a prerequisite to
licensing.
(2) Rabies vaccinations shall be considered valid
only when performed by a licensed veterinarian or
accredited animal rescue organization.
(3) The owner or person having the charge, care,
custody, or control of a cat or dog shall have the animal
vaccinated for rabies within 30 days after it reaches 4
months of age. Unvaccinated dogs or cats over 4 months
of age acquired or moved into the city must be vaccinated
for rabies within 30 days after coming into the city.
Thereafter, every dog shall be revaccinated every 36
months and every cat shall be revaccinated every 12
months. Any person not conforming with the
requirements of this subsection shall be guilty of a class C
misdemeanor. This Subsection shall not apply to
veterinarians or kennel operators temporarily keeping on
their premises animals owned by others.
(4) The most current publication of the Compendium
of Animal Rabies Control, published annually by the
National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians,
Inc., shall be the reference document for animal vaccine
use.
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017) (Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003)
(Ord. 1990-11, 06-14-1990)
6-6-3. Rabies tag requirements.
It shall be the duty of each veterinarian, when
vaccinating any animal for rabies, to complete a certificate
of rabies vaccination, which shall include the following
information:
(1) animal owner's name and address;
(2) description of animal (breed, sex, markings, age,
name);
(3) date of vaccination;
(4) rabies vaccination tag number;
(5) type of rabies vaccine administered; and,
(6) manufacturer's vaccine serial number.
A copy of the certificate shall be distributed to the
owner, and the original shall be retained by the issuing
veterinarian. The veterinarian and the owner shall retain
their copies of the certificate for the interval between
vaccinations specified in section 6-6-2 such that the most
recent certificate is always on file. Additionally, a metal
or durable plastic rabies vaccination tag, serially
numbered, shall be securely attached to the collar or
harness of the animal.
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017) (Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003)
(Ord. 1981-14, 05-25-1981)
6-6-4. Transient animal - exception.
The provisions of this Chapter with respect to
vaccination shall not apply to any animal owned by a
person temporarily remaining within Tooele City for less
than 30 days. Such animals shall be kept under strict
supervision of the owner.
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017) (Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003)
(Ord. 1981-14, 05-25-1981)
6-6-5. Impoundment of animal without rabies
vaccination tag.
(1) Any animal not wearing the tag required by
Section 6-6-3 shall be deemed to be unvaccinated, and
may be impounded.
(2) Any vaccinated animal impounded because of a
lack of a rabies vaccination tag may be reclaimed by its
owner within 10 days of impoundment upon furnishing
(March 28, 2017) 6-13
proof of rabies vaccination and payment of all
impoundment fees prior to release.
(3) Any unvaccinated animal may be reclaimed by
its owner within 10 days of impoundment upon payment
of all impoundment fees and by obtaining a rabies
vaccination, and providing a copy of the vaccination
certificate to the Division, within 72 hours of release.
(4) Any animal not reclaimed as provided in this
Section may be disposed of pursuant to provisions of
Section 6-7-3.
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017) (Ord. 2003-28,12-17-2003)
(Ord. 1981-14, 05-21-1981)
6-6-6. Reporting of rabid animals.
Any person having knowledge of the whereabouts of
an animal known to have been exposed to rabies, or
suspected of having rabies, or of an animal or person
bitten by such an animal, shall notify the Department or
the Tooele County Health Department.
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017) (Ord. 1981-14, 05-21-1981)
6-6-7. Quarantining and disposition of biting or rabid
animals.
(1) Any animal that has rabies or shows signs of
having rabies, and every animal bitten by another animal
affected with rabies or that has been exposed to rabies,
shall be reported by the owner as set forth above and shall
immediately be confined in a secure place by the owner.
The owner shall turn over the animal to the Division upon
request.
(2) The owner of any animal of a species subject to
rabies which has bitten another animal or a person shall
surrender the animal to an officer upon request. Any
officer may enter upon private property to seize the
animal; if the owner refuses to surrender the animal, the
officer may immediately obtain a search warrant
authorizing seizure and impoundment of the animal.
(3) Any animal of a species subject to rabies that
bites a person or animal or is suspected of having rabies
shall be seized and quarantined for observation for a
period of not less than 10 days by the Division. The
owner of the animal shall bear the costs and fees for
impoundment and quarantine. The shelter shall be the
normal place for quarantine, but other arrangements may
be made by the shelter supervisor if the animal’s rabies
vaccination is current or if there are other special
circumstances justifying the exception, in the discretion of
the shelter supervisor. A person who has custody of an
animal under quarantine shall immediately notify the
Division if the animal shows any signs of sickness or
abnormal behavior, or if the animal escapes confinement.
It is a class C misdemeanor for any person who has
custody of a quarantined animal to fail or refuse to allow
a Tooele County Health Department officer or Division
officer to make an inspection or examination during the
period of quarantine. If the animal dies within 10 days
from the date of any bite, the person having custody shall
immediately notify the Department. If, at the end of the
10 day period, the shelter supervisor examines the animal
and finds no sign of rabies, the animal may be released to
the owner provided that no complaint under Section 6-5b-
6 has been filed. In the case of a stray animal, the animal
shall be disposed of as provided in Section 6-7-3.
(4) Unvaccinated bitten animals.
The owner of an unvaccinated animal should
immediately destroy the animal if it has been bitten by a
rabid animal. If the owner is unwilling to destroy the
bitten or exposed animal, the animal shall be immediately
isolated and quarantined for 6 months under veterinary
supervision, the cost of such confinement to be paid in
advance by the owner. The animal shall be destroyed if
the owner fails to isolate and quarantine the animal under
veterinary care for the requisite period.
(5) Vaccinated bitten animals.
(a) In the event that a bitten or exposed animal
has been vaccinated, the animal shall be revaccinated
within 24 hours and quarantined for a period of 30 days
following revaccination; or,
(b) If the animal is not revaccinated within 24
hours, the animal shall be isolated and quarantined under
veterinary supervision for 6 months.
(c) The animal shall be destroyed if the owner
does not comply with items (a) or (b) of this Subsection
(5).
(6) Any person who removes any such animal from
the place of quarantine without written permission of the
shelter supervisor is guilty of a class B misdemeanor.
(7) Repealed.
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017) (Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003)
(Ord. 1981-14, 05-25-1981)
(March 28, 2017) 6-14
CHAPTER 7. IMPOUNDING
6-7-1. Animals to be impounded.
6-7-2. Case report.
6-7-3. Disposition of impounded animals.
6-7-4. Fees.
6-7-1. Animals to be impounded.
(1) Officers shall place animals taken into custody
into an animal shelter.
(2) The following animals may be taken into custody
and impounded without the filing of a complaint:
(a) any animal being kept contrary to Tooele
City Code Title 6;
(b) any animal creating a nuisance;
(c) any animal required to be licensed which is
not licensed. An animal not wearing a tag shall be
presumed to be unlicensed;
(d) any sick or injured animal whose owner
cannot be located after reasonable effort;
(e) any lost, strayed, or abandoned animal;
(f) any animal required to be vaccinated for
rabies which is not so vaccinated;
(g) any animal to be held for quarantine;
(h) any animal at large;
(i) any animal that has attacked a person or
domestic animal; and,
(j) any animal that has bitten a person or
domestic animal.
(3) The following animals shall be immediately
taken into custody and impounded:
(a) any animal that has bitten a person or a
domestic animal without provocation;
(b) any animal that has been determined to be
dangerous pursuant to Section 6-5b-6; and,
(c) any animal previously designated as a
potentially dangerous animal that is not being kept under
the conditions imposed pursuant to Sections 6-5b-6 or 6-
5b-7.
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017) (Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003)
(Ord. 1994-02, 01-11-1994)
6-7-2. Case report.
Officers shall complete case reports on all impounded
animals, which reports shall include, as applicable:
(1) a detailed description of the animal, including tag
number, if present;
(2) the reason for and the date of impound;
(3) the location of the pickup;
(4) the name of the officer picking up the animal;
(5) the name and address of any person relinquishing
an animal to the officer or to the animal shelter;
(6) the name and address of the redeemer or
purchaser;
(7) all expenses accruing during impoundment;
(8) all fees received; and,
(9) the manner and date of disposal.
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017) (Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003)
(Ord. 1994-02, 01-11-1994)
6-7-3. Disposition of impounded animals.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in Title 6 (i.e., for
dangerous or quarantined animals), any impounded animal
may be redeemed by its owner during the impound period
upon payment of the applicable fees.
(2) During impound, reasonable efforts shall be
made to identify the animal's owner and give such owner
notification of the impoundment. Notice shall be deemed
given when contact is made by telephone or in person, or
when a written message is left at the last known address of
the registered owner.
(3) The owner of an impounded animal must redeem
the animal within 5 business days after notification.
Failure to so redeem the animal shall indicate that the
animal is abandoned and subject the animal to immediate
destruction or other disposition.
(4) Each impounded, unredeemed animal shall be
kept a minimum of 5 business days after impound, except
as otherwise provided in this Title 6.
(5) Following impound, animals which are not
redeemed, except for those animals quarantined under the
provisions of Section 6-6-7, held under the provisions of
Section 6-5b-5, or confined by court order, may be
destroyed or otherwise disposed of. The Division shall
not sell or adopt out any animal that has not been spayed
or neutered.
(6) Quarantined animals not redeemed by their
owner within 5 business days after the quarantine is ended
shall be subject to immediate destruction or other
disposition.
(7) Any animal voluntarily relinquished by its owner
to the Division or the shelter for destruction or other
disposition may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of
immediately upon receipt.
(8) At the discretion of a supervisor, any impounded
animal having or suspected of having a serious physical
injury or a contagious disease requiring medical attention
may be released to the care of a veterinarian, with the
consent of the owner. The owner shall be responsible for
all costs and fees.
(9) When, in the judgment of a supervisor or officer,
an impounded animal must be destroyed for humane
reasons or to protect the public from imminent danger to
persons or property, the animal may be destroyed without
regard to any time limitations otherwise established herein
and without court order.
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017) (Ord. 2008-11, 11-05-2008)
(Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003) (Ord. 1994-02, 01-11-1994)
6-7-4. Fees.
(1) Fees relating to impounded animals shall be
established by resolution of the Tooele City Council.
(2) Except as otherwise provided in Title 6, the
(March 28, 2017) 6-15
owner of an impounded animal, or the owner's agent, may
redeem the animal before disposition provided all
applicable impounding, boarding, veterinary, licensing,
rabies vaccination, and other fees and costs are first paid.
(3) No impound fee shall be charged to:
(a) the reporting owner of a suspected rabid
animal if the owner complies with Chapter 6-6; or,
(b) the owner of an animal not found to be either
potentially dangerous or dangerous after a hearing under
Chapter 6-5b.
(4) The owner of an impounded animal is liable for
all impound, disposition, and other costs, which if not
voluntarily paid may be collected through a civil action or
by being added to the owner's tax or utility bill.
(5) Persons may obtain any animal not timely
redeemed by its owner for a fee per animal established by
resolution of the City Council, plus the costs of license,
spay, neuter, and rabies vaccination, as applicable.
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017) (Ord. 2008-11, 11-05-2008)
(Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003) (Ord. 1994-02, 01-11-1994)
6-16 (March 28, 2017)
CHAPTER 8. ANIMAL SHELTER
6-8-1. Animal shelter provided.
6-8-2. Disposal facilities.
6-8-3. Medical treatment.
6-8-1. Animal shelter provided.
Tooele City shall provide premises and facilities to be
used as an animal shelter where impounded small animals
can be adequately kept. The City shall purchase and
supply food and furnish humane care for impounded
animals, subject to owner reimbursement.
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017) (Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003)
(Ord. 1981-14, 05-25-1981)
6-8-2. Disposal facilities.
Tooele City shall provide for the humane destruction
of dogs and other animals required to be destroyed by this
Title or by the laws of the State of Utah.
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017) (Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003)
(Ord. 1981-14, 05-25-1981)
6-8-3. Medical treatment.
Tooele City may furnish medical treatment, when
necessary, to animals impounded under the provisions of
this Title. The costs for such treatment shall be assessed
to the owner upon redemption, or to the new owner upon
purchase or adoption.
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017) (Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003)
(Ord. 1981-14, 05-25-1981)
(March 28, 2017) 6-17
CHAPTER 9. CRUELTY TO ANIMALS
6-9-1. Repealed.
6-9-2. Repealed.
6-9-3. Repealed.
6-9-4. Repealed.
6-9-5. Repealed.
6-9-6. Repealed.
6-9-7. Injuries to animals by motorists.
6-9-8. Repealed.
6-9-9. Malicious impounding.
6-9-10. Penalties.
6-9-1. Repealed.
(Ord. 1989-03, 03-01-1989)
6-9-2. Repealed.
(Ord. 1989-03, 03-01-1989)
6-9-3. Repealed.
(Ord. 1989-03, 03-01-1989)
6-9-4. Repealed.
(Ord. 1989-03, 03-01-1989)
6-9-5. Repealed.
(Ord. 1989-03, 03-01-1989)
6-9-6. Repealed.
(Ord. 1989-03, 03-01-1989)
6-9-7. Injury to animals by motorists.
(1) Every operator of a vehicle upon the streets of
Tooele City shall immediately upon injuring, striking,
maiming, or running down any domestic animal give such
aid as can reasonably be rendered. In the absence of the
owner, the operator shall immediately notify the
Department or the Division, furnishing requested facts
relative to such injury.
(2) It shall be the duty of the vehicle operator to
remain at or near the scene until such time as an officer
arrives. Upon the arrival of an officer, the operator shall
immediately provide the operator’s identity, as well as
incident details, to the officer. Alternatively, in the
absence of the owner of the injured animal, the operator
or other person may give aid by taking the animal to the
animal shelter or other animal care facility and by
promptly notifying the Division. Such animal may be
taken in by the animal shelter and dealt with as deemed
appropriate by shelter personnel under the circumstances.
(3) Emergency vehicles are exempt from the
requirements of this Section.
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017) (Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003)
(Ord. 1981-14, 05-25-1981)
6-9-8. Repealed.
(Ord. 1989-03, 03-01-1989)
6-9-9. Malicious impounding.
It is unlawful for any person maliciously to secrete or
impound the animal of another.
(Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003) (Ord. 1989-03, 03-01-1989)
6-9-10. Penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this
Chapter is guilty of a class C misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003)
6-18 (March 28, 2017)
CHAPTER 10. WILD ANIMALS
6-10-1. Wild animals.
6-10-2. Protected species.
6-10-3. Penalties.
6-10-1. Wild animals.
It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale,
barter, give away, keep, own, purchase, or otherwise
harbor any wild animal as defined in Section 6-2-1, except
that the animal shelter, zoological park, veterinary
hospital, humane society shelter, public laboratory, circus,
sideshow, amusement show, or facility for education or
scientific purposes may keep such an animal if protective
devices adequate to prevent such animal from escaping or
injuring the public are provided.
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017) (Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003)
(Ord. 1988-17, 08-03-1988)
6-10-2. Protected species.
It is unlawful for any person to keep an animal of a
species prohibited or protected by Title 50 of the Code of
Federal Regulations or by any regulation or law of the
State of Utah.
(Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003) (Ord. 1981-14, 05-25-1981)
6-10-3. Penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this
Chapter is guilty of a class C misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017) (Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003)
6-19 (March 28, 2017)
CHAPTER 11. REGULATORY PERMITS;
KENNELS
6-11-1. Commercial permits.
6-11-2. Display of permit.
6-11-3. Renewal of permit.
6-11-4. Permit fees.
6-11-5. Exemptions.
6-11-6. Inspections.
6-11-7. Standards for establishments.
6-11-8. Suspension or revocation of permits.
6-11-9. Repealed.
6-11-1. Commercial permits. (Repealed)
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017)
6-11-2. Display of permit. (Repealed)
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017)
6-11-3. Renewal of permit. (Repealed)
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017)
6-11-4. Permit fees. (Repealed)
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017)
6-11-5. Exemptions. (Repealed)
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017)
6-11-6. Inspections. (Repealed)
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017)
6-11-7. Standards for establishments. (Repealed)
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017)
6-11-8. Suspension or revocation of permits.
(Repealed)
(Ord. 2017-07, 03-15-2017)
6-11-9. Repealed.
(Ord. 2003-28, 12-17-2003)
(January 5, 2004) 6-20
CHAPTER 12. Repealed. (Ord. 88-28, 09-07-88)
6-21 (January 5, 2004)
CHAPTER 13. Repealed. (Ord. 88-28, 09-07-88)
(January 5, 2004) 6-22
CHAPTER 14. Repealed. (Ord. 96-02, 02-07-96)
(October 13, 2020) 7-1
TITLE 7. UNIFORM ZONING TITLE OF
TOOELE CITY
Chapter 1. General Provisions.
Chapter 2. Supplementary and Qualifying
Regulations.
Chapter 3. Nonconforming Uses.
Chapter 4. Off-Street Parking Requirements.
Chapter 5. Conditional Use.
Chapter 6. P l a n n e d U n i t D e v e lo p m en t
Overlay District (PUD).
Chapter 7. Repealed (Ord. 97-21, 06-04-97).
Chapter 8. Mobile Home Parks.
Chapter 9. Re cr ea t io n a l Veh ic le s and
Recreational Vehicle Parks.
Chapter 10. Performance Standards for
Industrial and Other Uses.
Chapter 11. Design Review.
Chapter 11a. Design Standards: Multi-Family
Residential.
Chapter 11b. Design Standards: Single-Family
Residential.
Chapter 12. Sensitive Area Overlay Zoning
Regulations.
Chapter 13. Zoning Districts.
Chapter 13a. OS Open Space Zone.
Chapter 14. Residential Zoning Districts.
Chapter 15. Residential Facilities For Persons
with a Disability.
Chapter 15a. Residential Facilities for Elderly
Persons.
Chapter 16. Zoning District Purpose and
Intent. Mixed Use, Commercial,
Industrial and Special Purpose
Districts.
Chapter 17. Repealed (Ord. 98-40, 12-16-98).
Chapter 18. Repealed (Ord. 2003-10, 03-19-03
and Sec 7-18-8).
Chapter 19. Subdivisions.
Chapter 20. C o n d o m i n i u m A p p r o v a l
Procedure.
Chapter 21. Repealed (Ord. 2012-17, 09-10-12).
Chapter 22. Certificates of Occupancy.
Chapter 23. Official City Maps and Major
Street Master Plan.
Chapter 24. Annexed Areas.
Chapter 25. Signs.
Chapter 26. Water Rights.
Chapter 27. P e r s o n a l W i r e l e s s
Telecommunications Facilities.
Chapter 28. Constitutional Taking Issues.
Chapter 29. Temporary Vehicle Sales Lots.
CHAPTER 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
7-1-1. Purpose.
7-1-2. Interpretation.
7-1-3. Conflict.
7-1-4. Effect on Previous Ordinances and Maps.
7-1-5. Definitions.
7-1-6. Enforcement.
7-1-7. Violation and Penalties.
7-1-8. Construction.
7-1-9. Appeals and Variances.
7-1-1. Purpose.
This Title is designed and enacted for the purpose
of promoting the health, safety, morals, convenience,
order, prosperity and welfare of the present and future
inhabitants of Tooele City, including among other
things, the lessening of congestion in the streets, or
roads, securing safety from fire and other dangers,
providing adequate light and air, classification of land
uses and distribution of land development and
utilization, protection of the tax base, securing economy
in governmental expenditures, fostering the agricultural
and other industries, and the protection of urban
development.
(Ord. 1983-05, 04-20-1983)
7-1-2. Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this
Title, the requirements contained herein are declared to
be the minimum requirements for the purposes set forth.
(Ord. 1983-05, 04-20-1983)
7-1-3. Conflict.
This Title shall not nullify the more restrictive
provisions of covenants, agreements or other ordinances
or laws, including this Tooele City Code, but shall
prevail notwithstanding such provisions which are less
restrictive.
7-1-4. Effect on Previous Ordinances and Maps.
The existing ordinances governing zoning, in their
entirety, and including the maps heretofore adopted and
made a part of said ordinances are hereby superseded
and amended to read as set forth herein; provided,
however, that this Title, including the attached map,
shall be deemed a continuation of previous ordinances
and not a new enactment, insofar as the substance of
revisions of previous ordinances is included in this
Title, whether in the same or in different language; and
this Title shall be so interpreted upon all questions of
construction relating to tenure of officers and boards
(October 13, 2020) 7-2
established by previous ordinances and to questions of
conforming or nonconforming uses and buildings and
structures, and to questions as to the dates upon which
such uses, buildings or structures became conforming or
nonconforming.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 1983-05, 04-20-
1983)
7-1-5. Definitions.
Accessory Building - A structure detached from a
principal or primary building located on the same lot
and incidental and subordinate to the principal building
or use.
Accessory Drive Through Facility - A building
element or design feature that permits goods or services
to be provided to a customer while occupying a vehicle,
without entering the building.
Accessory Dwelling Unit - A subordinate dwelling,
containing its own eating, sleeping, and sanitation
facilities, which is:
(1) located internal to or attached to a primary
dwelling or non-residential structure; or,
(2) a detached dwelling unit on the same lot as a
primary dwelling.
Accessory Dwelling Unit for Caretaker - A
dwelling unit, occupied only by a caretaker and related
family, which must be located within and subordinate to
the primary building and not as an independent
structure.
Accessory Outdoor Sales and Display - The
placement outside of a building of items for display or
sale which are ordinarily available for sale at the
location within a building or structure.
Accessory Outside Storage - The outside placement
of items which are customary and incidental to the
principal use of the property but excluding the outside
storage and placement of flammable and hazardous
materials.
Accessory Outside Storage of Flammable or
Hazardous Materials - The outside placement of
flammable or hazardous materials which are customary
and incidental to the principal use of the property.
Accessory Use - A use of land or structure or
portion thereof customarily incidental and subordinate
to the principal use of the land or structure and located
on the same parcel with the principal use.
Adjacent - All properties immediately contiguous
to a development site, including those which are
separated from the site only by a road or other
right-of-way or easement.
Adult Day Care - A non-medical facility for the
daytime care of adult persons, and not exceeding 12
hours, who due to age or disability require assistance,
companionship, association and or supervision during
the day by staff members.
Agriculture (Forestry/Horticultural) - An
establishment devoted to the tilling of the soil, the
raising of crops, pasture, horticulture, trees, orchards
and gardens, but not including any agricultural industry
or business such as fruit packing plants, canneries or
agricultural processing facilities. Includes agricultural
support housing, including the occupancy of any
dwelling unit by the owner or agricultural employees
and their families, without regard to duration, which
occurs exclusively in association with the performance
of agricultural labor.
Agriculture (Livestock) - An establishment devoted
to the tilling of the soil, the raising of crops, and
livestock, but not including any agricultural industry or
business such as fur farms, animal hospitals, feed lots or
similar uses, and including such uses as crop
farms, dairy farms, livestock farms, poultry farms,
general farms, horse farms, and similar uses.
Agriculture (livestock production) includes agricultural
support housing, including the occupancy of any
dwelling unit by the owner or agricultural employees
and their families, without regard to duration, which
occurs exclusively in association with the performance
of agricultural labor.
Agriculture Business - A business or industry
involving agricultural products in manufacturing,
packaging, treatment, sales, intensive feeding or
storage, including commercial greenhouses, feed yards,
fur farms, food packaging or processing plants,
commercial poultry and egg production and similar
uses.
Airport - Areas used for the landing and takeoff of
aircraft, and any appurtenant areas which are intended
for use as airport buildings or other airport facilities.
Alter or Alteration - To change, rearrange, enlarge,
extend, or reduce any structure or part thereof on the
same site.
Animal Hospital - Any facility providing medical
or surgical treatment, clipping, bathing or other
services, including incidental boarding to dogs, cats and
other animals.
Apiary - Any structure or area used for the keeping
or bees and/or the collection of honey.
Applicant - The property owner, or authorized
agent of the property owner who files an application for
development approval pursuant to this Code.
Application - For the purpose of this Title, any
written request for approval or issuance of a
development order, permit, or license including but not
limited to Zoning District amendments, subdivision
plats, site plans, building and development permits,
(October 13, 2020) 7-3
variances, Conditional Use Permits.
Application for Reimbursement - A completed
application for reimbursement filed pursuant to Tooele
City Code §7-19-13, as amended.
Asphalt Plant - A facility, structure or area used for
the manufacture and mixing of asphalt and asphalt
related products, including areas and facilities used for
the storage of materials required for asphalt
manufacture.
Authorized Agent - Any person with valid authority
provided by the Owner, as evidenced by a document,
filed with the City, authorizing the Agent to represent
the Owner, and acting on behalf of the Owner of land
seeking a development permit approval.
Auto Impound Yard - Public or private storage
yard for the temporary storage of automobiles under
impound as a part of a law enforcement towing and
impound rotation program and in compliance with all
applicable Utah State laws and regulations.
Automobile Body and Fender Service and Repair
- An establishment engaged in the service and repair of
body and fender components of automobiles, trucks,
motorcycles, motor homes, or recreational vehicles.
Typical activities include patching, grinding, sanding,
and painting of body and fender parts of any type of
vehicle. This use shall be entirely conducted within an
enclosed structure and subject to annual inspection by
the Tooele City Fire Department and the Tooele City
Building Official.
Automobile Sales and Rental - An establishment
primarily engaged in the sales and / or rental of
automobiles, trucks less than 10.000 G.V.W.,
motorcycles, motor homes, or recreational vehicles,
including sale and servicing. Typical uses include new
and used car dealerships, motorcycle dealerships,
trailer, or recreational vehicle dealerships, and
automobile and light truck rental establishments.
Automobile Service and Repair - An establishment
primarily engaged in the mechanical or electrical repair
of automobiles, trucks less than 10,000 G.V.W.,
motorcycles, motor homes, or recreational vehicles.
Typical uses include auto repair garages, tire sales and
installation, wheel and brake shops, and similar repair
and service activities, and where all repair and service
activities occur within an enclosed building. This use
does not include body and fender shops, and
dismantling or salvage of any vehicles.
Bar - An establishment serving alcoholic beverages
for consumption on the premises. The term "bar" shall
also include taverns, discotheques, night clubs, private
liquor clubs and saloons.
Base Zoning District, or Underlying Zoning
District - the zoning district applicable to a use of land.
Beauty Shop - An establishment for the cutting,
styling, and treatment of hair, skin, fingernails, toenails,
etc. Includes a barber shop. Excludes tattoo parlors.
Bed and Breakfast Inn - An establishment in which
one to six rooms are rented for overnight lodging to
travelers, and where one or more meals are provided to
the guests only, the price of which may be included in
the room rate.
Boarding House - An existing residential structure
a portion of which is used to accommodate for
compensation, no more than three boarders or roomers,
not including members of the owner's immediate
family.
Building -
(1) any structure, whether portable or fixed
typically enclosed within exterior walls under a roof to
form a structure, used or intended for supporting or
sheltering any use or occupancy; or,
(2) the act or process of constructing a structure.
Building Area - The portion of a lot which is within the
envelope formed by the required yards or setbacks.
Building Height - The vertical distance on any one
two-dimensional building elevation (i.e. front, sides,
rear) measured from the lowest point of finished grade
of earth at the foundation to either:
1) the midpoint of all pitched areas for sloped
roofs; or
2) the top of the vertical building wall for flat
roofs or gabled walls, whichever is greatest.
Chimneys may exceed the height limitations to the
extent required by applicable fire codes. See Figure
7-1-5(1) for typical examples.
Building Maintenance Services - An establishment
engaged in the provision of maintenance and/or
custodial services to commercial or residential
buildings and structures including window cleaning
services, janitorial services, landscaping services and
exterminating services.
Business Office - An establishment primarily
engaged in the provision of executive, management, or
administrative services. Typical uses include
administrative offices and services including real estate,
insurance, property management, investment,
personnel, travel, secretarial services, telephone
answering, and business offices of public utilities,
organizations and associations, or other use
classifications when the service rendered is that
customarily associated with administrative office
services.
Campground - Any area of ground upon which two
or more campsites are located, established, or
maintained for occupancy by camping units, including
tents, travel trailers, and recreational vehicles, as
(October 13, 2020) 7-4
temporary living quarters for recreation, education, or
vacation purposes.
Car Wash - A structure with machine, or
hand-operated facilities used principally for the
cleaning, washing, polishing, or waxing of motor
vehicles using automated equipment operated by one or
more attendants or self-service facilities using customer
operated equipment activated by a coin, token, card, or
other similar means. A facility of this type may be able
to accommodate more than one vehicle at the same
time.
Carport - A roofed automobile structure open and
unobstructed on two or more sides. A carport is subject
to all the requirements for the location and construction
of a garage.
Chemical Manufacture and Storage - The
manufacture, processing and storage of chemical
materials that by reason of materials, processes,
products or waste may be hazardous or that by the
emission of odor, dust, smoke, gases, noise, vibration,
glare, heat or other impacts may impact adjoining
properties.
Church - A facility principally used for people to
gather together for public religious worship, religious
training, or other religious activities. One accessory
dwelling for the housing of the pastor or similar leader
of the church and their family will be considered
customary and incidental as a part of this use.
Cluster - A development design technique that
concentrates buildings in specific areas on a site to
allow the remaining land to be used for recreation,
common open space, agriculture areas and for the
preservation of environmentally-sensitive and critical
areas.
Commercial Center - A group of retail stores with
one or more being a major activity on the site and
where all buildings are planned and built as one
development with off-street parking provided on the
property.
Concrete Plant - A facility, structure or area used
for the manufacture and mixing of concrete and
concrete related products, including areas and facilities
used for the storage of materials required for concrete
manufacture.
Conditional Use - A use requiring special
consideration and review in the manner identified in
this Ordinance.
Conference Center - A facility, separate from
another principal use and providing meeting rooms and
areas for group gatherings, including areas for dining
and accessory parking areas and other facilities.
Construction Cost - The actual costs of
construction, including mobilization, equipment, labor,
materials, and other typical construction contract costs,
but not including design, engineering, surveying,
financing, third-party administration, and other indirect
costs typically associated with construction contracts.
Contractor's Display/Office - A facility providing
for general building repair, service, and maintenance
such as, and including installation of plumbing, roofing,
signs, electrical, air conditioning, and heating.
Contractor's Storage Yard - A facility or area used
for the outside storage of building materials and
contractor's equipment and vehicles.
Convalescent Care Facility - See Nursing Home.
Convenience Store - Any retail establishment
selling consumer products including prepackaged food
and household items, having a gross floor area of less
than 4,000 square feet.
Cost Differential - The difference between the
Construction Cost of the City's required minimum
standards and specifications for the Eligible Public
Improvements, and the Construction Cost of the
Eligible Public Improvements required by the City as a
condition of development approval.
Cultural and Artistic Uses - A building used for the
display of artistic, cultural or historic items, for the
conduct of human performances and similar activities
including, museums, art galleries dance studios, and
concert halls.
Day Care/Preschool (Commercial) - A
nonresidential facility providing for the care,
supervision, and protection of 17 or more children and
complying with all the requirements as licensed and
monitored by the State of Utah Department of Human
Services. For the purposes of this Code Commercial
Day Care includes preschools offering educational
programs to 17 or more children at any one time. All
Nonresidential Commercial Day Cares and Preschools
shall follow all standards for site plan development,
including parking, landscaping, building setbacks and
so forth as required by the GC General Commercial
Zone.
Day Care/Preschool (Home Occupation) - The care
of children within a dwelling unit that provides care for
four to 16 children (including "infant child care" and
"family child care" as defined by the Department of
Human Services) under 14 years of age and complying
with all the requirements as licensed and monitored by
the State of Utah Department of Human Services.
Home Occupation Day Care/Preschool does not mean
care provided to children by or in the homes of parents,
legal guardians, grandparents, brothers, sisters, uncles,
or aunts.
Dedication - The legal transference of an interest in
land without sale by a property owner to a public
(October 13, 2020) 7-5
agency for a public purpose.
Density - The number of dwelling units per acre
with respect to residential land uses.
Depreciation Value - The Construction Cost minus
a per annum depreciation of the Construction Cost of
5% for roads and 2% for water, sewer, secondary water,
and storm water utilities, beginning one year after the
date of development approval.
Developer - The owner or authorized agent of land
proposed to be subdivided or developed or who is
responsible for any undertaking that requires City
review and/or approval pursuant to this Code.
Development Parcel - The real property subject to
a development application (for purposes of this
definition, the "Subject Property"), plus other adjacent
properties with a logical nexus to the property subject
to the development application, as determined by the
City in light of the following factors, among others:
(1) Land ownership relationships between the
Subject Property and adjacent properties;
(2) Zoning of the Subject Property and adjacent
properties;
(3) Proposed density, use, configuration, and
public utility services demands on the Subject Property,
including development phasing;
(4) Proposed or anticipated development on the
adjacent properties, and the density, use, configuration,
and public utility services demands of the proposed or
anticipated development.
(5) City-approved planning documents, including
the general plan and its constituent master plans;
(6) Proximity of the Subject Property to existing
utilities, and the capacity and condition of those utility
infrastructures;
(7) The size of the Subject Property in relation to
adjacent properties.
Development Permit - Any building permit;
conditional use permit; preliminary subdivision plat;
final subdivision plat or other plat approval;
preliminary site plan; final site plan; rezoning; or any
other official action of the City or any state or local
government commission, board, agency, department or
official having the effect of permitting the development
of land located within the corporate boundaries of
Tooele City and subject to the provisions of this
Ordinance.
Disability - a physical or mental impairment that
substantially limits one or more of a person's major life
activities. Disability does not include the current use of
alcohol or current illegal use of any federally or state of
Utah controlled substance, as defined in Section 102 of
the Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. 802, or in the
Utah Controlled Substances Act, U.C.A. Chapter 58-37,
each as amended.
Distribution Center - A building used primarily for
the inside storage and distribution of goods and
materials and the parking and storage of tractor and/or
other trailer units.
District - A portion of the city within which certain
uses of land and buildings are permitted or prohibited
and in which other buildings or land restrictions may be
specified as set forth herein.
Dwelling - A building or portion thereof designed
for use as the residence or sleeping place of one or
more persons or families with cooking and bathroom
facilities, but not including hotel, motel, lodge, or
nursing home rooms.
Dwelling; Cabin/Seasonal Home - A structure
designed to provide housing for the owner, or guests of
the owner, on a temporary basis.
Dwelling; Condominium - A structure or group of
structures, in which units are owned individually, and
the structure(s), common areas and facilities are owned
by all the owners on a proportional, undivided basis
which has been submitted to condominium ownership
under the provisions of the Utah Condominium
Ownership Act.
Dwelling; Farm and Ranch Employee Housing - A
structure located on an operating farm or ranch and
designed to provide housing for employees of the farm
or ranch on a temporary or permanent basis.
Dwelling; Manufactured Home - A dwelling unit
constructed in accordance with the standards set forth
by the Department of Housing and Urban Development
and composed of components substantially assembled
in a manufacturing plant and transported to the building
site for final assembly on a permanent foundation. A
Manufactured home shall comply with all the
requirements of this Ordinance generally applicable to
a dwelling unit located in the same zoning district.
Dwelling; Mobile Home - A structure built on a
permanent chassis, and transported in one or more
sections, is eight feet or more in width and 40 feet or
more in length, and designed to be drawn by a motor
vehicle, and used as a dwelling with or without a
permanent foundation and connected to utilities.
Pre-manufactured and modular homes not placed on a
permanent foundation shall be considered a mobile
home.
Dwelling; Multiple-family or Multi-family - A
structure designed to be occupied by three or more
families, living independently of each other with each
unit having its own kitchen, including but not limited to
apartments, condominiums and townhouses, but not
including motels or hotels.
Dwelling, Primary - A single-family dwelling unit
(October 13, 2020) 7-6
to which an accessory dwelling unit is subordinate.
Dwelling, Single-family - A structure designed to
be occupied by one family, the structure having only
one dwelling unit.
Dwelling; Townhouse - A single-family dwelling
attached in a row of three or more with one or more
common walls between each dwelling unit under
separate ownership, on their own lot or parcel, with
separate private entrances for each unit, and without
direct access between units.
Dwelling; Two-family - A structure designed to be
occupied by two families, the structure having two
dwelling units. Includes a duplex.
Easement - A portion of a lot reserved for present
or future use by a person or agency other than the
owner of the lot. An easement may be under, on or
above the lot.
Eligible Public Improvements - Roads and water,
sewer, publicly-owned secondary water, and storm
water utilities that are required by the City and that
exceed the City's required minimum standards and
specifications for a particular development. Eligible
Public Improvements do not include street signs,
regulatory signs (e.g. stop signs), street lights, sidewalk,
curb & gutter, monuments and markers, landscaping,
privately-owned utilities (e.g. telephone, gas, power,
cable television, fiber optics), and other similar
improvements, as well as features desired by the
Developer that exceed the City's required minimum
standards and specifications. Eligible Public
Improvements also do not include Public Improvements
required as a condition of annexation. The minimum
required standards and specifications shall be based on
the infrastructure needs of the Development Parcel, as
determined by the City.
Extractive Industry - An establishment engaged in
the on-site extraction of surface or sub-surface mineral
products or natural resources. Typical industries include
quarries, sand and gravel quarries, oil and gas
extraction, and mining operations.
Family - An individual, or two or more persons
related by blood, marriage or adoption, or a group of
not more than four unrelated persons living in a
dwelling unit and using common cooking facilities.
Farm animals - Animals that are domesticated and
normally kept on farm or range lands, commonly
referred to as livestock, including but not limited to,
horses, cattle, swine, sheep, goats, rabbits, and fowl,
including roosters.
Fast Food Restaurant - An establishment in which
food is prepared and served for consumption on the
premises, and which includes a facility which allows
food to be ordered and taken from the premises without
leaving a vehicle.
Financial Services - An establishment primarily
engaged in the provision of financial and banking
services. Typical uses include banks, savings and loan
institutions, stock and bond brokers loan and lending
activities.
Food and Beverage Processing - An establishment
in which foods, grains, or raw materials are processed
or otherwise prepared for human consumption,
including dairy manufacturing, canning and preserving
foods, grain milling, bakery products and beverage
manufacturing.
Funeral Home/Mortuary - An establishment
engaged in undertaking services such as preparing the
human dead for burial or cremation and arranging and
managing funerals.
Garage, Private - A detached accessory building, or
a portion of a principal building, used for the storage of
motor vehicles for the tenants or occupants of a
dwelling or specific building and not by the general
public.
Garden Center - An establishment where plants are
offered for sale and including the sale of related plant
and garden items.
Gardening - The care and raising of crops, pasture,
trees, orchards vegetables and fruit.
General Industrial Activity - A manufacturing
operation or processing and assembly of goods which
are not likely to be obnoxious or offensive by reason of
emission of odor, dust, smoke, noxious gases, noise,
vibration, glare, heat or other impacts, nor hazardous by
way of materials, process, product, or waste. Not to
include outside storage or warehousing.
General Plan - A plan for the city, allowed by state
law, prepared and adopted by the Planning Commission
and City Council, and including maps, texts, charts, and
graphs.
Golf Course/Country Club - A facility providing
land area and buildings containing golf courses,
recreational facilities, a clubhouse, and customary
accessory uses, open only to members and their guests.
Grade - The average of the existing ground level at
the center of all walls of a building. In case walls are
parallel to, and within five feet of, a sidewalk, the
ground level shall be measured at the sidewalk.
Gravel Pit - See Quarry.
Greenhouse - A building, structure or place where
plants are raised for experimental purposes, for
transplanting, or for sale.
Guarantee - Escrow bond in an amount and form
satisfactory to the City. All guarantees shall be
approved by the City wherever required by these
regulations.
(October 13, 2020) 7-6.1
Hardware Store and Garden Supply Store - A
facility for the retail sale of a number of basic hardware
items, such as tools, builders' hardware, paint and glass,
home, lawn, and garden supplies; landscaping
materials; brick; lumber; and other similar materials,
but excluding commercial greenhouses.
Hazardous Materials Storage - Means the
importation of hazardous wastes, materials, or
substances for treatment, storage for more than ten
days, or disposal, either for profit or non-profit
purposes.
Hazardous Waste In-Transit Facility - a facility that
transports, stores, handles, or maintains hazardous
wastes for periods of ten days or less.
Health Care Facility - General acute hospitals,
specialty hospitals, home health agencies, hospices,
birthing centers, ambulatory surgical facilities, and any
other health care facility as defined by the Utah Health
Care Facility Licensure and Inspection Act, Utah Code
§26-21-2., excluding offices of Health Care Providers,
Nursing Homes or Emergency Care Facilities.
Health Care Provider - An office, clinic, laboratory
or any other facility engaged in furnishing medical,
surgical or other services including a physician, dentist,
dental technician, chiropractor, accupressurist,
acupuncturist, therapist, counselor or other similar
occupation.
Health Club - A club (athletic, health or
recreational), with full service facilities including but
not limited to exercise facilities, work-out equipment,
showers, lockers, pools and saunas.
Heavy Equipment Sales and Rental - An
establishment primarily engaged in the sale or rental of
trucks of one ton or greater capacity, tractors,
construction equipment, agricultural implements, or
similar equipment. Typical uses include truck
dealerships, construction equipment dealerships.
Heavy Equipment Service and Repair - An
establishment primarily engaged in the service and
repair of trucks of one ton or greater capacity, tractors,
construction equipment, agricultural implements, or
similar equipment.
Heavy Industrial Manufacturing and Assembly -
The assembly, fabrication, or processing of goods and
materials using processes that ordinarily, and are
expected to have, greater than average impacts on the
environment, or that have significant impacts on the use
of adjoining properties by reason of emission of odor,
dust, smoke, noxious gases, noise, vibration, glare, heat
or other impacts. This activity generally includes
processing of large items, products extracted from raw
materials, or products involving flammable or explosive
materials or processes which require expansive
buildings or land areas.
Heliport - Any designated area used for the landing
and taking off of helicopters, including all necessary
passenger and cargo facilities, fueling, and emergency
service facilities.
Home Occupation - An accessory use consisting of
a vocational activity conducted inside a dwelling unit or
a structure accessory to a dwelling unit.
Hospital - A building or building(s) for the
diagnosis, treatment and care of human illness or
infirmity, but not including clinics.
Hotel - A building or group of buildings, other than
a motel, boarding house or lodging house, containing
individual guest rooms or suites of guest rooms and
which furnishes services customarily provided by hotels
which may include reception and convention facilities.
In-fill Development - Subject to applicable
development standards, the permitting of a primary
dwelling upon:
(1) a conforming lot, created by subdivision final
plat approved by the Tooele City Council, located
within Geographic Area A illustrated in Figure 7-1-5.2;
or,
(2) a conforming lot, created by subdivision final
plat approved by the Tooele City council, located with
Geographic Area B illustrated in Figure 7-1-5.2,
exclusive of Geographic Area A; or,
(3) a legal nonconforming lot or parcel of record,
existing on the date of building permit application for
that lot or parcel, whether or not containing a dwelling.
Junk Yard/Salvage Yard - The use of any lot,
portion of a lot, or land for the storage, keeping or
abandonment of junk, including scrap metals or other
scrap material, or for the dismantling, demolition or
abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles, or
machinery.
Kennel - Any lot or premises or portion thereof on
which four or more dogs, cats, and other household
domestic animals, more than six months old, are
maintained, boarded, bred, or cared for in return for
compensation or kept for sale.
Laundromat - An establishment within which
clothes washing and drying machines, and clothes dry
cleaning machines, either coin operated or attendant
operated, are provided on a rental basis for use by
individuals doing their own laundry and dry cleaning.
Laundromat does not include outdoor drying facilities.
Light Manufacturing and Assembly - An
establishment engaged in the manufacture,
predominantly from previously prepared materials, of
finished products or parts, including processing,
fabrication, assembly, treatment, and packaging of such
products, and incidental storage, sales and distribution.
(October 13, 2020) 7-6.2
Allowed Light manufacturing activities will not be
offensive by reason of emission of odor, dust, smoke,
noxious gases, noise, vibration, glare, heat or other
impacts, nor hazardous by way of materials, process,
product, or waste, and where all equipment,
compressors, generators and other ancillary equipment
is located within a building or structure and any outside
storage areas are screened from view from all adjoining
properties and streets.
Liquor Store - A facility, authorized by the Utah
Liquor Control Commission to sell original packaged
liquor or wine for consumption off the premises.
Lot or Subdivision Lot - Any parcel of land which:
(1) has been legally established in the office of the
Tooele County Recorder; and,
(2) has been established by way of or included
within a subdivision final plat approved by Tooele City.
Medical and Dental Clinic - A building or other
facility engaged in furnishing medical, surgical or other
services including a physician, dentist, dental
technician, chiropractor, acupressureist, acupuncturist,
therapist, counselor or other similar occupation.
Medical Cannabis Pharmacy - A medical cannabis
pharmacy as defined in UCA 26-61a-102, as amended.
Medical Cannabis Production Establishment - A
cannabis production establishment as defined in UCA
4-41a-102, as amended.
Membership Club - A facility owned or operated
by a group of people organized for a common
educational, service, or recreational purpose. These
clubs may be characterized by certain membership
qualifications, payment of fees or dues and regular
meetings and activities. This use may include hunting
and gun clubs but does not include Private Clubs.
Military Surplus Yard - Public or private storage
yard for the storage and/or display of military
automobiles or equipment. This use may occur
outdoors or within an enclosed building.
Mine - An establishment engaged in activities on or
below the surface of the land for the exploration,
development of, and extraction of mineral deposits
including rock, sand and gravel, including
transportation, concentration, milling, evaporation and
other primary processing operations.
Mobile Home Park - A parcel of land under single
ownership, approved by the City, and which is designed
to accommodate the placement of mobile,
manufactured, or modular homes on leased or rented
pads or lots.
Mobile Home Subdivision - A parcel of land
subdivided into separate and individual lots which is
designed and planned to accommodate the placement of
mobile, manufactured, or modular homes on each lot.
Motel - An establishment containing guest rooms
or dwelling units, some or all of which have a separate
entrance leading directly from the outside of the
building with garage or parking space located on the lot
and designed, used, or intended wholly or in part for the
accommodation of automobile transients with
associated restaurants, dining facilities and meeting
rooms.
Nonconforming structure - A structure that does
not conform to the yard coverage, height, setback or
other physical dimensional requirement of the district.
Nonconforming use - An activity which is not an
allowed use within the Zoning District and which may
not conform to the use standards, including parking,
regulations in the district in which it is situated.
Nursery/Plant Nursery - An activity where plants,
shrubs, trees, and other horticultural materials and
supplies are sold, including both wholesale and retail
sales.
Nursing Home - A facility which provides 24-hour
residential care to persons who are not related by blood,
marriage, or adoption to the owner, operator, or
manager of the facility, and who do not meet the
definition of family under this Code. A Nursing Home
provides some level of skilled nursing or medical
service to the residents. Includes Convalescent Care
Facility.
Open Space Area - Means and refers to areas
preserved due to the presence of a particular natural or
environmental setting and which may include
conservation lands providing for both active and
passive types of recreation activities. These areas may
also be provided for the minimization of environmental
concerns, including but not limited to, wetlands, steep
slopes, areas prone to a high water table and flood area,
rock slides and debris flows. These areas may also
include natural enhancement areas, nature trails, nature
study, and view areas. Roadway areas including
rights-of-way, parking lots, lawns, setback areas or
other undisturbed portions of building lots shall not
constitute open space.
Owner - Any person, or group of persons, firm or
firms, corporation or corporations, or any other legal
entity having legal title to or sufficient proprietary
interest in the land sought to be developed or
subdivided under these regulations.
Parcel of Record - Any parcel of land which:
(1) has been legally established in the office of the
Tooele County Recorder;
(2) has not been established by way of or included
within any subdivision final plat approved by Tooele
City; and,
(3) is a conforming parcel to the regulations of the
(October 13, 2020) 7-6.3
zoning district in which it is located.
Park and Ride Facility - A parking area and transit
facility for the parking of motor vehicles with a
connection to public transportation or mass transit
services.
Parking Space - An area maintained for the parking
or storage of a motor vehicle, which is graded for
proper drainage and is hard surfaced or porous paved.
Permitted Use - A use of allowed by right under the
provision of the Code.
Personal Services - An establishment for the
provision of personal services including but not limited
to dry cleaners, tanning salon, fitness center,
photographic studio, or travel bureau.
Personal Storage Facility (mini-storage) - A facility
for storage of personal items in individual units, bins,
rooms, or containers. Any unit, bin, room, or container
must be a permanent structure.
Pet Shop/Pet Grooming - a retail establishment
involved in the sale of domestic animals and/or
grooming of such animals, such as dogs, cats, fish,
birds, and reptiles, excluding exotic animals and farm
animals, such as horses, goats, sheep and poultry. The
boarding of domestic animals on the premises would be
considered an accessory use and allowed as a
conditional use, with limits on the number and type of
animals to be boarded.
Plat Amendment - A change in a map of an
approved or recorded subdivision plat if such affects
any street layout in such map or area reserved thereon
for public use, or any lot line; or if it affects any map or
plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of any
regulations controlling subdivisions.
Preliminary Plat - The preliminary drawing or
drawings, described in this Code, indicating the
proposed manner or layout of the subdivision.
Preliminary Site Plan - The preliminary drawing or
drawings, described in the Code, indicating the
proposed manner or layout of a proposed
nonresidential, attached residential or mixed-use
development.
Premises - Land and/or buildings or other
improvements thereon.
Principal Use or Primary Use - The main use of
land or a building (as distinguished from an accessory
use).
Prior Developer - A Developer that constructs
Eligible Public Improvements.
Private Club - A social club, recreational athletic or
kindred association which maintains or intends to
maintain premises upon which liquor is or will be
stored, consumed or sold.
Private Park - An area owned and operated
privately for the exclusive use of the owner, the owner's
guests, or for a fee and providing active and passive
recreational opportunities including uses such as
playgrounds, sporting facilities and commercial
recreational facilities.
Private School - An educational institution, not
operated by a political entity of the State for which
entrance or tuition fees are charged for attendance.
Professional Office - An establishment primarily
engaged in the provision of executive, management, or
administrative services. Typical uses include
administrative offices and services including real estate,
legal, accounting, architectural, engineering, insurance,
property management, investment, personnel, travel,
secretarial services, and business offices of public
utilities, organizations, and associations.
Project - A proposal, application, or the
construction of improvements to property. This may
include clearing and grading of land, construction,
alteration or reconstruction of right-of-way
improvements, structures and associated ground covers
or similar activities resulting from land use approvals or
the issuance of a permit.
Public Building, Public Facility - A building or
structure primarily used for the provision of services by
governmental or public agencies, including the city,
state or federal agencies. Typical uses include public
administrative offices, maintenance facilities, active
open space owned and operated by a public entity, fire
stations, police stations, utility buildings and similar
services. Does not include Health Care Facility or
Health Care Provider.
Public Improvements - Are all public utility
infrastructure improvements, whether on- or off-site,
including as defined in Section 4-1-5 of the Tooele City
Code, and including all sewer, storm water, culinary
water, publicly-owned secondary water, street lights
and associated electrical, streets, curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, alleys, easements and rights-of-way, street
signs, monuments and markers, regulatory signs,
landscaping (including park strip and trees), and other
improvements considered public utility infrastructure
improvements in the construction trade which are found
within typical subdivision and site plan construction
documents
Public or Private Educational Facility - Buildings
and uses for educational or research activities which is
operated by a public or private entity, and has
curriculum for technical or vocational training,
kindergarten, elementary, secondary, or higher
education, including facilities for faculty, staff, and
students.
Public Park - A use operated exclusively by a
(October 13, 2020) 7-6.4
public body, such use having the purpose of providing
active and passive recreational opportunities for the
citizens of the city and including uses such as
playgrounds and other recreational facilities.
Public School - An educational institution,
operated by a political entity of the State of Utah.
Public Use - A use operated exclusively by a public
body, or quasi-public body, such use having the
purpose of serving the public health, safety, or general
welfare, and including recreational facilities,
administrative, and service facilities, and public utility
facilities.
Quarry - An establishment engaged in activities on
the surface of the land for the extraction of mineral
deposits including rock, sand and gravel, including the
transportation, crushing, loading and other processing
operations.
Reasonable Accommodation - a change in a rule,
policy, practice, or service necessary to afford a person
with a disability equal opportunity to use and enjoy a
dwelling. As used in this definition:
(1) "Equal opportunity" means achieving equal
results as between a person with a disability and a
nondisabled person.
(2) "Necessary" means that the applicant must
show that, but for the accommodation, one or more
persons with a disability likely will be denied an equal
opportunity to enjoy housing of their choice.
(3) "Reasonable" means that a requested
accommodation will not undermine the legitimate
purposes of existing zoning regulations notwithstanding
the benefit that the accommodation would provide to a
person with a disability.
Reception Center - A facility for the holding of
events including but not limited to weddings, wedding
receptions, community meetings, and group gatherings.
Recreation Facility, Indoor - A recreation facility
located within a structure or building and operated as a
business or public entity for use by an admission fee,
membership fee or other charge such as a skating rink,
bowling alley, mini-golf course, games and activities of
skill or amusement arcade or substantially similar uses.
Recreation Facility, Outdoor - A recreational
facility operated as a business and open to the general
public for a fee such as amusement parks, tennis
facility, water park, swimming pool, golf driving ranges
and baseball batting ranges or substantially similar uses.
Recreational Facility, Private - A recreation facility
or area operated on private property and not open to the
public, including recreation facilities owned by a home
owner or property owners association for private use by
members.
Recreational Vehicle Park/RV Park - See
Campground.
Recycling Collection Site - A center for the
acceptance and temporary storage of recyclable
materials to be transferred to a processing facility.
Recycling Collection Centers involve no more than
three collection containers up 40 cubic yards in total
size. Collection Centers located in parking lots, may not
occupy required parking spaces. A collection center
must be arranged so as to not impede traffic flow. The
operator of the collection enter shall remove products
stored at the site at least once a week. The operator of
the collection center shall keep the collection center in
proper repair and the exterior must have a neat and
clean appearance. Automated can recycling machines
are limited to two per site.
Recycling Processing Center - A facility where
recyclable and organic materials are collected, stored
and processed. Processing includes but is not limited to
baling, briquetting, compacting, flattening, crushing,
mechanical sorting, shredding, and cleaning. Facilities
where the sole purpose is to utilize recyclable materials
in manufacturing an end product which does not require
further processing shall be considered a General
Industrial and not a recycling use. Organic materials are
limited to tree limbs, leaves, and grass clippings only.
Repair Shop - A establishment providing for the
repair and servicing of household, personal and office
items with no outside storage of goods, materials or
supplies.
Research Facility - A facility that conducts research
and development work.
Residential Facility for Elderly Persons - A
dwelling unit inhabited by persons who are 60 years old
or older who desire or need to live with other elderly
persons in a group setting but who are capable of living
independently. Does not include a health care facility,
nursing home, retirement center, or residential facility
for persons with a disability.
Residential Facility for Persons with a Disability -
a dwelling in which two or more persons with a
disability reside and which is licensed or certified by
the Utah Department of Human Services under U.C.A.
Chapter 62A-2 (Licensure of Programs and Facilities)
and/or the Utah Department of Health under U.C.A.
Chapter 26-21 (Health Care Facility Licensing and
Inspection Act), each as amended.
Restaurant - A building in which food is prepared
and served for consumption within the premises.
Typical uses include buffets; cafes; cafeterias; coffee
shops; diners; dining rooms; dinner theaters and snack
shops.
Retail Store - An establishment for the retail sale of
merchandise. Retail store includes but is not limited to
(October 13, 2020) 7-6.5
antique or art shops, clothing, department, drug, dry
good, florist, furniture, gift, grocery, hardware, hobby,
office supply, paint, pet, shoe, sporting, or toy stores.
Retirement Center - Any age-restricted
development, developed, designed for, and marketed to
adults at or near retirement age, which may be in any
housing form including detached and attached dwelling
units, apartments, and residences, offering private and
semi-private rooms. Retirement Center dwelling units
are limited to a minimum size of 590 square feet for a
one-bedroom dwelling unit, 700 square feet for a twobedroom
dwelling unit, and 850 square feet for a
three-bedroom dwelling unit. Buildings fully
constructed prior to the effective date of Tooele City
Ordinance 2002-21 shall be exempt from the regular
height restriction.
Rock, Sand, and Gravel Storage and Distribution
- The outdoor storage and sale of rock, sand and gravel
in bulk quantities and the storage on-site of necessary
loading equipment, facilities and vehicles.
Shooting Range, Indoor - A structure used for
archery and/or the discharging of any firearm for the
purposes of target practice or temporary competitions.
Site - The land area upon which a Project is
proposed, considered, constructed or developed
including all associated improvements.
Site Plan - A development plan of one or more lots
on which is shown:
(1) the existing and proposed conditions of the lot,
including but not limited to topography, vegetation,
drainage, flood plains, wetlands and waterways;
(2) the location of all existing and proposed
buildings, drives, parking spaces, walkways, means or
ingress and egress, drainage facilities, utility services,
landscaping, structures, signs, lighting and screening
devices;
(3) the location of building pads for all residential
and nonresidential buildings; and
(4) the location and extent of all external buffers
from surrounding areas.
Sports Field - An area which is developed with
recreation and support facilities for the convenience of
the user, including, but are not limited to, baseball or
softball fields, football or soccer fields, basketball
courts, tennis courts, picnic areas, playgrounds.
Structure - A combination of materials to form a
construction for use, installed on, above, or below the
surface of land or water including a walled and roofed
building, as well as a manufactured home on a
permanent foundation. The term includes a building
while in the course of construction, alteration or repair,
but does not include building materials or supplies
intended for use in such construction, alteration or
repair, unless such materials or supplies are within an
enclosed building on the premises.
Subdivide - The act or process of creating a
subdivision.
Subdivider - Any person who: (1) having an
interest in land, causes it, directly or indirectly, to be
divided into a subdivision; or (2) directly or indirectly,
sells, leases, or develops, or offers to sell, lease, or
develop, or advertises to sell, lease, or develop, any
interest, lot, parcel site, unit, or plat in a subdivision; or
(3) engages directly or through an agent in the business
of selling, leasing, developing, or offering for sale,
lease, or development a subdivision or any interest, lot,
parcel site, unit or plat in a subdivision; and, (4) is
directly or indirectly controlled by, or under direct or
indirect common control with any of the foregoing.
Subdivision - Any land, vacant or improved, which
is divided or proposed to be divided or resubdivided
into two or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots,
condominiums, tracts or other division for the purpose
of offer, sale, lease or development whether immediate
or future, either on the installment plan or upon any and
all other plans, terms, and conditions. Subdivision
includes the division or development of land, whether
by deed, metes and bounds description, devise,
intestacy, lease, map, plat or other recorded instrument.
Subdivision includes resubdivision and condominium
creation or conversion.
Subdivision Plat - The final map or drawing,
described in this Code, of a plan of subdivision to be
presented to the City for approval and when approved,
may be submitted to the Utah County Recorder for
filing.
Subsequent Developer - A Developer whose
development is not derived from the Prior Developer's
development, and whose development benefits from
Eligible Public Improvements constructed by the Prior
Developer.
Telecommunications Site/Facility - A facility used
for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic or
electro-optic information, which is placed on a
structure. This use does not include radio frequency
equipment which have an effective radiated power of
100 watts or less. This use is not required to be located
on a building lot, or comply with the minimum lot size
requirement for the district in which it is located.
Temporary - Not to exceed a period of 12 months,
unless otherwise specified in this Title.
Temporary Construction or Sales Office - A facility
temporarily used for a period, not to exceed 12 months,
as a construction or sales office.
Temporary Seasonal Use - Activities related to
specific seasons, holidays, or times of year which are
(October 13, 2020) 7-6.6
open to the public and exist for a period of time not to
exceed that outlined in Section 7-2-20 of the Tooele
City Code.
Temporary Use - Activities which are open to the
public and exist for a period of time not to exceed that
outlined in Section 7-2-20 of the Tooele City Code.
Theater, Indoor - A facility for showing motion
pictures, video, or staging theatrical performances to an
audience, inside an enclosed structure.
Theater, Outdoor - A facility for outdoor
performances where the audience views the production
from automobiles or while seated outside.
Tobacco Product or Tobacco-related Product -
Inclusive of the following:
(1) any cigar, cigarette, or electronic cigarette as
defined in U.C.A. §76-10-101, including the component
parts of and ingredients to electronic cigarettes;
(2) a tobacco product as defined in U.C.A. §59-
14-102, including:
(a) chewing tobacco; and,
(b) any substitute for a tobacco product,
including flavoring or additives to tobacco; and,
(3) tobacco paraphernalia as defined in U.C.A.
§76-10-104.1.
Tobacco Specialty Store or Retail Tobacco
Specialty Business - An establishment in which:
(1) the sale of tobacco products accounts for more
than 35% of the total quarterly gross receipts for the
establishment;
(2) 20% or more of the public retail floor space is
allocated to the offer, display or storage of tobacco
products;
(3) 20% or more of the total shelf space is
allocated to the offer, display, or storage of tobacco
products; or,
(4) the retail space features a self-service display
for tobacco products.
Underlying Zoning District - See Base Zoning
District. Use - The purpose or purposes for which land
or a building is occupied, maintained, arranged,
designed, or intended.
Utilities, Private - Includes power, telephone,
natural gas, cable television and private water supply
service.
Utility Company, Public - Any company, or
municipal department, duly authorized to furnish under
public regulation, electricity, gas, steam, telephone,
transportation, water, or sewer service.
Utility Service Facility (major) - Any electric
transmission lines (greater than 115,000 volts), power
plants, or substations of electric utilities; gas regulator
stations, transmission and gathering pipelines, and
storage areas of utilities providing natural gas or
petroleum derivatives; and their appurtenant facilities
Utility Service Facility (minor) - Any electrical
distribution lines, natural gas distribution lines, cable
television lines, telegraph and telephone lines, and
gathering lines, or other minor service facilities. No
buildings are allowed and the use is limited to the
following sizes:
(1) gas lines less than 12 inches; and
(2) electric lines of less than 115,000 volts.
Vehicle Storage - Public or private storage yard for
the temporary storage of automobiles. This use is
intended for the storage of automobiles, recreational
vehicles, and trailers in a manner similar to or in
combination with a Personal Storage Facility where no
part extraction from the vehicles stored is permitted.
Vehicle storage shall not include the storage of an
individual vehicle on the residential property of owner
of the vehicle that is incidental to the residential use of
the property.
Veterinary Clinic/Animal Hospital - A facility for
the diagnosis, treatment, hospitalization, and boarding
of animals, which does not include outdoor holding
facilities.
Warehouse - A building used primarily for the
inside storage of nonhazardous goods and materials and
including accessory office facilities.
Zoning District - A mapped area to which a
uniform set of regulations applies, and which are
designed to implement the goals and policies of the
Tooele City General Plan.
(Ord. 2020-42, 10-07-2020) (Ord. 2019-29, 12-04-
2019) (Ord. 2019-27, 10-02-2019) (Ord. 2019-13, 08-
21-2019) (Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2018-24,
12-05-2018) (Ord 2018-08, 09-05-2018) (Ord. 2017-
14, 06-07-17) (Ord. 2016-17, 11-02-2016) (2015-25,
12-16-2015) (Ord. 2013-17, 02-05-2014)
7-1-6. Enforcement.
(1) (a) Tooele City or any owner of real estate
within the city in which violations of this Title occur or
are about to occur may, in addition to other remedies
provided by law, institute:
(i) injunctions, mandamus, abatement, or
any other appropriate actions; or,
(ii) proceedings to prevent, enjoin, abate,
or remove the unlawful building, use, or act.
(b) Tooele City need only establish the
violation to obtain the injunction.
(2) (a) Tooele City may enforce this Title by
withholding building permits.
(b) It is unlawful to erect, construct,
reconstruct, alter, or change the use of any building or
other structure within Tooele City without approval of
(October 13, 2020) 7-6.7
a building permit.
(c) Tooele City may not issue a building permit
unless the plans of and for the proposed erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, or use fully
conform to all regulations then in effect.
(d) The city engineer or the engineer's designee is
authorized as the enforcing officer for this Title. The
enforcing officer shall enforce all provisions of this
Title, entering actions in court if necessary, but the
failure to do so shall not legalize any violation of this
Title.
(Ord. 1991-08, 12-12-1991)
7-1-7. Violation and Penalties.
Violation of any of the provisions of this Title are
punishable as a class C misdemeanor upon conviction.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 1991-08, 12-12-
1991)
7-1-8. Construction.
(1) Words used in the present tense include the
future.
(2) The singular number shall include the plural
and the plural the singular.
(3) "Used" or "occupied" shall include arranged,
designed, constructed, altered, converted, rented, leased
or intended to be used or occupied.
(4) "Shall" is mandatory and not directory. The
word "may" is permissive.
(5) "Person" includes a firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation
as well as an individual.
(6) "Lot" includes the words plot or parcel.
(7) Words used in this Title but not defined herein
shall have the same meaning as defined in any other
ordinance adopted by Tooele City, or as defined in
Black's Law Dictionary, current edition.
(Ord. 1992-26, 12-10-1992)
7-1-9. Appeals and Variances.
(1) The administrative hearing officer shall hear
and decide:
(a) appeals from zoning decisions applying
the zoning ordinance; and
(b) variances from the terms of the zoning
ordinance.
(2) A person desiring to appeal a zoning decision
or apply for a variance from the zoning ordinance shall
file the appropriate application, obtained from the
Tooele City Community Development Department,
with the Department Director. Any applicable fee shall
be paid to the Tooele City Finance Department at the
time of filing. The Director shall review the application
for completeness and fee payment and forward it to the
City Recorder who shall set a hearing with the
administrative hearing officer. The City Recorder shall
notify the applicant of the date and time of the hearing.
(3) The powers and duties of the administrative
hearing officer and the standards of review to be
followed in deciding appeals and variances are
identified in Tooele City Code Chapter 1-28 for appeals
and Chapter 2-4 for variances.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2016-15, 10-19-
2016) (Ord. 2006-24, 11-15-2006) (Ord. 1994-56, 01-
31-1995)
(October 13, 2020) 7-6.8
(RESERVED FOR PAGE 7-6.8)
(October 23, 2019) 7-6.9
CHAPTER 1A. AMENDM ENTS TO THE TOOELE
CITY GENERAL PLAN ZONING ORDINANCE,
AND ZONING DISTRICTS MAP.
7-1A-1. Amendments to Tooele City General Plan;
General Requirements.
7-1A-2. Procedures for Amending the Tooele City
General Plan Text and Maps.
7-1A-3. Criteria for Approval of General Plan Text
and Map Amendment.
7-1A-4. Effect of a Tooele City General Plan
Amendment.
7-1A-5 Amendments to the Tooele City Zoning
Ordinance and Zoning Districts Map;
General Requirements.
7-1A-6. Procedures for Amending the Tooele City
Zoning Ordinance and Zoning Districts
Map.
7-1A-7. Criteria for Approval.
7-1A-8. Effect of a Tooele City Zoning Ordinance and
Zoning Districts Map Amendment.
7-1 A-1. Amendments to Tooele City General
Plan; General Requirements.
(1) A proposed amendment to the Tooele City
General Plan may be initiated by any person owning
property in the City, any person residing in the City, any
business owner doing business in the City, the Tooele
City Planning Commission, the Tooele Ci ty Council, the
Tooele City Mayor and City Staff by filing an
application for a General Plan amendment.
(2) If such amendment is approved pursuant to the
provisions of this Ordinance, the applicant may then
proceed to file an application for development approval
authorizing such development if such development is
consistent with the approved General Plan
amendment(s) as approved by the City Council.
(3) Submission. An application for an amendment
to the Tooele City General Plan or General Plan Land
Use Map may be filed with the City on the applicable
application form. Except on a motion duly passed by
the City Council, identifying a valid public purpose and
reasons to act immediately, an application for a General
Plan amendment shall be submitted to the City at least
45 days prior to the first meeting in April, August, or
December of the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 2016-15, 10-19-2016) (Ord. 1998-18, 07-15-
1998)
7-1 A-2. Procedures for Amending the Tooele
City General Plan Text and Maps.
(1) The City Staff shall prepare a report at least
21days prior to the meeting with the Planning
Commission indicating whether the proposed
amendment is consistent with the elements of the General
Plan, the effect of the proposed amendment on
the existing goals, objectives, and policies of the General
Plan, and listing any revisions to the Tooele City Zoning
Ordinance required to implement the proposed
amendment.
(2) Prior to recommending the adoption, rejection,
or revision of any General Plan amendment, the Planning
Commission shall hold a public hearing in accordance
with the requirements of this Ordinance and the Utah
Code, as amended.
(3) After the Planning Commission has reviewed the
application and made its recommendation, the City Staff
shall submit a copy of the General Plan amendment as
submitted to the Planning Commission, the report of the
City Staff, and the recommendation of the Planning
commission, by way of the minutes and all materials of
the proceedings before the Planning Commission, to the
City Council. Upon receipt of the materials required in
this subsection, the City Council shall schedule a public
hearing to consider the proposed General Plan
amendment, the recommendation of the Planning
Commission, and other submitted materials, pursuant to
the requirements established by this Ordinance and the
Utah Code, as amended. The City Council shall approve
the proposed amendment, revise the proposed
amendment and approve the proposed amendment as
revised, or reject the proposed amendment. The City
Council may approve a General Plan amendment only
upon the affirmative vote of a majority of its total
membership. If the City Council approves the proposed
amendment as submitted or as revised, the City Council
shall adopt the General Plan amendment by ordinance.
(Ord. 1998-18, 07-15-1998)
7-1 A-3. Criteria for Approval of General Plan
Text and Map Amendment.
(1) In considering a proposed amendment to the
Tooele City General Plan, the applicant shall identify,
and the City Staff, Planning Commission, and City
Council may consider, the following factors, among
others:
(a) The effect of the proposed amendment on
the character of the surrounding area;
(b) Consistency with the General Plan Land
Use Map and the goals and policies of the General Plan
and its separate elements;
(c) Consistency and compatibility with the
existing uses of adjacent and nearby properties;
(d) Consistency and compatibility with the
possible future uses of adjoining and nearby properties
as identified by the General Plan;
(e) The suitability of the properties for the uses
requested viz. a viz. the suitability of the properties for
the uses identified by the General Plan; and
(f) The overall community benefit of the
proposed amendment.
(Ord. 1998-18, 07-15-1998)
7-6.10 (October 23, 2019)
7-1A-4. Effect of a Tooele City General Plan
Amendment.
From and after the effective date of a General Plan
amendment, as approved by the City Council, no
amendments shall be made to the Tooele City Zoning
Ordinance, nor shall any development permit be
approved or approved with conditions, unless such
amendments, approvals, and conditions are consistent
with the adopted General Plan or element, as amended.
A General Plan amendment shall not authorize the
development of land or be deemed to give rise to vested
rights in the development of land. After a General Plan
amendment has been approved by the City Council, no
development shall occur until the required development
approvals have been obtained from, and permits issued
by, the City pursuant to the Tooele City Code and Utah
Code, as amended.
(Ord. 1998-18, 07-15-1998)
7-1 A-5. Amendments to the Tooele City Zoning
Ordinance and Zoning Districts Map; General
Requirements.
(1) The text of the Tooele City Zoning Ordinance
and the Tooele City Zoning Districts Map may be
amended, consistent with the adopted Tooele City
General Plan.
(2) A proposed amendment to the Tooele City
Zoning Ordinance or Zoning Districts Map may be
initiated by any person owning property in the City, any
person residing in the City, any business owner doing
business in the City, the Tooele City Planning
Commission, the Tooele City Council, or the Tooele City
Mayor and City Staff by filing an application for a
Zoning Ordinance / Zoning Districts Map amendment.
(3) If such amendment is approved pursuant to the
provisions of this Ordinance, the applicant may then
proceed to file an application for development approval
authorizing such development if such development is
consistent with the adopted General Plan and approved
Zoning Ordinance or Zoning Districts Map amendment
as approved by the City Council.
(4) Submission. An application for an amendment
to the Tooele City Zoning Ordinance or Zoning Districts
Map may be filed with the City on the applicable
application form. Except on a motion duly passed by
the City Council, identifying a valid public purpose and
reasons to act immediately, an application for a Zoning
Ordinance or Zoning Districts May amendment shall be
submitted to the City at least 45 days prior to the first
meeting in April, August, or December of the Planning
Commission.
(Ord. 2016-15, 10-19-2016) (Ord. 1998-18, 07-15-
1998)
7-1 A-6. Procedures for Amending the Tooele
City Zoning Ordinance and Zoning Districts Map.
(1) The City Staff shall prepare a report at least 21
days prior to the meeting with the Planning Commission
indicating whether the proposed Zoning Ordinance or
Zoning Districts Map amendment is consistent with the
Tooele City General Plan and listing any revisions to the
Tooele City Zoning Ordinance necessary to implement
the proposed amendment.
(2) Prior to recommending the adoption, rejection,
or revision of any Zoning Ordinance or Zoning Districts
Map amendment, the Planning Commission shall hold a
public hearing in accordance with the requirements of
this Ordinance and the Utah Code, as amended.
(3) After the Planning Commission has reviewed the
application and made its recommendation, the City Staff
shall submit a copy of the Zoning Ordinance or Zoning
Districts Map amendment as submitted to the Planning
Commission, the report of the city Staff, and the
recommendation of the Planning Commission, by way of
the minutes and all materials of the proceedings before
the Planning Commission, to the City Council. Upon
receipt of the materials required in this subsection, the
City Council shall schedule a public hearing to consider
the proposed Zoning Ordinance or Zoning Districts Map
amendment, the recommendation of the Planning
Commission, and other submitted materials, pursuant to
the requirements established by this Ordinance and the
Utah Code, as amended. The City Council shall approve
the proposed amendment, revise the proposed
amendment and approve the proposed amendment as
revised, or reject the proposed amendment. The City
Council may approve a Zoning Ordinance or Zoning
Districts Map amendment only upon the affirmative vote
of a majority of its total membership. If the City Council
approves the proposed amendment as submitted or as
revised, the City Council shall adopt the Zoning
Ordinance or Zoning Districts Map amendment by
ordinance.
(4) The Planning Commission may recommend,
and the City Council may attach, such conditions to the
approval of an application for a Zoning Ordinance or
Zoning Districts Map amendment necessary to
implement the Tooele City General Plan. All such
conditions shall be expressly stated in the approving
ordinance and in the minutes of the City Council meeting
in which such ordinance was approved.
(Ord. 1998-18, 07-15-1998)
7-1 A-7. Criteria for Approval.
(1) No amendment to the Zoning Ordinance or
Zoning Districts Map may be recommended by the
Planning Commission or approved by the City Council
unless such amendment or conditions thereto are
consistent with the General Plan. In considering a Zoning
Ordinance or Zoning Districts Map amendment, the
applicant shall identify, and the City Staff, Planning
Commission, and City Council may consider, the
following factors, among others:
(a) The effect of the proposed amendment on
(October 23, 2019) 7-6.11
the character of the surrounding area.
(b) Consistency with the goals and policies of
the General Plan and the General Plan Land Use Map.
(c) Consistency and compatibility with the
General Plan Land Use Map for adjoining and nearby
properties.
(d) The suitability of the properties for the uses
proposed viz. a. viz. the suitability of the properties for
the uses identified by the General Plan.
(e) Whether a change in the uses allowed for
the affected properties will unduly affect the uses or
proposed uses for adjoining and nearby properties.
(f) The overall community benefit of the
proposed amendment.
(Ord. 1998-18, 07-15-1998)
7-1A-8. Effect of a Tooele City Zoning Ordinance
and Zoning Districts Map Amendment.
An amendment to the Tooele City Zoning Ordinance
and Zoning Districts Map shall not authorize the
development of land or be deemed to give rise to vested
rights in the development of land. After an amendment
has been approved by the City Council, no development
shall occur until the required development approvals
have been obtained from, and permits issued by, the City
pursuant to the Tooele City Code and Utah Code, as
amended.
(Ord. 1998-18, 07-15-1998)
7-6.12 (October 23, 2019)
(Page 7-6.12 Reserved)
7-7 (October 9, 2019)
CHAPTER 2. SUPPLEMENTARY AND
QUALIFYING REGULATIONS
7-2-1. Effect of chapter.
7-2-2. Lot standards.
7-2-2.1. Historic plats.
7-2-3. Every dwelling to be on a lot - Exemptions.
7-2-4. Sale of lease of required space.
7-2-5. Sale of lots below minimum space
requirements.
7-2-6. Yards to be unobstructed - Exceptions.
7-2-7. Repealed. (Ord. 2012-04, 02-15-12).
7-2-8. Additional height allowed.
7-2-9. Exceptions to height limitations.
7-2-10. Minimum height of main buildings.
7-2-11. Clear vision area at intersecting streets.
7-2-12. Fences, walls, hedges.
7-2-13. Tennis Courts.
7-2-14. Repealed.
7-2-15. Lots in two districts.
7-2-16. Lots in business, commercial or industrial
districts adjacent to residential zones.
7-2-17. Transition zones.
7-2-18. Public utilities in residential districts.
7-2-19. Home occupations.
7-2-20. Temporary Uses and Temporary Seasonal
Uses.
7-2-1. Effect of chapter.
The regulations hereinafter set forth in this
Chapter qualify or supplement, as the case may be, the
zone regulations appearing elsewhere in this Title.
(Ord. 1983-05, 04-20-1983)
7-2-2. Lot standards.
Except for planned unit developments and highdensity
single-family developments, or as otherwise
provided in this Title, every lot or parcel of record,
existing or intended to be created, shall have such area,
width, and depth as is required by this Title for the
district in which such lot or parcel of record is located
and shall have frontage upon a dedicated street or upon
a private street. These requirements shall be satisfied
before any building permit is issued. Except in M-U,
RR-1, and RR-5 districts, no lot or parcel of record
shall be created which is more than three times as long
as it is wide; however, the Planning Commission may
waive this restriction at a public meeting upon a
showing of unusual circumstances. Lots or parcels of
record with frontage on private streets shall be allowed
only by conditional use permit or planned unit
development procedure, and shall be subject to all
applicable requirements of this Title.
(Ord. 2013-16, 11-06-2013) (Ord. 1996-17, 06-19-
1996) (Ord. 1983-05, 04-20-1983)
7-2-2.1. Historic plats.
For purposes of this Title, the parcels of land shown
in the historic Plats “A”, “B”, and “C” of Tooele City
shall not be considered lots and shall be considered
parcels of record unless otherwise included within a
subdivision plat.
(Ord. 2013-16, 11-06-2013)
7-2-3. Every dwelling to be on a lot - Exceptions.
Except as otherwise stated herein, every dwelling
shall be placed and maintained on a separate lot or parcel
of record having no less than the minimum area, width,
depth and frontage required by this Title for the district
where located, except that dwelling groups,
condominiums and other multi-structure dwelling
complexes with single ownership and management,
permitted by this Title and having Planning Commission
approval, may occupy one lot or parcel of record for each
such multi-structure.
(Ord. 2013-16, 11-06-2013) (Ord. 1983-05, 04-20-1983)
7-2-4. Sale or lease of required space.
No space required by the provisions of this Title
including side-yards, rear yards, coverage, etc. for a
particular lot or building may be sold or leased away
from such lot or building so as to defeat the provisions of
this Title.
(Ord. 1983-05, 04-20-1983)
7-2-5. Sale of lots below minimum space
requirements.
No parcel of land which has less than the minimum
width and area requirements for the district in which it is
located may be cut off from a larger parcel of land for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, for building or
development as a lot.
(Ord. 1983-05, 04-20-1983)
7-2-6. Yards to be unobstructed - Exceptions.
Every part of a required yard shall be open to the
sky, unobstructed except for accessory buildings in a rear
yard, the ordinary projections of skylights, sills, belt
courses, cornices, chimneys, flues, and other ornamental
building features which project into a yard not more than
two and one-half (2-1/2) feet, and open or latticeenclosed
fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways and
balconies opening upon fire towers projecting into a yard
not more than five (5) feet.
Apparatus necessary to retrofit a dwelling for the
operation of active and passive solar systems (as defined
by the Utah State Energy Office) shall be allowed to
project into a required yard a maximum of twenty percent
(20%) of the required set-back from the property line.
For purposes of this Section, "required set-back" is
defined as that set-back allowed for the particular piece
of property on which the dwelling in question has its
situs.
7-8 (October 9, 2019)
(Ord. 1983-05, 04-20-1983)
7-2-7. Repealed.
(Ord. 2012-04, 02-15-2012).
7-2-8. Additional height allowed.
Public and quasi-public utility buildings, when
authorized in a district, may be erected to a height
greater than the district height limited by a conditional
use permit but maximum height shall not exceed thirtyfive
(35) feet.
(Ord. 1983-05, 04-20-1983)
7-2-9. Exceptions to height limitations.
Roof structures for the housing of elevators,
stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment
required to operate and maintain the building, fire
walls, skylights, steeples, flagpoles, chimneys,
smokestacks, water tanks, radio or television masts, or
similar structures may be erected above the height
limits herein prescribed, but no space above the height
limit shall be allowed for purposes of providing
additional floor space.
(Ord. 1983-05, 04-20-1983)
7-2-10. Minimum height of main buildings.
No dwelling shall be erected to a height less than
one (1) story above grade.
(Ord. 1983-05, 04-20-1983)
7-2-11. Clear vision area at intersecting streets.
In all districts requiring a front yard, no viewobstructing
object in excess of three (3) feet in height
shall be placed on any corner lot within a triangular
area formed by the street property lines and a line
connecting them at points forty (40) feet from the
intersection of the street back of curb lines. However,
a reasonable number of trees pruned high enough to
permit unobstructed vision to automobile drivers,
pedestal-type identification signs, and pumps at
gasoline service stations may be allowed in such areas.
(Ord. 2000-18, 08-16-2000); (Ord. 1993-17, 11-11-
1993)
7-2-12. Fences, walls and hedges.
(1) Fences, walls and hedges may be allowed to
permitted heights within buildable areas. Any fence or
wall over six feet high requires a building permit. Any
retaining wall over one foot high requires a building
permit.
(2) In required front yards and except that area
described in Section 7-2-11, view-obscuring fences,
walls and hedges shall not exceed three feet in height.
Non-view-obscuring fences, walls or hedges in front
yards shall not be more than four feet high.
(3) Fences, walls or hedges shall not exceed eight
feet in height in a required rear yard or interior side
yard, except that on a corner lot the fence, wall or hedge
shall be not more than six feet high in the rear yard area
adjacent to a public street, and in the rear yard area
abutting a required front yard area of an adjoining lot.
Also, that fence, wall or hedge abutting the street and the
adjoining lot's front yard area shall not be view-obscuring
if the adjoining lot has a driveway closer than six feet to
the rear yard of the subject lot.
(4) A fence, wall or hedge not more than six feet
high may be allowed in a side yard adjacent to a public
street on a corner lot, provided it does not extend into the
required front yard area, does not extend into the clear
vision area of a corner lot as defined by Section 7-2-11,
and is not a sight distance hazard to vehicular or
pedestrian traffic as determined by the building inspector.
(5) In residential districts where rear yards and side
yards abut arterial and major collector streets, fences,
walls and hedges may be eight feet high adjacent to such
arterial or major collector street, subject to the clear view
requirements of Section 7-2-11 at intersections.
(6) Where a fence, wall, or hedge is located along a
property line separating two lots and there is a difference
in the grade of the properties on the two sides of the
property line, the fence, wall, or hedge may be erected or
allowed to the maximum height permitted on either side
of the property line.
(7) "View-obscuring" means preventing the full
view of property on one side of the fence, wall, or hedge
by a viewer standing on the other side.
(8) It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or
cause to be erected or to maintain any barbed wire fence,
razor wire fence, or electric fence along or adjacent to
any street or as a division fence between adjoining lots or
parcels of land, either of which is occupied as a place of
residence. Any such fence so erected or maintained is
hereby declared to be a nuisance, and any person so
erecting or maintaining such a nuisance shall be deemed
guilty of a class C misdemeanor.
(Ord. 1993-17, 11-11-1993)
7-2-13. Tennis Courts.
Notwithstanding other provisions of the city code:
(1) A private outside tennis court may be
constructed as an accessory use to a principal building
within the side or rear yard thereof, provided that it is set
back from the side and rear lot lines not less than four
feet and not less then 30 feet from any neighbor's
dwelling. Where an adjacent lot is vacant, a tennis court
must be located at least 15 feet from any side lot line of
such adjacent lot.
(2) When not located on a property line, fences
used for tennis court enclosures may be erected to a
height greater than eight feet, but shall not exceed a
height of 18 feet.
(3) Lights for tennis courts shall be directed onto
the court and away from adjoining properties.
(Ord. 1994-23, 05-17-1994)
7-9 (October 9, 2019)
7-2-14. Repealed. (Ord. 1987-16, 11-05-1987)
7-2-15. Lots in two districts.
Where a district boundary line is established by
this Title, or shown on the zoning map, divides a lot
which is in single ownership and of record, the use in
the other district requirements applying to the least
restrictive portion of said lot shall be considered to
extend to the entire lot, provided the more restricted
portion of such lot is entirely within thirty (30) feet of
said dividing district boundary line. The use so
extending shall be deemed to be conforming.
(Ord. 1983-05, 04-20-1983)
7-2-16. Lots in business, commercial or industrial
districts adjacent to residential zones.
Where a lot in any business, commercial or
industrial district abuts a lot in any residential district,
there shall be provided along such abutting line a
landscaped side yard. The size to be determined by
the Planning Commission. Also, a privacy fence may
be required on any lot which abuts a residential
district.
(Ord. 1983-05, 04-20-1983)
7-2-17. Transition zones.
(1) Where the frontage on one side of a street
between two intersecting streets is owned partially as
residential and partially as business, commercial or
industrial, or where any part of the street is so zoned as
to require a front yard, a front yard shall be required
for the entire block frontage equal to that required for
the most restricted portion of the block.
(2) On any corner lot in a residential district,
there shall be provided on the side street a side yard
equal in depth to the required front yard depth on said
street, except that upon any corner lot under separate
ownership which is less than sixty (60) feet wide, this
provision may be waived allowing a residence to be
erected to within twelve (12) feet of the side yard. The
side street shall be held to be on that side of the corner
lot having the greater length. When a dwelling is
erected to within twelve (12) feet of the side yard in
this manner, it must maintain a twenty-five (25) foot
rear yard, regardless of the location of the garage, or
accessory building.
(Ord. 1983-05, 04-20-1983)
7-2-18. Public utilities in residential districts.
Where not otherwise authorized by this Title, the
Planning Commission, if it determines that the best
interests of the community will be served thereby, may
permit as a conditional use the use of land in a
residentially zoned district for a public utility building,
electrical substation, radio or television relay station,
including necessary tower, and other similar public
utilities, provided that in all such cases:
(1) From the evidence presented, the Planning
Commission finds that it is essential in order to provide
the area with adequate electrical, gas, telephone,
television or radio service.
(2) It shall determine that due to certain peculiar
conditions, the facility could not be located outside the
residentially zoned district and properly serve the City.
(3) All structures on the premises are designed to
conform to the residential character of the districts.
(4) All yard spaces as required for the permitted use
in the district are provided.
(5) Adequate screening is provided for proper
landscaping and fencing where the facility is not within a
building.
(6) Such other conditions are met as may be
deemed necessary by the Planning Commission to protect
the character of the residential district.
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as giving
the Planning Commission the authority to permit a
privately owned or operated commercial radio or
television tower or station in any residential district.
(Ord. 1983-05, 04-20-1983)
7-2-19. Home occupations.
Home occupations are permitted upon compliance
with the following:
(1) shall be carried on entirely within the dwelling
unit or accessory building on the premises;
(2) shall not include the outside storage of goods,
materials, or equipment;
(3) shall not involve any use of any outside yard
area about the premises whereupon the dwelling unit or
accessory building is located, except for customer
parking and except for fenced outdoor areas associated
with a home occupation day care;
(4) shall be customarily incidental to the use of the
dwelling for dwelling purposes;
(5) shall not change the primary character and use
of the dwelling unit as a dwelling;
(6) shall be carried on only by persons residing in
the dwelling unit;
(7) shall have no employees or assistants other than
members of the immediate family, and only if such
family members reside in the dwelling unit, except as
otherwise permitted by this Chapter;
(8) reasonable inventory related to the Home
Occupation shall be allowed so long as such inventory is
stored entirely within the dwelling unit or accessory
building on the premises;
(9) shall not create a nuisance;
(10) shall specifically exclude: vehicle repair
work, body and fender work, firewood sales, commercial
stables, kennels, livestock, auctions, restaurants, nursing
homes, funeral houses, welding, musical instrument
instruction and practice consisting of more than two
persons at a time;
7-9.1 (October 9, 2019)
(11) shall not display signs;
(12) shall comply with all Federal, State, and
local license and permit requirements;
(13) nothing contained in this section shall be
construed to supersede or otherwise render inoperative
the provisions of the Tooele City Code concerning
business licenses;
(14) Child day care and preschool home
occupations:
(a) shall be permitted one non-residential
employee at the home;
(b) child care and preschool home
occupations involving 7 children or less shall be
permitted;
(c) child care and preschool home
occupations involving 8 to 16 children shall require a
Conditional Use Permit and shall adhere to the
following guidelines:
(i) a traffic & parking plan shall be
submitted, reviewed by the Planning Department and
includes acceptable traffic flow, drop-off and
turnaround areas;
(ii) child preschools shall not include
more than two sessions per day;
(iii) No child day care or preschool
requiring a conditional use permit shall be established
within 300 feet from property line to property line of
another properly licensed child day care or preschool.
(iv) the total number of students/children
shall include the licensee's and any employee's
children if they are under the care of the licensee at the
time the home occupation is conducted.
(Ord. 2019-27, 10-02-2019) (Ord. 2017-14, 06-07-
2017) (Ord. 1987-24, 01-02-1988) (Ord. 1983-05, 04-
20-1983)
7-2-20. Temporary Uses and Temporary Seasonal
Uses.
(1) Temporary Uses. Temporary uses shall occur
over a period not to exceed 40 days in any calendar
year including uses incidental to set up and take down
of the temporary use.
(2) Temporary Seasonal Uses. Temporary
seasonal uses, as permitted in this Title, shall not
exceed the time limits listed herein, or 120 calendar
days, whichever is shorter.
(a) Permitted Temporary Seasonal Uses.
Where temporary seasonal uses are identified in this
Title as permitted, the following shall be permitted
uses. Where temporary seasonal uses are identified in
this Title as conditional, the following shall be
conditional uses permissible only following issuance
of a Conditional Use Permit:
(i) Christmas tree lot, not to exceed 45
calendar days;
(ii) Pumpkin patch, not to exceed 45
calendar days;
(iii) Corn maze, not to exceed 45 calendar
days; and,
(iv) Firework sales stand, limited to the
period of time as set forth under state law.
(b) Conditional Temporary Seasonal Uses.
Where temporary seasonal uses are identified in this Title
as allowed, the following uses shall be conditional uses
allowed only following issuance of a Conditional Use
Permit:
(i) Agricultural produce stand and openair
farmer’s market for the sale of agricultural produce,
not to exceed the length the local outdoor growing
season;
(ii) Haunted house, not to exceed 45
calendar days; and,
(iii) Other uses determined by the Zoning
Administrator to be substantially similar to any of the
above.
(3) Exclusive Uses. For the purposes of this Title,
temporary uses and temporary seasonal uses shall be
mutually exclusive of each other and mutually exclusive
of other uses defined within this Title.
(Ord. 2018-24, 12-05-2018)
7-9.2 (October 9, 2019)
(Page 7-9.2 Reserved)
(December 27, 2012) 7-10
CHAPTER 3. NONCONFORMING USES
7-3-1. Nonconforming use defined.
7-3-2. Noncomplying structures.
7-3-3. Maintenance and repair of noncomplying
structures.
7-3-4. Restoration of noncomplying structures.
7-3-5. Nonconforming use of land.
7-3-6. Change of use.
7-3-7. Discontinuance of nonconforming uses.
7-3-1. Nonconforming Use Defined.
As used in this Title, a nonconforming use is the
use of any building, structure, or land which is
prohibited by any zoning, building, or other regulatory
ordinance, but which lawfully existed prior to the
effective date of such ordinance. A noncomplying
structure is a structure or building regulated by but not
in compliance with uniform building codes, but which
was lawfully constructed prior to the effective date of
such codes.
(Ord. 2006-25, 01-03-2007); (Ord. 1995-16, 08-19-95)
7-3-2. Noncomplying Structures.
A noncomplying structure, or use thereof, existing
at the time this Ordinance became effective, may
continue to exist, provided that:
(1) the building or structure is occupied or
utilized for at least 30 days in each calendar year;
(2) the floor space of the building or structure
is not increased;
(3) no structural alterations are made to the
building or structure except as provided by this [zoning]
Title; and
(4) any nonconforming use of the building or
structure not extend beyond the floor area of the
building or structure.
(Ord. 2006-25, 01-03-2007); (Ord. 1995-16, 08-19-95)
7-3-3. Maintenance and Repair of Noncomplying
Structures.
A noncomplying structure may be maintained and
repaired, subject to the provisions of this Chapter.
(Ord. 2006-25, 01-03-2007); (Ord. 1995-16, 08-19-95)
7-3-4. Restoration of Noncomplying Structures.
(1) Except as provided in subsection (3) below, a
noncomplying structure may be reconstructed and
restored after the structure has been involuntarily
destroyed in whole or in part due to fire or other
calamity.
(2) Except as provided in subsection (3), below, a
nonconforming use of a noncomplying structure that is
involuntarily destroyed in whole or in part due to a fire
or other calamity may resume and continue that use
upon reconstruction or restoration of the structure.
(3) A noncomplying structure may not be
reconstructed or restored, and a nonconforming use of a
noncomplying structure may not be resumed or
continued, if:
(a) at the time the structure is destroyed in
whole or in part, it has been unoccupied or unused for
one (1) year pursuant to Section 7-3-7, below;
(b) the structure has been allowed to
deteriorate to a condition that the structure is rendered
uninhabitable, in the opinion of the Building Official,
and is not repaired or restored to a state of habitability
within six (6) months, after written notice is mailed to
the property owner or posted upon the structure
property that the structure is uninhabitable and that the
structure or the nonconforming use of the structure will
be lost if the structure is not repaired or restored to
habitability within six (6) months; or
(c) the property owner has voluntarily
demolished a majority of the structure or the building
that houses the nonconforming use.
(Ord. 2006-25, 01-03-2007); (Ord. 1995-16, 08-19-95)
7-3-5. Nonconforming Use of Land.
A nonconforming use of land, existing at the time
that the land use ordinances applicable to the land
changed so as to prohibit the use, may be continued,
provided that:
(1) the land is used for such nonconforming
use at least 30 days in each calendar year; and,
(2) the nonconforming use is in no way
expanded or extended either on the same or on
adjoining property.
(Ord. 2012-26, 12-05-12); (Ord. 1995-16, 08-19-95)
7-3-6. Change of Use.
A nonconforming use, if changed to a conforming
use, may not thereafter be changed back to a
nonconforming use.
(Ord. 1995-16, 08-19-95)
7-3-7. Discontinuance of Nonconforming Uses.
(1) If any noncomplying structure remains
unoccupied or unused for the period of one year, or if
the noncomplying structure does not satisfy the
requirements of this Chapter, any future use of that
building shall conform to the provisions of the zone in
which the structure is located.
(2) If any nonconforming use of land is
discontinued for the period of one year, or if the
nonconforming use does not satisfy the requirements of
this Chapter, any future use of that land shall conform to
the provisions of the zone in which the land is located.
(3) Upon allegation of discontinued occupation or
nonconforming use of a noncomplying structure,
discontinued use of a nonconforming use of land, or
other failure to comply with this Chapter, the owner of
the structure or land shall have the burden of
establishing compliance with this Chapter.
(Ord. 2006-25, 01-03-2007); (Ord. 1995-16, 08-19-95)
(November 19, 2020) 7-11
CHAPTER 4. O F F - S T R E E T P A R K IN G
REQUIREMENTS
7-4-1. Purpose and Scope.
7-4-2. Parking to be Provided.
7-4-3. Parking Calculation.
7-4-4. Number of Parking Spaces.
7-4-5. Parking Calculation Ranges.
7-4-6. Parking Studies
7-4-7. Parking Location.
7-4-8. Access Requirements.
7-4-9. Parking Lots.
7-4-10. Parking Dimensions.
7-4-11. Public Safety Aisles.
7-4-1 Purpose and Scope.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this Chapter is to
ensure the provision and maintenance of off-street
parking and loading facilities in proportion to the
parking and loading demand of the associated land uses.
The requirements of this Chapter are intended to
provide functional, efficient and attractive parking and
loading facilities, to protect public safety, and to
mitigate adverse land use impacts.
(2) Scope. This Chapter is applicable to all new
and existing development requiring vehicular access
under the provisions of this Title. The requirements of
this Chapter shall not be construed to prohibit or limit
other applicable provisions of this Title, the Tooele City
Code, or other laws.
(Ord. 2019-12, 05-15-2019)
7-4-2 Parking to be Provided.
(1) Parking Required. Every land use established
under the authority of this Title shall provide parking as
required by this Chapter. Each person who establishes
any such land use shall provide the required parking.
The establishment of a land use shall include any
change in use and any increase in the capacity or
intensity of an existing use.
(2) Continual Obligation to Provide Parking.
Provision of parking as required by this Chapter shall
be a continual obligation so long as the associated use
exists, including during times of vacancy. It shall be
unlawful for any property owner, land use operator, or
person responsible for providing parking to discontinue
or dispense with required parking facilities without
providing alternate parking which meets the
requirements of this Chapter.
(3) Alteration Where Parking Insufficient. A
building, structure, or use which lacks sufficient parking
as required by this Chapter may not be altered,
enlarged, or changed in a manner that affects their
parking calculation unless additional parking for the
alteration, enlargement, or change is supplied that meets
the requirements of this Chapter.
(Ord. 2019-12, 05-15-2019)
7-4-3. Parking Calculation.
The following provisions shall be used to calculate
the total number of parking spaces required by this
chapter:
(1) Fractional Numbers. Any fractional parking
space requirement resulting from a parking calculation
shall be rounded up to the next whole number, subject
to Section 7-4-5(2) of this Chapter.
(2) More Than One Use on Lot. If a lot or parcel
contains more than one use, parking spaces shall be
provided in an amount equal to the total of the
requirements for each use unless shared parking is
approved pursuant to this Chapter.
(3) Square Foot Basis. Parking requirements
based on square footage shall be calculated using gross
floor area unless otherwise provided in this Chapter.
(4) Employee Basis. Parking requirements based
on the number of employees shall be calculated using
the largest number of persons working on any shift,
including owners and managers.
(5) Capacity Basis. Parking requirements based
on the number of seats, beds, or other capacity
determinations shall be calculated using the maximum
capacity for those units of measure.
(6) Director Determinations. If a use listed in
Table 7-4-1 identifies the calculation of its parking
requirement to be a determination of the Director, or for
a use not otherwise listed in Table 7-4-1, the Director of
the Community Development Department shall
determine the appropriate parking calculation by:
(a) first, applying the parking requirements
for a use deemed most similar to the use proposed; or
then
(b) second, applying an established standard
specific to that use from a professional publication such
as the Institute of Traffic Engineers; or then
(c) third, requiring a parking study be
provided by the applicant to provide guidance for the
Director to determine the appropriate parking
calculation requirement. The Director shall not be
under any obligation or requirement to agree or follow
the recommendations of the submitted parking study.
(7) ADA-Accessible Parking Spaces. Parking
spaces compliant with ADA regulations shall be
provided as required by the current building codes
adopted by the City and any other standards officially
adopted by the City. Accessible spaces shall be
(November 19, 2020) 7-12
counted towards the fulfillment of the on-site parking
requirement for each use.
(8) Parking Space Calculations. Standard parking
spaces shall be provided as set forth in Section 7-4-4.
Formulas and calculations shown in that Section
represent both the maximum and minimum parking
requirements subject to the provisions of Section 7-4-5.
Uses and terms listed in Section 7-4-4 shall have no
effect on the permissibility or definition of uses.
(Ord. 2019-12, 05-15-2019)
7-4-4. Number of Parking Spaces.
The number of required off-street parking spaces
shall be calculated according to Table 7-4-1, subject to
Section 7-4-5 herein.
(Ord. 2019-12, 05-15-2019)
Table 7-4-1 – Parking Space Requirement Calculations.
Land Use Parking Requirement
Accessory Uses As determined by the Director
Auditoriums 1 space for every 3 seats
Bar, Tavern, and Private Club 1 space for every 3 seats or 1 space per 100 square feet of floor
area (excluding kitchen, storage, etc.) whichever is more
Beauty Shop
First patron station 2 spaces
Each additional station
(excluding wash stations) 1 space
Churches and Places of Worship 1 space for every 3 seats in the primary assembly area
Commercial Center 1 space per 300 square feet
Commercial Day Care / Pre-School Center 1 space for every employee, plus 4 visitor spaces1
Convalescent Care Facility 1 space for every 4 patient beds, plus 1 space per employee
Dwelling2
Single-Family 2 spaces per dwelling unit
Two-Family 2 spaces per dwelling unit
Dwelling, Multi-Family2
<2 Bedroom Units 2 spaces per unit
2 Bedroom Units 2 spaces per unit
3+ Bedroom Units 2 spaces per unit
Dwelling, Visitor Parking3 1 space for every 4 dwelling units
Educational Facility
Public Use As determined by the Director
Private Use As determined by the Director
Funeral Homes and Mortuaries 1 space for every 3 seats
Health Care Facility 1 space for every 2 patient beds, plus 1 parking space for each
employee
Health Care Provider 3 spaces for each doctor, dentist, therapist, or other provider, plus
1 space for each employee
Hotel 1 space for each living or sleeping unit, plus 1 space for each
employee
Industrial Uses 1 space per employee, adequate spaces for company owned
vehicles, plus 4 visitor spaces
Manufacturing Uses 1 space per employee, adequate spaces for company owned
vehicles, plus 4 visitor spaces
Land Use Parking Requirement
(November 19, 2020) 7-12.1
Motel 1 space for every living or sleeping unit, plus 1 space per
employee
Nursing homes 1 space for every 4 patient beds, plus 1 space per employee
Office
Business 1 space per 200 square feet
Professional 1 space per 200 square feet
Personal Services 1 space per 300 square feet
Public Use As determined by the Director
Residential Facility for Elderly
Persons
Bedroom for 1 or 2 Persons 1 space per bedroom, plus 1 space per employee
Bedroom for 3 or 4 Persons 2 space per bedroom, plus 1 space per employee
Residential Facility for Persons
with a Disability
Bedroom for 1 or 2 Persons 1 space per bedroom, plus 1 space per employee
Bedroom for 3 or 4 Persons 2 space per bedroom, plus 1 space per employee
Restaurant 1 space for every 3 seats or 1 space per 100 square feet of floor
area (excluding kitchen, storage, etc.) whichever is more
Retail
General 1 space per 300 square feet
Appliance Stores 1 space per 600 square feet
Furniture Stores 1 space per 600 square feet
Sports Arenas 1 space for every 3 seats
Theaters, Assembly Halls and Meeting Rooms 1 space for every 3 seats
Uses not listed As determined by the Director
Warehouse Uses 1 space per employee, adequate spaces for company owned
vehicles, plus 4 visitor spaces
Wholesale Uses 1 space per employee, adequate spaces for company owned
vehicles, plus 4 visitor spaces
7-4-5 Parking Calculation Ranges.
(1) Purpose of Parking Calculation Ranges. The
number of parking spaces required under Section 7-4-4
may be adjusted in accordance with the provisions in
this section. The purpose of adjustments is to provide
flexibility to those requirements in recognition that
many factors can be unique to various potential uses of
land in the city, to adapt to specific circumstances,
reduce potential environmental impacts, and conserve
resources.
(2) Natural Adjustment Range. Where permitted,
a Natural Adjustment Range allows for parking to be
freely modified to increase or decrease the amount of
parking spaces provided without necessity of requesting
a formal modification as outlined in this Section. The
calculation of the Natural Adjustment Range shall be
based on the true calculation from Table 7-4-1 without
rounding allowed under Section 7-4-3(1) of this
Chapter. In all situations where the Natural Adjustment
Range results in a partial or fractional parking
requirement, the requirement shall be rounded up to the
next whole number.
(a) Residential Uses.
(i) Single-Family and Two-Family
Residential Uses. No Natural Adjustment shall be
allowed and the parking calculations established in
Table 7-4-1 shall represent the minimum requirements.
(ii) Multi-Family Residential Uses.
Multi-family residential developments where the
parking calculations established in Table 7-4-1 result in
a requirement of 100 parking spaces or less, exclusive
of required visitor parking, shall have no Natural
Adjustment allowed and the parking calculations
established in Table 7-4-1 shall represent the minimum
(November 19, 2020) 7-12.2
requirements. Multi-family residential developments
where the parking calculations established in Table
7-4-1 result in a requirement of 101 parking spaces or
more, exclusive of required visitor parking, may apply
a maximum 8% Natural Adjustment Range.
(iii) Visitor Parking. Visitor parking
calculations shall not be eligible for Natural Adjustment
and the calculations established in Table 7-4-1 shall
represent the minimum requirements.
(b) Non-Residential Uses. The parking
requirement calculations from Table 7-4-1 shall
represent both the minimum and maximum parking
requirement. Non-residential developments may apply
a maximum 15% Natural Adjustment Range.
(3) Deviations Beyond the Natural Adjustment
Range. In cases where parking in amounts beyond the
allowances of the Natural Adjustment Range may be
appropriate, the Planning Commission may approve a
request for a modification, by way of a parking study,
to increase or reduce parking requirements based on
findings found in Subsection (4) by not more than an
additional 10% of the calculation from Section 7-4-4.
(Ord. 2019-12, 05-15-2019)
7-4-6. Parking Studies.
In any instance where a parking study is required,
a parking study shall be prepared and submitted by the
applicant for review. Parking studies shall be prepared
by a professional engineer licensed to work in the State
of Utah and reviewed as a part of the land use
application.
(1) The study shall provide:
(a) planning and traffic engineering data,
including estimates of parking demand based on the
most current recommendations from the Institute of
Transportation Engineers;
(b) data collected from uses or combinations
of uses that are the same or highly comparable to the
proposed application as indicated and justified by
density, scale, bulk, area, type of activity, and location;
(c) the source of data used to develop the
study's recommendations;
(d) a recommendation for parking
requirement standard or calculations applicable to the
site for which the study is being prepared based on site
specific factors, data, circumstances, and conditions
compared against study-collected data; and
(e) the name and qualifications of the
person(s) preparing the study.
(2) City staff shall review the study and make a
recommendation to the Planning Commission
concerning the validity of the parking study, the
appropriateness of the conclusions reached, and the
appropriate standard and minimum number of parking
spaces that should be required.
(3) The Planning Commission shall determine the
appropriate standard and required minimum number of
parking spaces required after:
(a) considering the recommendations of the
parking study and City staff; and
(b) making the findings required under
Subsection (3)(d), according to the type of application.
(4) Findings Required. The Planning Commission
may approve a deviation from strict compliance for the
number of parking spaces required or the standard of
calculation to be used only after making the findings of
this subsection.
(a) For commercial, retail, office, and
mixed-use developments, the Planning Commission
must find that:
(i) adequate parking will be provided;
(ii) the total number of spaces that would
otherwise be required for each individual establishment
in the development is overly burdensome or
underestimates the actual parking needed for the site
specific factors of the application;
(iii) the estimated trade-offs between
businesses which are open when others are closed will
not over burden the parking proposed;
(iv) there is an adequate availability of
shared parking for all associated uses;
(v) site- or use-specific conditions or
factors do not provide for compliance with the parking
calculation used or parking requirements outlined in
Section 7-4-4;
(vi) any potential for future expansion or
addition to the development will have or will provide
adequate parking for that expansion or addition; and
(vii) ADA-comp l ia n t par k ing
requirements are not proposed for adjustment; or
(b) For multi-family developments, the
Planning Commission must find that:
(i) adequate parking will be provided;
(ii) the size of housing units, considered
by the number of bedrooms and required visitor
parking, does not support or necessitates more than the
calculated parking requirements of this Chapter;
(iii) the size of project does not reflect the
calculated parking requirements of this Chapter,
necessitating more or fewer spaces;
(iv) the specific parking proposed to be
dedicated for use by visitors is appropriate;
(v) any potential for future expansion or
addition to the development will have or will provide
adequate parking for that expansion or addition;
(vi) ADA-compliant parking requirements
(November 19, 2020) 7-12.3
are not proposed for adjustment; and
(vii) restrictive covenants specific to
the development make provisions to control parking
such that parking for the development will not impact
neighboring properties or public rights-of-way.
(Ord. 2019-12, 05-15-2019)
7-4-7. Parking Location.
(1) On-Site Parking. Except as allowed in
Subsection (2), all required parking shall be located on
the same lot or parcel as the use to which it is
associated. On-site parking shall be made available
without charge for the use of or providing of the
parking. In the case of a multi-tenant non-residential
development in which multiple parcels are covered by
the tenant uses and their associated parking, the parking
shall be considered on-site for all of those tenant uses.
(2) Off-Site Parking. Where practical difficulties
exist in providing on-site parking or if public safety
would be better served by locating parking on a
separate lot or parcel, the Planning Commission may
authorize such off-site parking subject to the following
conditions:
(a) no other practical alternative exists for
providing on-site parking such that any of the following
shall deem a request for off-site parking ineligible for
approval:
(i) the hardship causing the need for
off-site parking is self-imposed;
(ii) the hardship causing or resulting from
the provision of off-site parking is financial in nature;
(b) providing off-site parking does not affect
or reduce the amount of parking required or provided;
(c) required ADA-compliant parking spaces
shall not be located in an off-site parking area;
(d) off-site parking areas shall be located in
the same or a more intensive zone which applies to the
property where the use served is located;
(e) the shortest practical and safe walking
path is conveniently usable without causing
unreasonable:
(i) hazard to pedestrians;
(ii) hazard to vehicular traffic;
(iii) traffic congestion;
(iv) interference with safe and convenient
access or use of other parking areas in the vicinity;
(v) detriment to the appropriate,
convenient and reasonable use of any business in the
vicinity; or
(vi) detriment to any residential
neighborhood;
(f) no off-site parking space shall be located
more than 600 feet from a public entrance of the use
served, measured along the route of the shortest
practical and safe walking path;
(g) off-site parking shall not be separated
from the principal use by a street right-of-way of a
collector or arterial class;
(h) off-site parking separated by from the
principal use by a local class street has adequate and
convenient crosswalk facilities to serve the practical
and safe walking path;
(i) availability of each off-site parking area
shall be assured by an agreement reviewed and
accepted by the City which requires at least the
following:
(i) all parking spaces shall be available
perpetually to all uses utilizing the parking;
(ii) all parking spaces shall be available
without charge; and
(iii) provisions exist for the perpetual
maintenance and upkeep, including but not limited to
snow removal, striping, and signage, of the practical
and safe walking path by private parties to the
agreement; and
(3) Vacant Lots and Open Land. Vacant lots and
open land areas shall not be used as parking areas,
except as allowed for a temporary use or special event.
(4) Parking of Recreational Vehicles in
Residential Zones. Personal recreational vehicles,
including but not limited to trailers, boats and
watercraft, travel trailers, utility trailers, and motor
homes parked in residential zones shall be parked on a
hard surfaced area behind the front wall plane of the
primary structure on the same property. Parking for
such vehicles within residential developments approved
with off-street recreational vehicle parking areas shall
be allowed within those recreational vehicle parking
areas only.
(Ord. 2019-12, 05-15-2019)
7-4-8. Access Requirements.
For purposes of this Chapter, a drive approach
shall be that portion of the ingress and egress to and
from a driveway from the front of the curb to the
property line. Adequate ingress and egress to and from
all uses shall be provided as follows:
(1) One- and Two-Family Residential Lots.
Access to one- and two-family residential lots shall be
provided in compliance with the following
requirements:
(a) Not more than two drive approaches shall
be allowed for any residential lot.
(b) The width of a drive approach shall not be
greater than 30 feet or more than one-third of the lot
frontage in which the drive approach is constructed,
(November 19, 2020) 7-12.4
whichever is less. A drive approach from a cul-de-sac
or curved lot with a frontage of less than 50 feet at the
property line may exceed one-third of that frontage, but
shall not be more than 50% of the frontage at the
property line.
(c) A lot may have a singular 30-foot drive
approach or two drive approaches that total 30 feet
wide. A drive approach shall have a minimum width of
ten feet. Two drive approaches on the same lot must
have a minimum of 12 feet between them.
(d) A drive approach shall be measured from
the bottom of the flares, at its widest point. The flare
shall not be greater than three feet long.
(2) Other Residential Uses. Access to residential
lots other than one- and two-family residential lots shall
be provided in compliance with the following
requirements:
(a) Access to each parking space shall be
from a private driveway and not from a public street.
(b) Not more than one drive approach shall be
used for each 100 feet or fraction thereof of frontage on
any street.
(c) No two of said drive approaches shall be
closer to each other than 50 feet, and no drive approach
shall be closer to a side property line than ten feet.
(d) No drive approaches shall be located
within 50 feet of an intersection of two streets,
measured from the existing or planned terminus of the
curve return.
(3) Non-Residential Uses. Access to
non-residential uses shall be provided in compliance
with the following requirements:
(a) Each drive approach shall not be more
than 40 feet wide, measured at right angles to the
centerline of the drive approach, measured curb-face to
curb-face, exclusive of tapered areas. Upon the
recommendation of the City Engineer, the Planning
Commission may extend a commercial drive approach
to 50 feet wide.
(b) Divided or one-way access and egress
driveways shall maintain a minimum of a 12-foot wide
travel lane, per lane, measured curb-face to curb-face,
exclusive of tapered areas.
(c) Driveways for two-way access and egress
shall maintain a minimum of a 24-foot width measured
curb-face to curb-face, exclusive of tapered areas.
(d) Not more than one drive approach shall be
used for each 100 feet or fraction thereof of frontage on
any street except that a use on its own property with less
than 100 feet of frontage or which cannot meet the
spacing between existing drive approaches on adjacent
properties may be approved by the Planning
Commission for one drive access of not more than 30
feet in width according to Chapter 11 of this Title.
(e) No two of said drive approaches shall be
closer to each other than 50 feet, and no drive approach
shall be closer to a side property line than ten feet.
(4) General Standards for All Uses. All access to
properties shall be provided to meet the following
general requirements:
(a) Where practical, adjacent properties are to
share accesses. Unless a driveway access is shared by
two or more properties, no drive approach shall be
closer than ten feet to the point of intersection of two
property lines at any corner as measured along the
property line, and no driveway shall extend across such
extended property line.
(b) Driveways or drive approaches shall not
be located where sharp curves, steep grades, restricted
sight distances or any other feature or characteristics of
the road or driveway or drive approach by itself or in
combination impairs safe traffic operation. The
relocation of highway signs, signals, lighting or other
traffic control devices necessitated by a drive approach
shall be relocated by Tooele City or its agent at the
permittee's expense.
(c) Driveways or drive approaches which
provide access and egress to and from a street
controlled by the Utah Department of Transportation
(UDOT) must be reviewed and approved by UDOT and
shall be sized according to applicable UDOT standards.
(d) Spacing and location of drive approaches
for residential uses in relation to an intersection of two
streets shall be as follows:
(i) a driveway serving an individual
dwelling unit, regardless of unit type or configuration,
shall be located at least ten feet from the intersecting
streets, measured from the existing or planned end point
of the intersection curve along the back of the sidewalk
to the closest point of the driveway. Figure 7-4-1
demonstrates typical applications of this provision.
(ii) a driveway providing access to a
collective parking area serving multiple dwelling units,
regardless of unit type or configuration, shall be located
at least 30 feet from the intersecting streets, measured
from the existing or planned end point of the
intersection curve along the back of the sidewalk to the
closest point of the driveway. Figure 7-4-1
demonstrates typical applications of this provision.
(Ord. 2020-45, 11-18-2020) (Ord. 2020-02, 02-19-
2020) (Ord. 2019-12, 05-15-2019)
(November 19, 2020) 7-12.5
Figure 7-4-1 - Drive Approach Locations.
7-4-9. Parking Lots.
Every parcel of land containing a public or private
parking lot shall be developed and maintained in
accordance with the following requirements:
(1) Each off street parking lot shall be surfaced
with a bituminous surface course, Portland cement
concrete or other approved surface to provide a dustless
surface. The Planning Commission, following a
recommendation from the City Engineer, must approve
any surface that is not bituminous surface course or
Portland cement concrete.
(2) The sides and rear of any off-street parking lot
which face or abut a residential district shall be
adequately screened from such district by a masonry
wall or solid visual barrier fence not less than three or
more than six feet in height as measured from the high
side.
(3) Landscaping.
(a) Each parking lot shall be landscaped and
permanently maintained.
(b) Landscaping area within the parking lot
shall also be eligible for calculation into the required
site landscaping requirement.
(c) At least 5% of the total area used for
parking and related activities shall be landscaped by
planting new or preserving existing trees or shrubs.
(d) For the purpose of identifying areas in and
around a parking lot that are eligible for consideration,
Figure 7-4-2 identifies areas anticipated for
consideration.
(e) Landscaping islands not less than eight
feet in width, exclusive of curbing, and extending the
entire length of the parking stalls it borders shall be
provided at each end of parking rows. Landscape
islands shall be outlined with curbing to ensure the
viability of the landscaping and separation between
parking and landscaping. These islands shall include
one tree for each parking stall it borders except that
(November 19, 2020) 7-12.6
trees may be eliminated where pedestrian walkways are
provided in their place.
(f) The maximum number of parking spaces
in a row without separation by a landscaping island
shall be 12. Landscaping islands that provide this
separation shall comply with the requirements of
Subsection (e) herein except that the number of trees
required shall be based on the number of parking stalls
bordered on one side only.
(g) Where landscaping islands are proposed
to run the length of parking rows:
(i) those areas shall include plantings
and ground covers with at least one tree per four
parking stalls that front upon that landscaping;
(ii) trees shall be evenly spaced through
the landscaping area;
(iii) landscaping areas may be broken up
by pedestrian pathways that cross the landscaping area
only when that pathway is a segment of an established
and identified pedestrian pathway beyond the
landscaping area and through the parking area
(iv) pedestrian pathways running the
length of the landscaping island shall be not less than
five feet in width;
(v) pedestrian pathways running the
length of the landscaping island may be included in the
calculation of landscaping only when landscaping of at
least three in width is provided between the walkway
and the parking spaces it borders.
Figure 7-4-2 – Parking Area Landscaping.
(4) Lighting used to illuminate any parking lot
shall be arranged to reflect the light away from adjacent
properties, uses and streets.
(5) Alignment. Parking lots which include
multiple drive aisles that access parking spaces, or
adjacent parking lots that connect, function, or have the
ability to function as a single parking lot shall be
designed such that drive aisles align across connecting
drive aisles. Drive aisles which intersect on an angle to
the connecting drive aisle shall connect only as a three
leg intersection which does not interfere with traffic
movements of nearby drive aisle intersections at the
discretion of the City Engineer. Accesses to a parking
lot from an adjacent right-of-way shall align with
(November 19, 2020) 7-12.7
parking lot drive aisles or end at the first interesting
drive aisle in a perpendicular intersection. Alignment
requirements of this Subsection are generally displayed
in Figure 7-4-2.
(6) Where not otherwise authorized by this Title,
when in the best interests of the community as
determined by the Planning Commission, the
Commission may grant a Conditional Use Permit for
the exclusive use as a parking lot on a parcel of land in
residential districts, provided that in all cases the
following conditions are met:
(a) The lot is to be used only for parking of
passenger automobiles of employees, customers, or
guests of the person or firm controlling and operating
the lot, who shall be responsible for its maintenance and
upkeep.
(b) No charges shall be made for parking on
the lot.
(c) The lot shall not be used for sales, repair
work, or servicing of any kind, but shall be used for
parking of vehicles only.
(d) Entrances to and exits from the lot shall be
located so as to do the least harm to the residential
district in an aesthetic context.
(e) No advertising sign shall be located on the
lot.
(f) All parking is to be kept back of the
setback building lines by a barrier which will prevent
the use of the premises in front of the setback lines for
the parking of automobiles.
(g) The parking lot and that portion of the
driveway behind the building line is to be adequately
screened from the street and from adjoining property in
a residential district by a hedge or sight-obscuring fence
or wall not less than three feet, nor more than six feet in
height, which is to be located behind the building
setback line. All lighting is to be arranged so there will
be no glare therefrom annoying to the occupants of an
adjoining property in a residential district. The surface
of the parking lot is to be smoothly graded,
hard-surfaced and adequately drained.
(h) Drainage shall be disposed of upon the
premises of the parking lot, as per the requirement set
by the city engineer.
(i) No private or public garage or parking lot
for more than five motor vehicles shall have an entrance
or exit in any district within 150 feet of the entrance or
exit of a public school, church, playground, or other
public or semi-public institution or facility.
(j) There may be imposed such other
conditions as may be deemed necessary by the Planning
Commission to address findings of identified impacts
on the residential district.
(Ord. 2020-02, 02-19-2020) (Ord. 2019-12, 05-15-
2019)
7-4-10. Parking Dimensions.
Minimum parking space and related dimensions
shall be as set forth in this Section.
(1) Standard parking spaces shall be a minimum
of nine feet wide by 20 feet deep.
(2) Where a front overhang over a sidewalk is
proposed or provided, and the sidewalk is a minimum
of six feet in width, parking spaces may be reduced to
18 feet deep. In the instance where the sidewalk is less
than six feet in width, parking stalls shall be at least 20
feet deep and contain wheel stops to prevent vehicles
from overhanging the sidewalk.
(3) Where a front overhang over a landscape area
is proposed or provided, parking spaces may be
reduced to 18 feet deep.
(4) Driving aisles between or along parking stalls
within a parking area shall be not less than 24 feet wide
for two-way traffic or not less than 16 feet in width for
one-way traffic, subject to Section 7-4-10.
(5) Carports shall have a minimum inside
dimension of nine feet wide by 20 feet deep for each
parking space.
(6) Garages shall have a minimum inside
dimension of ten feet wide by 22 feet deep and a
minimum door width of eight feet for each parking
space contained therein, unless a greater requirement is
established elsewhere in this Title.
(7) ADA-accessible parking spaces shall be
provided and designed according to the provisions and
requirements of the adopted building and fire code.
(8) Angled parking spaces shall be sized based on
the angle of parking spaces shown in this Section, Table
7-4-2 and Figure 7-4-3. Parking spaces positioned
nose-to-nose shall be at least 20 feet deep each.
(9) Parallel parking spaces shall be a minimum of
eight feet wide by 22 feet deep.
(10) Loading spaces shall be a minimum of ten
feet wide by 25 feet deep.
(11) Stacking and queuing spaces shall be a
minimum of ten feet wide by 20 feet deep.
(12) Sites containing 50 or more parking
spaces may provide compact parking spaces for a
portion of the required parking for the site. Compact
parking, when proposed, shall adhere to the following:
(a) Compact parking spaces may be utilized
to provide up to:
(i) a maximum of 5% of the total parking
requirement for the site; or
(ii) a maximum of 10% of the total
parking requirement for the site when combined with
(November 19, 2020) 7-12.8
the following:
(A) a landscaped plaza area near the
primary entrance to the building associated with
compact parking spaces that is equal in area to 15% of
the total building square footage;
(B) pedestrian amenities, such as but
not limited to benches, throughout the plaza; and
(C) pedestrian pathways from the
primary entrance to and through the plaza which
connect to street sidewalks and neighboring sites or
uses; and
(b) All compact parking spaces shall:
(i) measure no less than eight feet wide
and 16 feet deep;
(ii) be clearly identified and shown on a
site plan approved by the Planning Commission; and
(iii) be marked on the surface as
"Compact" and maintained.
(c) Under no circumstances shall
ADA-accessible parking spaces qualify or be sized as
compact spaces.
(Ord. 2020-02, 02-19-2020) (Ord. 2019-12, 05-15-
2019)
Figure 7-4-3 – Angled Parking Layout.
Parking Stalls with Front Overhang Parking Stalls without Front Overhang
(November 19, 2020) 7-12.9
Table 7-4-2 – Angled Parking Dimensions.
Parking Stalls with Front Overhang Parking Stalls without Front Overhang
Parking Angle
A
Stall Width
B
Stall Depth
C
Parking Angle
A
Stall Width
B
Stall Depth
C
90° 9 Feet 18 Feet 90° 9 Feet 20 Feet
60° 9 Feet 18 Feet 60° 9 Feet 20 Feet
45° 9 Feet 18 Feet 45° 9 Feet 20 Feet
7-4-11. Public Safety Aisles.
Every lot or parcel that includes a parking area
with internal vehicular aisles for access to parking
spaces shall provide public safety access and facilitation
aisles. Those public safety aisles shall be a minimum of
30 feet in width, measured from curb-face to curb-face
and as shown in Table 7-4-2, regardless of whether the
aisle accommodates one- or two-way traffic. Public
safety aisles, as represented and depicted in the Figure
7-4-4, shall consist of all aisles that:
(1) provide access from a public or private street;
(2) provide frontage for, or which abut any side
of, one or more buildings or business;
(3) provide direct access to the front of the
building according to the most direct route from a
public or private street; or
(4) are deemed critical by the fire or police
department for access to one or more buildings in the
event of a public safety emergency.
(Ord. 2020-02, 02-19-2020) (Ord. 2019-12, 05-15-
2019)
Figure 7-4-4 – Public Safety Aisles.
24’ Standard Parking Aisles
30’ Emergency Access Routes
(November 19, 2020) 7-12.10
(PAGE 7-12.10 RESERVED)
7-13 (December 5, 2016)
CHAPTER 5. CONDITIONAL USE
7-5-1. Purpose.
7-5-2. Requirements.
7-5-3. Public hearing.
7-5-4. Findings of fact.
7-5-5 . Notification of Planning Commission action.
7-5-6 . Conditions appurtenant to property.
7-5-7 . Building permits.
7-5-8. Time limits; termination of permits.
7-5-9. Guidelines for conditions.
7-5-10. Revocation.
7-5-11. Appeals.
7-5-12. Penalty.
7-5-13. Administrative Conditional Uses.
7-5-1. Purpose.
The purpose and intent of this Chapter is to allow
the integration of specified uses which are allowed uses
of the zoning district, but which may create detrimental
effects upon neighboring land uses and occupants
without the imposition of reasonable conditions
calculated to mitigate those detrimental effects.
(Ord. 2016-15, 10-19-2016) (Ord. 1996-21, 09-04-
1996)
7-5-2. Requirements.
(1) General requirements. A conditional use
permit shall be required for all uses listed as conditional
uses in each zoning district or elsewhere in this Code.
(2) Application requirements. Application for a
conditional use permit shall be made by the property
owner or authorized agent to the Community
Development Department upon a form prescribed by the
Department Director. An application which does not
satisfy the requirements of this Chapter shall not be
heard. An application must contain the following
information:
(a) the name, address, and telephone number
of the applicant;
(b) an affidavit under oath asserting
ownership of the subject property, executed by the
owner or authorized agent;
(c) the description of the property, including a
legal description, street address, and other common
means of identification;
(d) the names and addresses of all last known
property owners as contained in the current records of
the Tooele County recorder, within a 200-foot radius of
the subject property, measured from the closest
boundary of the proposed conditional use as shown on
the development plan;
(e) a written statement indicating the manner
of compliance with the provisions of this Code, and a
written statement setting forth specifically any variance
granted by the City from any provision of this Code;
(f) an accurate scale drawing showing the
locations of the existing and proposed streets, property
lines, uses, structures, driveways, pedestrian walks, offstreet
parking, off-street loading facilities, and
landscaped areas; and,
(g) such other information, plans, maps,
diagrams and information that may be necessary or
helpful to assure the full presentation of all pertinent
facts for the record and to assist the Planning
Commission in making a determination.
(3) Fees.
(a) Application fee. A conditional use
application must be accompanied by the fee established
by Resolution of the City Council. A receipt or notation
of receipt number showing that the application fee has
been paid must be attached to all applications as proof
of filing.
(b) Extension fee. A request for conditional
use permit extension must be accompanied by the fee
established by Resolution of the City Council.
(c) Appeal fee. An appeal from a Planning
Commission determination must be accompanied by the
fee established by Resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 2016-15, 10-19-2016) (Ord. 1996-21, 09-04-
1996)
7-5-3. Public hearing.
(1) Public hearing. The Planning Commission
shall hold a public hearing on all conditional use
applications. The Commission shall consider
conditional use permit applications at its regularly
scheduled business meeting as soon as practicable after
the filing of an application. Applications must be filed
with the City Engineer not later than 15 days prior to the
scheduled business meeting.
(2) Notice. At least 7 days prior to the date set for
the hearing, the City shall mail written notice of the
hearing to each property owner whose name and
address accompany the application. The notice shall
give the date, time, and place of the hearing, the name
of the applicant, the requested conditional use, an
identification of the subject property, and such other
information as the Planning Commission may require.
In addition to the application fee, the applicant shall pay
the costs incurred by the City to provide the required
notice.
(3) Procedure. At the public hearing, testimony
may be given by the applicant and all other persons
either in support of or in opposition to the application.
The Planning Commission may take the application
under advisement, but shall render its determination
within 30 days of the date of the hearing.
(4) Approval. The Planning Commission shall
approve the conditional use application if reasonable
conditions are proposed, or can be imposed, to mitigate
the reasonably anticipated detrimental effects of the
proposed use. If the reasonably anticipated detrimental
effects of a proposed conditional use cannot be
substantially mitigated by the proposal or the imposition
of reasonable conditions to achieve compliance with
applicable standards, the conditional use may be denied.
7-14 (December 5, 2016)
(5) Minutes. All conditions imposed upon
approval of the application shall be entered into the
minutes of the Planning Commission and on the
conditional use permit.
(6) Code compliance. The granting of a
conditional use permit shall not exempt the
applicant/permittee from the requirements of this Code.
(Ord. 2009-15, 12-2-2009) (Ord. 1996-21, 09-04-1996)
7-5-4. Findings of fact.
Prior to approving or denying a conditional use
permit application, the Planning Commission shall
make, in the business meeting at which the public
hearing is conducted or the permit is approved or
denied, a finding of the following facts:
(1) the reasonably anticipated detrimental effects
of the proposed use upon adjacent and nearby persons
and properties;
(2) the evidence identified regarding the identified
reasonably anticipated detrimental effects of the
proposed use;
(3) the reasonable conditions imposed, as part of
the conditional use permit approval, intended to
mitigate the reasonably anticipated detrimental effects
of the proposed use;
(4) the reasons why the imposed conditions are
anticipated or hoped to mitigate the reasonably
anticipated detrimental effects of the proposed use;
(5) the evidence, if any, identified regarding the
ability of the imposed conditions to mitigate the
reasonably anticipated detrimental effects of the
proposed use.
(Ord. 2012-25, 11-21-2012) (Ord. 1996-21, 09-04-
1996)
7-5-5. Notification of Planning Commission action.
Within a reasonable time following the public
hearing, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the
Planning Commission’s action. If the application is
approved, the notification shall detail any conditions
imposed, the procedures to be followed prior to
obtaining a business license or building permit, and the
expiration date of permit approval.
(Ord. 1996-21, 09-04-1996)
7-5-6. Conditions appurtenant to property.
All conditions imposed upon a conditional use
permit shall run with the land, and shall be binding on
the applicants and their heirs, successors, and assigns.
(Ord. 1996-21, 09-04-1996)
7-5-7. Building permits.
(1) Following the issuance of a conditional use
permit by the Planning Commission, and site plan
review, if required, the Building Official may approve
an application for a building permit and shall ensure
that the development is undertaken and completed in
compliance with said permit.
(2) Permit document. Prior to the issuance of any
building permit or business license, the permittee shall
sign a conditional use permit document. The document
shall include a list of all conditions imposed by the
Planning Commission. A site plan may also be
required.
(Ord. 1996-21, 09-04-1996)
7-5-8. Time limits; termination of permit.
(1) Effective date. The date of issuance of a
conditional use permit shall be from the date of the
Planning Commission’s final decision on the
conditional use permit application.
(2) Commencement of construction. Within 12
months from the date the Planning Commission grants a
conditional use permit, the permittee shall substantially
comply with all conditions imposed upon the permit.
Substantial compliance shall be demonstrated by
obtaining a current building permit and commencing
construction. Construction shall be deemed commenced
upon the completion of the foundation for at least one
principal building or 20% of remodeling or other
construction. If construction is not commenced within
12 months, the permit will terminate automatically and
without notice to the permittee.
(3) Business license. If construction is not
proposed as an element of the conditional use, a
business license shall be obtained to satisfy this
requirement. If a business license is not obtained within
12 months, the permit will terminate automatically and
without notice to the permittee.
(4) Lapsing of permit. If the conditional use
should cease for any reason for a continuous period of
12 months, the conditional use permit will terminate
automatically and without notice to the permittee.
(5) Extensions. A request for extension of a
conditional use permit may be filed with the Community
Development Department not less than 30 days prior to
the permit expiration date. Following a request for
extension, the original conditional use permit shall
remain valid until the request for extension is acted
upon by the Planning Commission in a regularly
scheduled public meeting. A request for extension shall
not require a public hearing. A permit may be extended
for no more than six months. Failure to request an
extension in a timely manner shall cause the conditional
use permit to expire without further notice, and a new
conditional use permit shall be required prior to any
reinstatement of the use.
(6) Reinstatement. Where a conditional use permit
terminates under this Section, approval of a new
conditional use permit shall be required prior to any
reinstatement of the use.
(Ord. 2016-15, 10-19-2016) (Ord. 1996-21, 09-04-
1996)
7-5-9. Guidelines for conditions.
(1) Applicants for conditional use permits shall
7-15 (December 5, 2016)
satisfy all the requirements of this Code. The Planning
Commission may establish all reasonable conditions it
deems necessary to protect the health, safety, and
general welfare of the community. In addition, the
Planning Commission may impose conditions regarding
the following:
(a) conditions relating to safety for persons
and property:
(i) building elevations and grading plans
which will prevent or minimize flood water damage,
where property may be subject to flooding; for example,
down-sloping driveways;
(ii) the relocation, covering, or fencing of
irrigation ditches, drainage channels, and other potential
dangers existing on or adjacent to the property;
(iii) increased setback distances from lot
lines;
(iv) design, construction, and location of
structures, buildings, and facilities in relation to any
earthquake fault or other seismic hazard, which may
exist on or near the property, and limitations or
restrictions to use or location of use due to site
conditions, including but not limited to flood plains or
landslide areas that may exist outside of the Sensitive
Area Overlay areas;
(v) the arrangement and dimensions of
truck loading and unloading facilities;
(vi) the construction of curbs, gutters,
drainage culverts, sidewalks, streets, fire hydrants, and
street lighting;
(vii) limits on time of day for the conduct
of specified activities, or the absolute length of time of
the proposed use; for example, commercial and
industrial uses within 250 feet of a residential zoning
district not operating between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.;
and,
(viii) wind energy conversion systems.
(b) conditions relating to health and
sanitation:
(i) the sufficiency of water to serve the
proposed land use and a water delivery system to be
installed according to standards adopted by the City;
(ii) a wastewater disposal system
approved by the Tooele County Health Department
according to standards adopted by the City; and,
(iii) solid waste disposal receptacle
enclosures constructed according to standards adopted
by the City;
(iv) construction of water mains, sewer
mains, and drainage facilities serving the proposed use,
in sizes necessary to protect existing utility users in the
district and to provide for orderly development of land
in the City.
(c) conditions relating to environmental
concerns:
(i) areas that may exist outside of the
Sensitive Area Overlay due to soil capabilities, wildlife,
and plant life;
(ii) processes for the control, elimination,
or prevention of land, water, or air pollution, the
prevention of soil erosion, and the control of
objectionable odors and noise;
(iii) the planting of ground cover or other
surfacing to prevent dust and erosion;
(iv) the restructuring and revegetation of
the land when the use involves cutting or filling the land
and where such land would be adversely affected if not
restructured or revegetated.
(d) conditions relating to compliance with the
purposes and regulations of general plans and zoning
districts:
(i) conditional uses being located only on
lots fronting arterial or collector streets within the
district;
(ii) the removal of nonconforming,
noncompliant, nuisance, or unsafe structures, debris, or
plant materials;
(iii) the screening of yards or other areas
as protection from other land uses and activities;
(iv) landscaping in addition to that which
may be required in other chapters of this Code, to
ensure protection from neighboring land uses;
(v) the location, height, lighting, and
materials used for the construction of structures to
ensure protection of neighboring land uses specifically
if the use abuts a residential zoning district;
(vi) the location, height, and materials of
walls, fences, hedges, and screen plantings to ensure
protection of adjacent development, or to conceal
storage areas, utility installations, or other accessory
features or structures;
(vii) the relocation of proposed or
existing structures as necessary to provide for future
streets on the Official Street Map, sight distances for
general safety, groundwater control, or similar concerns.
(viii) the construction of recreational
facilities necessary to satisfy the needs of the
conditional use;
(ix) increased setback distances from lot
lines;
(x) decreasing the intensity of land uses
to avoid nuisances or other detrimental effects; and,
(xi) improvements which serve the
property in question and which may compensate in part
or in whole for possible detrimental effects to the
district from the proposed conditional use.
(e) conditions relating to performance and
administration:
(i) bonding or other valuable assurance
in favor of the City in an amount to be determined by
the City may be required for improvements or
guarantees of construction relating to the conditional
use permit.
(Ord. 2016-15, 10-19-2016) (Ord. 1996-21, 09-04-
1996)
7-16 (December 5, 2016)
7-5-10. Revocation.
(1) The issuance of a conditional use permit under
this Chapter grants a revocable property interest and
privilege to engage in the conditional use allowed on the
permitted property. The permittee agrees, as a
condition of permit issuance, to conduct the conditional
use on the permitted property in conformity with the
terms and conditions of the permit, the ordinances of the
City, and all other applicable laws.
(2) Any conditional use permit issued pursuant to
the provisions of this Chapter may be revoked by the
Community Development Director for failure of the
permittee to observe, or to assure observance of, all the
conditions specified in the issuing of the permit, or for
failure to observe other requirements of this Code in
regards to the maintenance of improvements or the
conduct of the use or activity as approved.
(3) An action or omission constituting grounds for
revocation under this Section by an agent, employee,
officer, operator, owner, guest, or patron of the
permittee shall constitute the action or omission of the
permittee.
(4) Prior to revocation, the Community
Development Director shall make a preliminary
determination to revoke. Notification of the Director’s
preliminary determination to revoke a conditional use
permit shall be mailed by the Department by certified
U.S. mail to the permittee at the mailing address
identified on the conditional use permit application.
(5) Notification of conditional use permit
revocation shall be mailed by the Department by
certified U.S. mail to the permittee:
(a) if no timely appeal of the preliminary
revocation determination was filed, at the mailing
address identified on the conditional use permit
application; or,
(b) if a timely appeal of the preliminary
revocation determination was filed, and the
determination was sustained by the Administrative
Hearing Officer, at the address identified on the appeal.
(6) The City shall have the right of action to
compel offending structures or uses to be removed at
the cost of the violator or owner.
(Ord. 2016-15, 10-19-2016) (Ord. 1996-21, 09-04-
1996)
7-5-11. Appeals.
Appeals of actions taken or decisions made under
this Chapter shall be to the Administrative Hearing
Officer.
(Ord. 2016-15, 10-19-2016) (Ord. 1996-21, 09-04-
1996)
7-5-12. Penalty.
The following are violations of this Chapter and are
class B misdemeanors:
(1) conducting a use that is identified as a
conditional use in Chapter 7-14 Table 1: Table of Uses
or §7-16-3 (Table 1: Table of Uses) of this Title without
a valid, current conditional use permit;
(2) conducting a use in violation of the terms of a
conditional use permit; and,
(3) continuing to conduct a use after a conditional
use permit for that use has been revoked.
(Ord. 2012-23, 11-21-2012)
7-5-13. Administrative Conditional Uses.
The terms of this Section shall apply only to those
conditional uses listed in Subsection (1). In the event
that the terms of this Section conflict with similar
provision elsewhere in this Chapter, the terms of this
Section shall supersede for those conditional uses listed
in Subsection (1).
(1) Conditional Uses to be Reviewed
Administratively. All home occupation uses requiring a
conditional use permit shall be reviewed administratively.
(2) Application. All applications for a home
occupation conditional use permit shall be filed with the
Community Development Department as prescribed in
Section 7-5-2 herein.
(3) Fees.
(a) Application Fee. An application for a home
occupation conditional use permit shall be accompanied by
the fee established by Resolution of the City Council. A
receipt or notation of receipt number showing that the
application fee has been paid must be attached to all
applications as proof of filing. An application for a home
occupation conditional use permit shall not be complete
without a paid application fee and shall not be accepted.
(b) Extension Fee. A request for extension of a
home occupation conditional use permit must be
accompanied by the fee established by Resolution of the
City Council and must be received prior to the expiration of
the permit. An application for extension of a home
occupation conditional use permit shall not be complete
without a paid application fee and shall not be accepted.
Time limits and extensions of a home occupation
conditional use permit shall comply with the terms of
Section 7-5-8 herein.
(c) Appeal Fee. An appeal from a determination
on a home occupation conditional use permit must be
accompanied by the fee established by Resolution of the
City Council. An application for appeal of a home
occupation conditional use permit shall not be complete
without a paid application fee and shall not be accepted.
(4) Notice of Application. Upon receipt of a
complete application for a home occupation conditional use
permit, the Zoning Administrator shall issue notice to all
property identified under Section 7-5-2(d) herein. The
notice shall include at least the following:
(a) Identification of the property where the
proposed home occupation conditional use is to be located;
(b) The nature of the proposed home occupation;
(c) Identification of the proposed home
occupation conditional use as an administrative review;
7-16.1 (December 5, 2016)
(d) Invitation to submit any relevant information
and evidence in writing to the Zoning Administrator
regarding the application; and,
(e) The date and time deadline, to be not less
than 7 calendar days from the date of the notice, for receipt
of all submitted relevant information and evidence.
(5) Review of Application.
(a) Standard of Review. Upon receipt of all
submitted relevant information and evidence, the Zoning
Administrator shall review the application and the
submitted relevant information and evidence for
compliance with the applicable terms of the Tooele City
Code. The Zoning Administrator shall review applications
for a home occupation conditional use permit according to
Section 7-5-3(4) based on the substantial evidence
provided in the application, the applicable provisions of the
Tooele City Code, and the submitted relevant information
and evidence. In the event the Zoning Administrator finds
substantial evidence that the application presents unique or
extraordinary challenges or the submitted relevant
information and evidence present substantial concern that
the Zoning Administrator deems a public hearing to be
warranted or necessary, the Zoning Administrator, in their
sole discretion, shall have the option to defer the
application for a home occupation conditional use permit to
the Planning Commission for review. In doing so, the
application shall than follow the process described in this
Chapter for Planning Commission review including
noticing and scheduling of a public hearing.
(b) Findings of Fact. The Zoning Administrator
may impose conditions necessary to ensure the
application’s compliance with the purpose of the Chapter
according to the terms of Section 7-5-4 herein.
(6) Notification of Action. Within 7 calendar days of
the deadline identified in Subsection (5)(e) herein, the
Zoning Administrator shall issue a written notification of
determination to the applicant of a home occupation
conditional use permit as outlined in section 7-5-5 herein.
(7) Appeal. Any aggrieved party to a written
determination for a home occupation conditional use permit
may appeal in writing to the Director of the Community
Development Department within 7 calendar days of the
date of determination being appealed. The Director shall
review the appeal according the same standard of review as
the determination and issue a determination to uphold or
overturn the Zoning Administrator’s determination within 7
calendar days of the appeal being filed. An appeal of the
Director’s determination may be appealed according to
Section 7-5-11 herein.
(Ord. 2016-18, 11-02-2016)
7-16.2 (December 5, 2016)
(Page 7-16.2 Reserved)
7-17 December 31, 1997)
CHAPTER 6. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
OVERLAY DISTRICT (PUD)
7-6-1. Purpose.
7-6-2. Definition.
7-6-3. Allowed Uses.
7-6-4. Authorization of a Planned Unit
Development Overlay District.
7-6-5. Application Requirements.
7-6-6. Planned Unit Development Designation.
7-6-7. Authorization and Approval Procedures for
Subdivisions and Site Plans within a
Planned Unit Development District.
7-6-1. Purpose.
The purpose of the Planned Unit Development
Overlay District, when used in conjunction with the
requirements of the base, or underlying zoning district,
is to permit flexibility in subdivision and site planning,
to promote the efficient utilization of resources, and to
preserve and protect valuable site features and to add
desired amenities for the neighborhood or area. The
application of the Planned Unit Development Overlay
District is intended to promote the achievement of
quality neighborhood and site design while complying
with the policies of the Tooele City General Plan and
the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. The intent
of the Planned Unit Development Overlay District is to:
(1) Create opportunities for flexible site
planning and development options where the standard
lot configuration is not practical or desirable;
(2) Provide flexibility in site and building
design, placement of buildings, use of open space,
provision of circulation facilities and parking, and other
design considerations;
(3) Encourage the preservation and
enhancement of desirable site characteristics, including
open space areas, vegetation and critical natural areas;
(4) Allow design, landscape or architectural
treatments to create an attractive and pleasing
environment;
(5) Support reductions in development costs
and the costs of providing ongoing maintenance; and
(6) To allow and encourage the provision of
special development amenities.
(Ord. 97-21, 06-04-97)
7-6-2. Definition.
Planned Unit Development (PUD) is a site plan or
subdivision layout technique allowing buildings and
structures with some or all of the lots reduced below the
minimum lot sizes and/or differing setback standards
than required by the base zoning district, but where the
overall project or site area meets the density standard of
the zoning district. While the underlying zoning district
establishes the allowed use and densities, the Planned
Unit Development overlay district allows flexibility in
the general configuration of the subdivision or site plan
area. Development areas being proposed as a Planned
Unit Development require that the planning for lots and
the locations of buildings and structures be achieved in
a coordinated, functional and unified manner. (Ord. 97-
21, 06-04-97)
7-6-3. Allowed Uses.
The Planned Unit Development Overlay District
does not establish or identify any of the uses allowed
within an area or proposed development site. Rather, it
is the underlying zoning district which identifies and
establishes the uses which are allowed, either as a
permitted, or as a conditional use. (Ord. 97-21, 06-04-
97)
7-6-4. Authorization of a Planned Unit
Development Overlay District.
(1) Qualifying Districts. A Planned Unit
Development Overlay District may be allowed by the
City Council as an overlay zoning district in the
Residential Zoning Districts of the City with a
minimum area of five (5) acres.
(2) Procedure for Approval. A Planned Unit
Development Overlay District may only be authorized
by the City Council, as an amendment to the Tooele
city Zoning District Map, after receipt of a
recommendation from the Planning Commission, and
after complying with all the requirements of §10-9-403,
Utah Code Annotated (U.C.A.). In evaluating the
appropriateness of approving a Planned Unit
Development Overlay District the City Council and
Planning Commission may consider the following
factors, among others:
(a) The suitability of the properties for a
Planned Unit Development Overlay District
designation;
(b) That adequate public services and
facilities exist or can be provided to serve the proposed
Planned Unit Development area;
(c) A Planned Unit Development area will
encourage greater efficiency in the delivery of Cityprovided
services ;
(d) The Planned Unit Development has the
potential of providing additional amenities for the
residents of the area, or the residents of the City, than
would be achieved by a conventional development
pattern;
(e) Whether the establishment of a Planned
Unit Development District will have a negative affect
on the rights, enjoyment and uses on nearby and
adjoining properties; and
(f) The gain to the public health, safety and
welfare and the overall community benefit to
authorizing a Planned Unit Development designation.
(Ord. 97-21, 06-04-97)
7-6-5. Application Requirements.
7-18 December 31, 1997)
Applications for a Planned Unit Development
Overlay district shall provide the following information
in addition to the information generally required by the
City for a Zoning District Map amendment (rezoning)
application:
(1) Representative architectural drawings and
elevations of proposed dwellings, structures and other
buildings;
(2) Concept subdivision layout or site plan
design, as the case may be, showing the general
locations of all buildings, structures, parking areas,
open space areas, streets and roads and other private
and public improvements;
(3) Tables showing the total number of acres
in the proposed development identifying the
percentages of the total area devoted to each proposed
use including residential structures, residential lots,
parking areas, streets and roads, parks, open space
areas, and any other uses, and a tabulation of the overall
density for the development site;
(4) Any other information, reasonable related
to the application that the Planning Commission and
City Council may require to determine the
appropriateness of authorizing a Planned Unit
Development Overlay District designation. (Ord. 97-
21, 06-04-97)
7-6-6. Planned Unit Development Designation.
Following the receipt of a Planning Commission
recommendation and following the requirements of
§10-9-403 U.C.A. the City Council may authorize that
the Tooele City Zoning District Map be amended to
allow a Planned Unit Development Overlay District. If
this occurs the underlying district designation shall be
followed by the “PUD” identifier, i.e. if a single family
R1-12 district is the underlying district the revised or
amended district classification would be R1-12(PUD),
indicating the R1-12 district as the underlying zoning
district and the Planned Unit Development District as
the overlay zoning district. (Ord. 97-21, 06-04-97)
7-6-7. Authorization and Approval Procedures for
Subdivisions and Site Plans within a Planned Unit
Development District.
All subdivision and site plan layouts and designs
proposed within a Planned Unit Development Overlay
District shall be reviewed and considered pursuant to
the procedures as established in Chapter 19 of this
Ordinance for subdivision applications of Chapter 11 of
this Ordinance for site plan applications.
(1) Application Requirements. Applications for
preliminary and final subdivision plat and preliminary
and final site plan review and approval must contain all
information required by the City for subdivision
approval as identified in Chapter 19, or for site plan
approval as identified in Chapter 11 as well as the
following:
(a) A statement of how the purpose and intent
of this Chapter will be achieved by the proposed
Planned Unit Development (PUD) project. The
statement should include sketches or illustrations of the
proposed character of the development, including
architecture of buildings and a description of how the
development will relate to surrounding land uses.
(b) A summary report identifying: the
different land uses, including the amount of land for
housing, open areas, streets, and parking; the number
and type of housing units; and a statement of how
necessary services will be provided and whether the
services will be publicly or privately owned and
operated.
(c) Preliminary architectural drawings and
elevations of proposed dwellings, structures and other
buildings.
(2) Allowed Density. The density allowed by a
Planned Unit Development designation shall not exceed
the density allowed by the underlying zoning district.
(3) Calculation of Density. The density allowed in
a Planned Unit Development area is to be calculated in
the following manner:
(a) Land set aside or dedicated for schools,
religious institutions, and public or quasi-public
activities (excluding park and open space areas) is to be
subtracted from the gross site area to determine net
usable site area.
(b) Net usable site area is multiplied by the
density allowed by the underlying zoning district, as
established in the Table of Allowed Residential Density
(Table 2, Table of Allowed Residential Density;
Residential Zoning Districts) to identify the maximum
number of residential units allowed.
(c) If the Planned Unit Development project
is to be located in more than one residential zoning
district, the total number of residential units allowed is
calculated by adding the number of units allowed by
each zoning district. Dwelling units may be placed
without regard to district boundaries, provided the total
number of units do not exceed that allowed by the
underlying zoning districts.
(d) Lot Sizes. In a Planned Unit
Development area there is no minimum lot size
requirement (area, width, or depth). However, lot sizes
must be adequate to promote compatibility with
adjoining activities on and off the development site as
determined by the Planning Commission and City
Council.
(e) Housing Types Allowed. Dwelling units
allowed are to be consistent with the types of housing
units allowed by the underlying zoning district.
(f) Building Locations and Setbacks. The
proposed building areas, and proposed setback lines for
all buildings and structures must be shown on the
preliminary and final plat or site plan. Along the
perimeter of the development site / project area, all
development must meet the building setback standards
of the underlying zoning district. Within the site,
7-19 December 31, 1997)
building setbacks and building separation is to be
established as part of the preliminary subdivision plat or
preliminary site plan review and approval process
sufficient to promote a functional, attractive and
compatible development.
(g) Height. The height limit of the underlying
zoning district applies.
(h) Open Space and Park Areas. Park and
open space areas provided within a Planned Unit
Development may be proposed for dedication to the
City. Open space and park areas proposed for
dedication to the City may be received by the City, at
the discretion of the City Council, following the receipt
of a Planning Commission recommendation. All open
space areas and park areas provided as part of a Planned
Unit Development must be in common ownership, city
ownership, or held in a form acceptable to the City to
guarantee access and continued preservation and
maintenance.
(i) Maintenance of Open Space Areas.
Unless dedicated and accepted by the City, an
enforceable maintenance agreement for any commonly
owned areas must be created and recorded with the
Tooele County Recorder, and a copy of the recorded
agreement provided to the City. The final plat or site
plan shall also carry a note identifying the existence of
the recorded maintenance agreement. Prior to
recordation the agreement must be approved by the City
Attorney to assure that the City’s interests are
maintained and protected.
(j) Provision of Services and Improvements
Standards. It is the responsibility of the applicant to
provide all service facilities necessary for the
functioning of the Planned Unit Development project
consistent with the requirements generally imposed on
subdivision or site plan approvals, including
compliance with the City’s public improvement, design
and construction standards.
(k) Phased Development Procedures. An
applicant may submit a preliminary subdivision plat or
preliminary site plan for the entire Planned Unit
Development area with proposed phased final
subdivision plats and / or phased final site plans.
(l) Amendments to the Planned Unit
Development Subdivision Plats and Site Plans.
Applicants may be granted revisions to approved
preliminary or final Planned Unit Development
subdivision plats or site plans by following the
amendment procedures for subdivision plats and site
plans as identified in this Ordinance and as required by
applicable State law requirements. Requests for
revisions must be submitted in writing to the City.
Changes and amendments to approved preliminary and
final Planned Unit Development plans are processed
following the same procedures as the original review
and approval.
(m) Certificates of Occupancy. Certificates of
occupancy will not be issued unless all improvements
and conditions of approval have been fulfilled to the
satisfaction of the City Engineer and Building Official.
(Ord. 97-21, 06-04-97)
(December 31, 1997) 7-20
CHAPTER 7. Repealed. (Ord. 97-21, 06-04-97)
(June 20, 2005) 7-21
CHAPTER 8. MOBILE HOME PARKS
7-8-1. Purpose.
7-8-1a. Definitions.
7-8-2. Requirements for set-up of manufactured
homes in mobile home parks and mobile
home subdivisions within Tooele City.
7-8-3. Mobile home parks.
7-8-1. Purpose.
No manufactured home or trailer shall be placed on
any tract or parcel of land within the limits of Tooele
City other than in mobile home parks or recreational
vehicle parks heretofore existing or established in
compliance with the terms and conditions set forth
herein, not to include, however, land used for parking or
storage of a personal trailer not in use, and land used
exclusively for the retail sale of manufactured homes.
(Ord. 2004-11, 09-15-04); (Ord. 83-05, 04-20-83)
7-8-1a. Definitions.
Words and phrases not defined in this Section shall
have the meanings set forth in U.C.A. §58-56-3, if there
defined, then in this Code, if defined, or then their
commonly understood meanings.
(1) “HUD code” means the National Manufactured
Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, 42
U.S.C. Sec. 5401 et seq.
(2) “Manufactured home” means a transportable
factory built housing unit constructed on or after June
15, 1976, according to the HUD Code, in one or more
sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body
feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length,
or when erected on site, is 400 or more square feet, and
which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to
be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities, and
includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and
electrical systems. Manufactured homes constructed on
or after June 15, 1976, shall be identifiable by the
manufacturer’s data plate bearing the date the unit was
manufactured and a HUD label attached to the exterior
of the home certifying the home was manufactured to
HUD standards. “Manufactured home” includes in its
meaning the term “mobile home” as used in other Titles
and Chapters of this Code.
(3) “Mobile home” means a transportable factory
built housing unit built prior to June 15, 1976, in
accordance with a state mobile home code which
existed prior to the HUD Code.
(4) “Mobile home park” and “mobile home
subdivision” mean those land developments authorized
by City approval to contain manufactured homes.
(Ord. 2004-11, 09-15-04)
7-8-2. Requirements for set-up of manufactured
homes in mobile home parks and mobile home
subdivisions within Tooele City.
(1) A building permit shall be required for the setup
of any manufactured home within a mobile home
park. The permit fee shall be as established by
resolution of the City Council.
(2) A building permit shall be required for the setup
of any manufactured home in a mobile home
subdivision. The permit fee shall be as established by
resolution of the City Council.
(3) Manufactured homes set up in Tooele City
shall meet the standards of the Utah State Division of
Manufactured Housing and Recreational Vehicles and
carry the design approval label of the Department of
Housing and Urban Development.
(4) Manufactured homes in mobile home parks
shall be set up to comply with the following:
(a) the home manufacturer’s written
specifications; or,
(b) the American National Standard,
Manufactured Home Instruc tions Guide
(NCSBCS/ANSI A225.1).
(c) All manufactured homes shall be skirted
in an approved manner.
(d) Stairs and landings serving manufactured
homes shall conform to Section R311 of the
International Residential Code.
(e) Electrical services shall meet the
requirements of the current edition of the National
Electrical Code, and the power company.
(f) Sewer and water connections shall meet
the requirements of the International Plumbing Code
and the Tooele City Sewer and Water Departments.
(g) Gas equipment and installations shall
conform to requirements of the International Fuel Gas
Code and the gas supplier.
(h) Alterations or additions to manufactured
homes shall not be made except when a permit is first
obtained from the Division of Manufactured Housing
and Recreational Vehicles, Utah State Department of
Business Regulation and a building permit obtained
from the Tooele City Building Official.
(5) Manufactured homes in mobile home
subdivisions shall be set up to comply with all of the
foundation, site, and other requirements applicable to
single-family dwellings.
(6) Notwithstanding other requirements of this
chapter to the contrary, a mobile home located in a
mobile home park in Tooele City may be relocated to
an existing space in another mobile home park when the
relocation is necessitated by the closing of the former
mobile home park by its owner. A copy of a written
contract or notice shall be sufficient evidence of closure
to allow the relocation. A mobile home may not be
relocated to a mobile home subdivision or building lot.
A relocated mobile home shall comply with all of the
permitting requirements of this Chapter and all
applicable Codes.
(Ord. 2005-16, 06-15-2005); (Ord. 2004-11, 09-15-04);
(Ord. 83-05, 04-20-83)
(June 20, 2005) 7-22
7-8-3. Mobile home parks.
No person shall set aside any tract or parcel of land
within Tooele City designed for use as a mobile home
park except in zones provided in this Title and upon
compliance with the following provisions and
conditions.
(1) Concept: The proposed development shall be
submitted in accordance with Title 7, Chapter 19, of the
Tooele City Code, and at a regularly convened meeting
of the Planning Commission. The developer shall
provide a map showing the proposed layout of the
development including buildings, streets, lot lines, etc.
The developer shall also provide floor plans, elevation
views and architectural renderings of all proposed
buildings and structures. The Planning Commission
shall then grant or deny concept approval based upon
the criteria set forth at Title 7, Chapter 19, of the Tooele
City Code.
(2) Plat: A preliminary plat for each proposed
mobile home park shall be prepared by a professional
engineer or architect for approval pursuant to the
following procedures and requirements:
(a) At least ten (10) business days prior to a
Planning Commission meeting, the applicant shall
submit to the Community Development Department a
minimum of five (5) copies of a preliminary plat with
appropriate attached exhibits for the proposed mobile
home park or recreational vehicle park which shall
contain the following information:
(i) Proposed boundary lines indicating
bearings and distances for the park.
(b) The location, width, and purpose of all
easements of the park, either existing or proposed. The
names, right-of-way widths and locations of all streets
proposed or existing, indicating the type, width and
elevation of surfacing.
(c) The type, width, and elevation of
proposed or existing walks, curbs, gutters, and culverts,
and any legally established centerline elevations.
(d) The location and size of all sanitary
sewer lines and water lines existing or proposed in the
tract.
(e) Water courses, marshes, rock outcroppings,
wooded areas, isolated preservable trees one
(1) foot or more in caliper at one (1) foot above ground
level, houses, barns, shacks, or other significant features
existing upon the premises.
(f) Other conditions on adjacent ground,
including approximate direction and gradient of ground
slope, character and location of buildings, railroads,
power lines, towers, and uses. If any adjacent ground is
platted as a subdivision, indicate the subdivision name,
recording data, approximate percent of build-up, typical
lot size, and dwelling type.
(g) Lot lines, lot dimensions, lot numbers,
and block numbers, if any.
(h) Sufficient information to show the
direction of flow of surface drainage and the means of
disposal.
(i) Sites, if any, to be reserved or dedicated
for schools, parks, playgrounds, or other public uses.
(j) Sites, if any, for all service buildings and
other accessory structures on the premises.
(k) Site data, including number of
residential lots, typical lot size, acres in the park,
proposed name of the park, location by section,
township and range, name and address of the applicant,
name and address of the planner or engineer, title, scale,
northpoint, and date. The scale shall be one hundred
(100) feet to the inch.
(l) The location of all fire hydrants, street
lights, proposed shrubbery and trees, boundary fences
or landscape screens, driveways, sidewalks, and parking
areas.
(m) The protective covenants for the park, if
any.
(n) A letter from each utility company
involved in the park addressed to the Planning
Commission upon letterhead of the utility company,
stating that the preliminary plan has been reviewed and
any comments regarding the utility service design and
easements.
(o) An exact copy of a preliminary report of
a title insurance company, a title insurance policy of an
attorney's opinion brought to date of the application,
setting forth the names of all property owners of
property included in the park as shown as the
preliminary plat, as well as mortgages, judgments, liens,
easements, contracts, and other clouds affecting title to
the premises. The City may require all persons having
an interest in the premises as disclosed by the report,
policy, or opinion, to join in and approve of the park
application.
(p) When a proposed street of the park will
intersect a State or a County highway, or a railroad,
written consent of the appropriate authority having
jurisdiction over said highway or railroad shall be
submitted.
(q) If the proposed park is being submitted
to a federal agency for federally guaranteed loans,
grants, or aid, copies of all application forms and
addenda must be attached.
(3) Conditions for approval by Planning
Commission: The minimum conditions required for
final approval of all mobile home park plats are as
follows:
(a) The minimum number of spaces to be
completed and ready for occupancy during the first
phase of development shall be ten (10).
(b) The intent of a mobile home park is for
a long-term residential occupancy; therefore, no space
shall be rented for a period of less than thirty (30) days,
except in those portions of the park which are especially
approved as a recreational vehicle area.
(c) Service buildings, including a park
office building, automatic laundry and dry cleaning
facilities, beauty shops, and barber shops may be
permitted in the park, subject to the following:
(June 20, 2005) 7-23
(i) The buildings and their yard areas and
parking areas shall not occupy over ten percent (10%)
of the net area of the park.
(ii) The buildings shall be designed in
keeping with the residential character of the district, and
shall be so located and designed as to serve the needs of
the persons residing within the park only.
(iii) There shall be no evidence of the
nature of the commercial services offered, such as
display windows or signs.
(iv) No advertising of any type shall be
allowed outside the park premises.
(4) Off-street parking area shall be provided at
the rate of at least two (2) vehicle spaces for each
manufactured home lot.
(5) There shall be a completely landscaped buffer
area of at least twenty-five (25) feet in width,
completely surrounding the mobile home park and the
park shall be fenced with a sightly fence as approved by
the Planning Commission of at least five (5) feet in
height.
(6) There shall be at least twenty (20) feet
between manufactured homes, and at least fifteen (15)
feet between an individual manufactured home and the
common sidewalk, street and parking areas, or other
common areas of the park. There shall be at least a ten
(10) foot rear yard for each manufactured home on each
lot on which an accessory building is to be allowed. No
accessory building shall exceed eighty (80) square feet
in area. Awnings are allowed on all four (4) sides of
manufactured homes as an attachment to the side
thereof, provided there is at least ten (10) feet from the
awning to any manufactured home on an adjoining lot.
Any enclosure of an awning area shall meet the
building code requirements of the City.
(7) All mobile home parks shall be provided with
safe and convenient vehicular access from abutting
major public streets and access shall be designed to
minimize congestion and allow free flow of traffic on
such adjacent streets. The entrance road connecting the
park with a public street shall have a minimum paved
width of thirty-four (34) feet. Internal streets shall have
a minimum paved width of twenty-four (24) feet; and if
parallel parking is permitted on the streets, the
minimum paved width shall be forty-four (44) feet. No
parking shall be permitted on the access road to the
public street.
(8) Concrete sidewalks shall be provided from all
manufactured home sites to all parks, streets and
common areas.
(9) A drainage system shall be provided to
completely handle all surface drainage within the park
in a manner approved by the City Engineer.
(10) The City may require mobile home parks to
provide and maintain landscaped recreational areas of a
minimum size of one-hundred (100) square feet per lot,
space in such configuration as is deemed reasonable
considering the nature and intended use of the park.
There shall be no neon, illuminated flood-lighted or
flashing or moving signs. All signs shall be kept to an
absolute minimum, and no sign shall exceed nine (9)
square feet in area.
(11) All other provisions of the City ordinances
and building codes respecting the standards of
construction and licensing of mobile home parks shall
be complied with.
(12) Where a mobile home park has direct access
to a major highway, the Planning Commission may
approve the use of a portion of the park as a recreational
vehicle park, provided the requirements of the
recreational vehicle park chapter of this Title are met.
The Planning Commission shall have authority to
approve site plan development of all mobile home parks
and recreational parks and may impose any additional
conditions, including increasing the above standards
and requiring the approval of operating and
management standards which are found by the
Commission to be necessary to insure the proper
development of the park in accordance with the area
wherein it is proposed to be located.
(13) Repealed.
(Ord. 93-04, 05-04-93)
(14) Repealed.
(Ord. 93-04, 05-04-93)
(15) Approval by Planning Commission:
Approval may be granted the applicant by the Planning
Commission if the Commission has found that the
proposed development is in keeping with the character
of the district within which it is located and will not
prevent the proper use of adjoining properties for the
purpose which is contemplated by the existing zoning
classification, nor will its establishment change the
character of the area in which it is proposed to be
located by reason of increased congestion, increased
density, increased traffic, etc.
(a) The applicant shall be present at the
Planning Commission meeting at which the application
is submitted for approval. All changes, amendments,
and additions to the plat required by the Commission at
the meeting, if any, shall be made by the applicant prior
to the Commission's approval of the plat.
(b) The applicant, upon completion of the
above, within one (1) year of approval of the
preliminary plat shall prepare a final plat to be
submitted to the City Council for approval, which shall
include all required changes, amendments or additions
of the Planning Commission and which shall include all
information indicated as required on the plat. Prior to
submission to the City Council, the plat shall be
submitted to the City Attorney for approval as to form
and completing of all preliminary procedures.
(c) The plat shall be signed by each
member of the Planning Commission and the City
Council voting for the approval, and shall indicate
thereon whether each said member voted for or against
the approval. The plat shall likewise be signed by the
Chief of Police, the Fire Chief, Community
Development Director, Public Works Director, City
(June 20, 2005) 7-23.1
Engineer, Health Officer, and City Attorney, indicating
their approval of the plat. The signatures of all parties
indicated herein, except the City Councilmen, shall be
subscribed on the plat prior to the submission of the plat
to the City Council for its final approval. In order for
the plat to be approved by the Planning Commission
and the City Council, at least a majority as defined by
law of the members of each body in attendance at the
meeting wherein the vote for or against approval was
taken shall vote in favor of approval.
(16) Final approval by Tooele City Council: Upon
receiving approval of the plat by the Planning
Commission, the applicant shall submit the same to the
City Council for its concurrence in approval. The
applicant shall personally be present at the Council
meeting where said plat is presented for final approval.
Action must be taken by the Council within two (2)
months after the meeting at which the final plat has
been submitted for its approval. The Council may
extend the two (2) month period upon a two-thirds (2/3)
vote of its members. Upon approval, the plat shall be
signed by each member of the Council voting for
approval, and shall indicate thereon whether each said
member voted for or against the approval. Any failure
to act by the Council shall be deemed a denial of the
said submission.
(17) (1) The subdivider shall deliver to the City the
fully executed final plat within ninety (90) days of final
plat approval. Failure to fully execute the final plat, or
to deliver the fully executed final plat to the City,
within the specified ninety (90) days, shall result in the
automatic revocation of, and shall void, the final plat
approval.
(2) Tooele City shall record all final plats
with the Tooele County Recorder.
(Ord. 2004-11, 09-15-04); (Ord. 87-24, 01-02-88; Ord.
86-19, 11-11-86; Ord. 83-05, 04-20-83)
7-24
CHAPTER 9. RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS
7-9-1. Purpose.
7-9-1a. Definition.
7-9-2. Location and use.
7-9-3. Approval.
7-9-4. Recreational vehicle park development
application.
7-9-1. Purpose.
To permit development of facilities for recreational
vehicles in appropriate districts and to require that
recreational vehicle accommodations will be of such
character as to promote the objectives and purposes of
this Title, to protect the integrity and character of the
districts contiguous to those in which recreational
vehicle parks are located, and to protect other use
values contiguous to or near recreational vehicle park
uses. (Ord. 83-05, 04-20-83)
7-9-1a. Definition.
“Recreational vehicle” means a vehicular unit other
than a mobile home, primarily designed as a temporary
dwelling for travel, recreational, or vacation use, that is
either self-propelled or pulled by another vehicle.
“Recreational vehicle” includes a travel trailer, a
camping trailer, a motor home, a fifth wheel trailer, and
a van. (Ord. 2010-14, 11-03-10)
7-9-2. Location and use.
(1) No recreational vehicle as herein defined shall
be located, placed, used, or occupied for residential
purposes in any district except within approved and
licensed recreational vehicle parks and except as
otherwise provided herein. Each person residing in a
recreational vehicle in violation of this Section and each
property owner permitting persons to reside in a
recreational vehicle on the owner’s property is guilty of
a class C misdemeanor. Each day of residence shall be
a separate offense.
(2) Recreational vehicle parks shall be generally
located:
(a) Adjacent to or in close proximity to a
major traffic artery or highway.
(b) Near adequate shopping facilities.
(c) Within or adjacent to a mobile home park.
(3) No individual space in a recreational vehicle
park shall be used by one individual vehicle for more
than thirty (30) consecutive days, nor shall such space
be rented or leased to any one individual for a period
longer than thirty (30) days.
(4) Recreational vehicles may be stored, but not
used for permanent living quarters.
(5) Recreational vehicles may be stored,
displayed, sold and serviced, but not used for living
quarters, in a sales lot in a Commercial or
Manufacturing district when such use is a permitted or a
conditional use.
(6) Recreational vehicles may be accommodated
in an approved and licensed mobile home park,
provided that:
(a) The recreational vehicle park portion of
the development is separated by barriers, screens, or
otherwise from the area of mobile homes.
(b) The recreational vehicle use area shall
have direct access to a collector or arterial street.
(c) Separate ingress and egress shall be
provided for recreational vehicles when required by the
Planning Commission. (Ord. 2010-14, 11-03-10);
(Ord. 83-05, 04-20-83)
7-9-3. Approval.
A recreational vehicle park may not be constructed
unless first approved by the Planning Commission and
City Council, after review of plans for said park which
satisfy the Commission that the proposed development
will:
(1) Be in keeping with the general character of the
district where it is proposed to be located.
(2) Be located on a parcel of land containing not
less than five (5) acres, unless attached to a mobile
home park, in which case no minimum area is required.
(3) Have at least ten (10) spaces completed and
ready for occupancy before first occupancy permit is
issued.
(4) Meet all requirements of the State of Utah
Code of Camp, Trailer Court, Hotel, Motel, and Resort
Sanitation Regulations which are intended to apply to
trailer, camper, and ten camps as defined in such Code.
(5) Be designed by a professional architect,
engineer or land surveyor.
(6) Contain not more than twenty (20) units per
acre. The spaces may be clustered, provided that the
total number of units does not exceed the number
permitted on one (1) acre, multiplied by the number of
acres in the development. The remaining land not
contained in individual trailer spaces, roads or parking,
shall be set aside and developed as park, playground, or
service areas for the common use and enjoyment of
occupants of the development and of visitors thereto.
(Ord. 83-05, 04-20-83)
7-9-4. Recreational vehicle park development
application.
(1) An overall plan for development of a
recreational vehicle park shall be submitted to the
planning commission for review. The plan shall be
drawn to a scale not smaller than one inch to 50 feet.
At least six copies of the plan shall be submitted. The
plan shall show:
(a) the topography of the site, when required
(January 12, 2011)
(January 12, 2011) 7- 2 5
by the planning commission, represented by contours
shown at not greater than two foot intervals;
(b) the proposed street and recreational
vehicle space pad layout, with convenient means of
vehicular and pedestrian access to recreational vehicles,
parking areas and accessory buildings, including access
for firefighting equipment, delivery trucks, and garbage
trucks, as well as occupant's automobiles;
(c) tabulations showing the percent of area to
be devoted to parks, playgrounds and open space, the
number of trailer spaces and total area to be developed;
(d) proposed location, number, and design of
parking spaces and accessory buildings;
(e) a generalized landscaping and utility plan,
including location of water, sewer, electricity, gas lines,
and fire hydrants;
(f) any other data the city engineer or
planning commission may require.
(2) Applications for approval shall be in writing,
submitted to the planning commission.
(3) It shall be the duty of the city engineer to
investigate and examine all such premises to determine
that licenses or keepers thereof have complied with the
provisions of this Code.
(4) Every licensee of such premises shall keep a
daily register of all guests or tenants of such premises.
The register shall be available at all times and for one
year thereafter for inspection by Tooele City.
(5) After the installation of all required
improvements and service facilities in accordance with
specifications as indicated by a statement from the city
engineer, and upon the payment of a fee as per an
adopted schedule, which fee shall be effective for the
balance of the calendar year in which it is issued, the
city recorder shall issue a license to operate a
recreational vehicle park.
(6) Upon the recommendation of the city engineer,
and after a hearing and due cause shown at such
hearing, the city council may refuse to grant any license
under this Chapter and may revoke any license
theretofore issued. It shall be unlawful for any person
to operate any recreational vehicle park after the
revocation of the license; provided, that all applicants
or licensees shall be given a reasonable notice of any
hearing as specified in this Chapter.
(7) The City is hereby authorized to make and to
adopt such written regulations as may be necessary for
the proper enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter
provided, that such regulations shall not be in conflict
with the provisions of this Chapter, and the penalty for
violation of the provisions thereof shall be the same as
the penalty for violation of any provisions of the Code.
(8) The license to conduct or maintain a
recreational vehicle park shall be conspicuously
displayed in the recreational park office located upon
the premises.
(9) The dimensions and improvement
specifications of recreational vehicle parks shall be as
follows:
(a) Each recreational vehicle space shall be
not less than 1,250 square feet in area and shall be at
least 25 feet wide. All spaces shall be clearly marked
and shall be accessible from all sides. Only one
recreational vehicle shall be parked in one recreation
vehicle space.
(b) The minimum spacing between
recreational vehicles and between recreational vehicles
and buildings shall be as follows:
(i) side-to-side spacing, 15 feet;
(ii) end-to-end spacing, ten feet.
(c) No recreational vehicle shall be located
closer than 25 feet from the right-of-way line of a street
or highway nor closer than ten feet from the recreational
vehicle park boundary.
(d) All roads within the recreational vehicle
park shall be at least 20 feet wide, exclusive of parking
space, and shall be continuous.
(e) Each recreational vehicle space shall be
provided with parking space of not less than 200 square
feet for at least one vehicle, exclusive of roadways.
(f) Walks of not less than three feet in width
shall be provided from the entrance exclusive of
roadways.
(g) In any recreational vehicle park designed
for, or licensed to permit, one or more dependent
recreational vehicles, service buildings shall be
provided within 200 feet from any such recreational
vehicle space as follows:
(i) There shall be separate men's and
women's toilet rooms, distinctly marked and separated
by a sound-resistant wall. A vestibule or screen shall be
provided to prevent direct view into toilet rooms when
exterior doors are open.
(ii) For each ten dependent recreational
vehicles or fraction thereof, there shall be:
(a) one laundry tray or washing
machine;
(b) for men, one water closet, but
urinals may be substituted for one-third of the number
of required water closets; one lavatory or wash basin;
one bathtub or shower; one sink with hot and cold
running water;
(c) for women, one water closet; one
lavatory or wash basin; one bathtub or shower; one sink
with hot and cold running water;
(iii) All water closets and bathtubs for
women and water closets and bathtubs for men shall be
located in separate compartments. Gangtype shower
compartments may be used for men. The room
containing the laundry units shall be separated from the
toilet rooms and have an exterior entrance only.
(iv) Heating facilities capable of
(January 12, 2011) 7-25.1
maintaining a temperature in the service buildings of 70
degrees Fahrenheit in cold weather shall be provided.
(h) Hot water facilities capable of maintaining
a continuous supply of two to three gallons of 180
degrees hot water per trailer shall be provided.
(i) Mechanical laundry drying equipment or
laundry drying yards of at least 50 square feet per
recreational vehicle space shall be provided.
(j) Fly-tight and rodent-tight containers of not
less than 20 gallons capacity shall be provided and
maintained for each recreational vehicle space.
(10) Utilities, including culinary water, sewage
electricity, shall be available to each recreational
vehicle space. (Ord. 94-56, 01-31-95); (Ord. 88-18, 07-
06-88); (Ord. 83-05, 04-20-83)
(January 12, 2011) 7-25.2
(PAGE 7-25.2 RESERVED)
7-26 (January 08, 1998)
CHAPTER 10. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
FOR INDUSTRIAL AND OTHER USES
7-10-1. Purpose.
7-10-2. General provisions.
7-10-3. Performance standards procedures.
7-10-4. Enforcement provisions applicable to all
uses.
7-10-5. Nonconforming uses.
7-10-6. Locations where determinations are to be
made for enforcement of performance
standards.
7-10-7. Dangerous and objectionable elements.
7-10-1. Purpose.
To permit potential nuisances from industrial or
other uses to be measured factually and objectively in
terms of the potential nuisance itself; to ensure that all
uses will provide necessary control methods for
protection from hazards and nuisances which can be
prevented by modern processes of control and nuisance
elimination; to protect any use from arbitrary exclusion
based solely on the characteristics of uncontrolled
production in this type of use in the past. (Ord. 83-05,
04-20-83)
7-10-2. General provisions.
No land or building in any district shall be used or
occupied in any manner so as to create dangerous,
injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable fire,
explosive, or other hazard; noise or vibration, smoke,
dust, odor or other form of air pollution; heat, cold,
dampness, glare, electrical or other disturbance; liquid
or solid refuse or wastes; or other substance, condition
or element in such a manner or in such an amount as to
affect adversely the surrounding area or adjoining
premises. The foregoing are hereinafter referred to as
"dangerous or objectionable elements". No use shall be
undertaken or maintained unless it conforms to the
regulations of this Chapter in addition to the regulations
set forth for the district in which such use is situated.
(Ord. 83-05, 04-20-83)
7-10-3. Performance standards procedures.
The City Engineer may require performance
standards review for any use in any district when he has
reason to believe that such use, or the manner of its
operation will not or may not conform to the
performance standards of this Chapter. (Ord. 83-05, 04-
20-83)
7-10-4. Enforcement provisions applicable to all
uses.
Initial and continued compliance with performance
standards is required to every use; and provisions for
enforcement of continued with said standards shall be
invoked by the City Engineer against any use if there
are reasonable grounds to believe that performance
standards are being violated by such use. (Ord. 83-05,
04-20-83)
7-10-5. Nonconforming uses.
For purposes of this Title, any use established
before the effective date of this Title and
nonconforming as to performance standards shall have
five (5) years in which to conform therewith. (Ord. 83-
05, 04-20-83)
7-10-6. Locations where determinations are to be
made for enforcement of performance standards.
(1) The determination of the existence of
dangerous and objectionable elements shall be made at
the location of the use creating the same and at any
points where the existence of such elements may be
most apparent; provided, however, that the
measurements having to do with noise, odors, vibration,
or glare shall be taken at the following points of
measurement:
(a) In any district, except an M-District, at the
lot line of the establishment or use.
(b) In an M-District at one or more points five
hundred (500) feet from the establishment or use, or at
the boundary or boundaries of the District, if closer to
the establishment or use, or at the closest point within
an adjacent district other than an M-District. (Ord. 83-
05, 04-20-83)
7-10-7. Dangerous and objectionable elements.
(1) Repealed. (Ord. 91-26, 12-12-91)
(2) Vibration. No vibration (other than from
transportation facilities or temporary construction work)
shall be permitted which is discernible without
instruments at the points of measurement specified
herein.
(3) Odors. No emission of odorous gases or other
matter shall be permitted in such quantities as to be
readily detectable when diluted in the ration of one
volume of odorous air to four of clean air at points of
measurement specified herein, or at the point of greatest
concentration. Any process involving creation or
emission of any odors shall be provided with a
secondary safeguard system so control will be
maintained if the primary safeguard system should fail.
(There is hereby established as a guide in determining
such quantities of offensive odors Table III, "Odor
Thresholds", in Chap. 5, Air Pollution Abatement
Manual, Copyright 1951, Manufacturing Chemists'
Association, Inc., Washington, D.C., and said manual
and/or table as subsequently amended.)
(4) Glare. No direct or sky-reflected glare,
whether from flood lights or from high temperature
processes such as combustion or welding or otherwise,
shall be permitted to be visible at the points of
measurement specified herein. This restriction shall not
apply to signs or lighting of buildings or grounds for
protection as otherwise permitted by the provisions
(January 08, 1998) 7-27
of this Title.
(5) Fire and Explosion Hazards. All activities
involving, and all storage of flammable and explosive
materials, shall be provided at any point with adequate
safety devices against the hazard of fire and explosion.
(6) Radioactivity or Electrical Disturbances. No
activities shall be permitted which emit dangerous
radioactivity at any point, or electrical disturbance.
(7) Smoke. No emission shall be permitted from
any chimney or other source, of smoke or gases except
in accordance with air pollution provisions of the Utah
State Board of Health.
(8) Liquid or Solid Wastes. No discharge at any
point into public sewer, private sewage system, or
stream, or into the ground shall be permitted, except in
accordance with the standards equivalent to those
approved by such Department. No materials or wastes
shall be deposited on any property in such form or
manner that they may be transferred off the property by
natural causes or forces, and any wastes which might be
attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors
only in closed containers. (Ord. 91-26, 12-12-91; Ord.
83-05, 04-20-83)
7-28 (January 22, 2021)
CHAPTER 11. DESIGN REVIEW
7-11-1. Purpose.
7-11-2. Application and review.
7-11-3. Inspection.
7-11-4. Occupancy permit required.
7-11-5. Exceptions.
7-11-6. Approval.
7-11-7. Site plans required.
7-11-8. Considerations in review of applications.
7-11-9. Considerations.
7-11-10. Time limitations on approval; extension.
7-11-11. Conformance to approval.
7-11-12. Modification.
7-11-13. Bonds and bond agreements for public
improvements.
7-11-14. Reimbursement agreements.
7-11-15. Water Rights.
7-11-16. Failure to act.
7-11-1. Purpose.
The intent and purposes of design review include
securing the general purposes and policies of this Title
and providing that buildings, structures, and the
development of land does not impair the orderly and
harmonious development of neighborhoods.
It shall not be the intent of this Chapter to restrict
or specify the particular architectural design proposed
or to specify the exterior detail, design, color, or
materials proposed by the applicant, except where doing
so would enhance the general appearance and
compatibility of the development with its surroundings
and in such areas where detailed regulations further the
specific land use policies of the City, e.g., Gateway
Overlay areas, Downtown Overlay areas. Compatibility
of development shall inc lud e accessib i l ity
considerations.
(Ord. 1998-24, 08-05-1998) (Ord. 97-30, 08-06-1997)
(Ord. 1983-05, 04-20-1983)
7-11-2. Application and review.
All applications for building permits for all
buildings and structures, except for single-family
dwellings and their accessory buildings, shall be
accompanied by architectural and site development
plans drawn to scale, which shall show building
locations, fences, off-street parking and circulation,
location and size of adjacent streets, North arrow and
property lines, major exterior elevations, building
materials, proposed exterior color scheme, existing
grades, proposed new grades, and other information
requested by the City Engineer. All such drawings and
sketches shall be accompanied by the items described in
Section 7-11-7, and be reviewed and approved by the
City Engineer, the Accessibility Committee, and the
Fire Chief, which review and approval shall form the
basis of the recommendations required by Section 7-11-
6.
(Ord. 1998-24, 08-05-1998) (Ord. 97-30, 08-06-1997)
(Ord. 1983-05, 04-20-1983)
7-11-3. Inspection.
The Building Inspector is authorized to inspect, or
to have inspected, all buildings and structures in the
course of their construction, modification, or repair, and
to inspect land uses to determine compliance with
zoning provisions and conditional use permit and other
development approval conditions. The Building
Inspector or authorized agent is authorized to enter any
building for the purpose of determining its use, or to
enter any premises for the purpose of determining
compliance with this Title, provided that such right of
entry is to be used only in a reasonable time and
manner. In no case shall entry be made to any occupied
building in the absence of the owner or tenant thereof,
without written permission from the owner or written
order of a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 1998-24, 08-05-1998) (Ord. 1983-05, 04-20-
1983)
7-11-4. Occupancy permit required.
Land, buildings, or premises in any zoning district
shall hereafter be used only for a purpose permitted in
the district and in accordance with district regulations.
A permit of occupancy shall be issued by the Building
Official to the effect that the use, building, or premises
will conform to provisions of this and related codes
prior to occupancy, for any building erected, enlarged,
or altered structurally, or the occupancy or use of any
land, except for permitted agricultural uses. Such a
permit is needed whenever use or character of any
building or land is to be changed. Upon written request
from the owner, a permit shall be issued regulating any
lawful use of buildings or premises existing on the
effective date of this amendment, including
nonconforming buildings and uses. A permit shall be
issued only upon compliance by the applicant with the
provisions of this Code.
(Ord. 1998-24, 08-05-1998) (Ord. 1983-05, 04-20-
1983)
7-11-5. Exceptions.
For buildings and uses regulated by a conditional
use permit, subdivision, or planned unit development
approval, design review shall be incorporated within
such approval and need not be a separate application,
provided the requirements of this Chapter are fully
satisfied.
(Ord. 1998-24, 08-05-1998) (Ord. 1983-05, 04-20-
1983)
7-11-6. Approval.
The Planning Commission, shall determine whether
the proposed architectural and site development plans
submitted are consistent with this Chapter and with the
general policies and objectives of this Title, and shall
give or withhold approval accordingly. Before making
7-29 (January 22, 2021)
this determination, the Planning Commission shall
receive the written recommendations of the City
Engineer, the Accessibility Committee, and the Fire
Chief. Such recommendation may be by letter,
memorandum, or signature on the plans.
(Ord. 1998-24, 08-05-1998) (Ord. 1994-56, 01-31-
1995) (Ord. 1988-18, 07-06-1988)
7-11-7. Site plans required.
A detailed site plan shall be filed as part of any
application, prior to request for a building permit. It
shall show and be accompanied by the following
information:
(1) Scale of plan, and direction of North point.
(2) Lot lines, adjacent streets, roads, easements,
rights-of-way.
(3) Location of all existing structures on subject
property and adjoining properties, with utility lines,
poles, etc., fully dimensioned.
(4) Location of proposed construction, with
location and dimension of all signs.
(5) Motor vehicle access, circulation patterns,
parking, and curb, gutter, and sidewalk location.
(6) Necessary explanatory notes.
(7) Name, address, telephone number of builder
and owner.
(8) The affidavit of the applicant that the site plan
satisfies the requirements of the Americans with
Disabilities Act standards for accessible design, as
contained in 28CFR36, Appendix A.
(9) Required public improvements.
(10) All other information required as determined
by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 1998-24, 08-05-1998) (Ord. 1997-30, 08-06-
1917) (Ord. 83-05, 04-20-1983)
7-11-8. Considerations in review of applications.
The City shall consider the following matters,
among others, in their review of applications:
(1) Considerations relating to traffic safety and
traffic congestion:
(a) The effect of the site development plan on
traffic conditions on abutting streets.
(b) The layout of the site with respect to
locations and dimensions of vehicular and pedestrian
entrances, exits, drives, and walkways.
(c) The arrangement and adequacy of offstreet
parking facilities to prevent traffic congestion.
(d) The location, arrangement, and
dimensions of truck loading and unloading facilities.
(e) The circulation patterns within the
boundaries of the development.
(f) The surfacing and lighting of off-street
parking facilities.
(g) The effect of the site development plan on
traffic conditions for uses within the development,
including compliance with Chapter 4-8 of the Tooele
City Code.
(2) Considerations relating to outdoor advertising:
(a) The number, location, color, size, height,
lighting, and landscaping of outdoor advertising signs
and structures in relation to the creation of traffic
hazards and the appearance and harmony with
neighboring development.
(3) Considerations relating to landscaping:
(a) The location, height, and materials of
walls, fences, hedges, and screen plantings to insure
harmony with neighboring development, or to conceal
storage areas, utility installations, or other unsightly
development.
(b) The planting of ground cover or other
surfacing to prevent dust and erosion.
(c) The unnecessary destruction of existing
healthy trees.
(4) Considerations relating to buildings and site
layout:
(a) Consideration of the general silhouette
and mass, including location on the site, elevations, and
relation to natural plant coverage, all in relationship to
neighboring development.
(b) Consideration of exterior design in
relation to adjoining structures in height, bulk, and area
openings, breaks in facade facing on streets, line and
pitch of roofs, and the arrangement of structures on the
parcel.
(5) Considerations relating to drainage:
(a) The effect of the site development plan on
the adequacy of the storm and surface water drainage,
retention, and/or detention.
(Ord. 2021-03, 01-20-2021) (Ord. 1998-24, 08-05-
1998) (Ord. 1983-05, 04-20-1983)
7-11-9. Considerations.
The Planning Commission, or the City Engineer,
when authorized, shall decide all applications for design
review. Design approval may include such conditions
consistent with the considerations of this Chapter as the
Planning Commission or City Engineer deem
reasonably necessary under the circumstances to carry
out the intent of this Chapter.
(Ord. 1998-24, 08-05-1998) (Ord. 1983-05, 04-20-
1983)
7-11-10. Time limitations on approval; extension.
If construction in harmony with the permit for any
development for which design approval has been
granted has not been commenced within one (1) year
from date of notification of approval, the approval shall
be deemed automatically revoked. Upon application an
extension of time may be granted by the Planning
Commission.
(Ord. 1998-24, 08-05-1998) (Ord. 1983-05, 04-20-
1983)
7-11-11. Conformance to approval.
Development for which design approval has been
granted shall conform to the approval and any
conditions attached thereto. Nonconformance shall be
grounds for refusing to issue, or revoking, an occupancy
permit.
7-30 (January 22, 2021)
(Ord. 1998-24, 08-05-1998) (Ord. 1983-05, 04-20-
1983)
7-11-12. Modification.
No modification in the site plan may be made
without the prior approval of the Planning Commission
under the regular approval procedure provided by this
Chapter. All shall satisfy the requirements and intent of
this Chapter. The Planning Commission may revoke or
modify a design approval which does not conform to all
provisions of the approved permit.
(Ord. 1998-24, 08-05-1998) (Ord. 1983-05, 04-20-
1983)
7-11-13. Bonds and bond agreements for public
improvements.
All public improvements, as defined in Section 7-1-
5, required by the City as part of the approved site plan
shall comply with the bonding requirements of Section
7-19-12. No building permit shall be issued without
verification from the City Attorney that a satisfactory
bond and bond agreement have been provided by the
applicant.
(Ord. 1998-24, 08-05-1998)
7-11-14. Reimbursement.
All site plan approvals shall be conditioned upon
and subject to the payment of appropriate
reimbursement amounts as determined in accordance
with Tooele City Code §7-19-13.
(Ord. 2005-06, 05-18-2005) (Ord. 2000-02, 01-19-
2000)
7-11-15. Water Rights.
All site plan approvals are conditioned upon
compliance with the water rights conveyance
requirements of Title 7, Chapter 26. No building permit
shall be issued without verification from the Public
Works Director that the required water rights have been
conveyed to and accepted by the City.
(Ord. 2000-02, 01-19-2000)
7-11-16. Failure to act.
Should the applicant for any submitted application
under this Chapter fail to resubmit corrected plans or
application materials from any City review of the
application within 180 calendar days from the return of
that City review, the application shall be considered
abandoned. Prior to an application being deemed
abandoned, the Community Development Department
shall provide to the applicant a notice of potential
abandonment at least 30 calendar days prior to
abandonment. Following abandonment, the City shall
determine the expended portion of fees paid through all
efforts involved with the application up to and including
the process of abandonment and all unexpended
application fees refunded to the applicant. For the
purpose of entitlements by this Chapter, abandoned
applications shall be considered as if having never been
submitted for review. An abandoned application may
be resubmitted as a new application at any time
following abandonment, including the payment of new
application fees and a complete package of application
materials, and shall be subject to all requirements
applicable at the time of the new submission.
(Ord. 2021-02, 01-20-2021)
7-30.1 (January 22, 2021)
(PAGE 7-30.1 RESERVED)
(January 22, 2021) 7-30.2
CHAPTER 11a. DESIGN STANDARDS: MULTIFAMILY
RESIDENTIAL
7-11a-1. Defined Terms
7-11a-2. Purpose and Scope
7-11a-3. General Provisions
7-11a-4. Project Application, Procedure
7-11a-5. Context and Setting
7-11a-6. Design Standards: Building Orientation
7-11a-7. Design Standards: Vertical Alignment
7-11a-8. Design Standards: Horizontal Alignment,
Facade
7-11a-9. Design Standards: Windows
7-11a-10. Design Standards: Building and Dwelling
Unit Entries
7-11a-11. Design Standards: Project Entrances
7-11a-12. Design Standards: Landscaping
7-11a-13. Design Standards: Parking and Internal
Circulation
7-11a-14. Design Standards: Signage
7-11a-15. Design Standards: Lighting
7-11a-16. Design Standards: Utilities
7-11a-17. Design Standards: Walls and Fences
7-11a-18. Design Standards: Building Materials
7-11a-19. Design Standards: Color
7-11a-20. Design Standards: Vents
7-11a-21. Design Standards: Dumpster Enclosures
7-11a-22. Design Standards: Common Areas
7-11a-23. Design Standards: Pedestrian Pathways
7-11a-24. Design Standards: Zoning
7-11a-25. Deviation From Design Standards.
7-11a-26. Figures
7-11a-27. Photo Groups
7-11a-1. Defined Terms.
The following terms, as used in this Chapter, shall be
defined as follows:
(1) "Alcove" means a recess or small room
connected to or forming part of a larger room.
(2) "Arch" means a curved structure for spanning an
opening, designed to support a vertical load.
(3) "CC&Rs" means covenants, conditions, and
restrictions.
(4) "Column" means a pillar with a cylindrical shaft.
(5) "Common Area" means Project areas that are
commonly owned and/or commonly used by Project
residents, that allow for recreational and leisure activities,
that are located generally interior to, between and around
buildings. Areas and items not included in Common Area
include parking areas, roadways, dumpster pads and
enclosures, equipment pads, and other developed,
non-landscaped areas. See Figure 1 for examples of
Common Area.
(6) "Context and Setting" means that set of existing
natural and manmade landmarks and structures adjacent
to and near a proposed Project.
(7) "Department" means the Community
Development Department or successor department.
(8) "Design Elements" means factors, features,
elements, and considerations related to building and
Project design.
(9) "Director" means the director of the Community
Development Department, or designee.
(10) "Dry-Scape" means landscaped areas,
plants, and materials that do not require more than drip
irrigation, and includes the term "Xeriscape."
"Dry-Scape" is not intended to be and does not include a
waterless design.
(11) "Elements" has the same meaning as
"Design Elements".
(12) "Eave" means the underside or lower edge
of a roof overhang.
(13) "Facade" means a two dimensional view of
any building face.
(14) "Gable" means a triangular section of wall
at the end of a pitched roof, or a triangular ornamental
seat over a window or door.
(15) "Gambrel" means a ridged roof divided on
each side into a shallower slope above a steeper one.
(16) "Keystone" means the wedge-shaped
element at the center, crown, or top of an arch, serving to
lock all of the other elements of the arch into place.
(17) "Land Use Plan" means the Land Use
Element of the current Tooele City General Plan.
(18) "Landmarks" means off-Project items or
structures of visual prominence that are associated with a
certain geographic area or development.
(19) "Lintel" means a beam supporting the weight
above a door or window.
(20) "Net Developable Area" means the entire
Site minus areas dedicated for public rights-of-way,
interior roads, dumpster enclosures, and pathways.
(21) "Pediment" means a wide, low-pitched
gable, usually over an entry.
(22) "Pier" means a vertical support structure
such as a wall between two openings.
(23) "Pilaster" means a rectangular column,
projecting slightly from the wall.
(24) "Pillar" means an upright, relatively slender
shaft or structure used as a support or standing alone as a
monument.
(25) "Porch" means an exterior appendage to a
building forming a covered approach or vestibule to a
doorway.
(26) "Portico" means a porch or walkway with a
roof supported by columns often leading to the entrance
of a building.
(27) "Pre-existing" means in place or in effect
prior to the date of Project Application.
(28) "Project" means the full scope of a
multi-family residential development project, including,
but not limited to, site improvements, associated off-site
and right-of-way improvements, buildings and Common
Areas.
(29) "Project Plan" means that set of documents
comprising an Application for a Multi-Family residential
development Project, including, but not limited to, all
information and documents required by this Chapter.
(30) "Shutter" means a louvered awning which is
angled to shade a window from direct sunlight and glare
while preserving the outside view and admitting soft,
(January 22, 2021) 7-30.3
diffused light.
(31) "Standards" means the Multi-Family
Residential Design Standards contained in this Chapter.
(32) "Surrounding Property" means all properties
touching, adjacent to, affected by, or generally within the
area of a Project.
(33) "Trim" means a finished woodwork or the
like used to decorate, border, or protect the edges of
openings or surfaces.
(34) "Wainscot" means a facing of finish material
which typically covers the lower portion of a wall.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2012-10, 04-18-2012)
(Ord. 2005-05, 03-02-2005)
7-11a-2. Purpose and Scope.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this Chapter is to
establish minimum development standards for Projects
that include multi-family dwellings. These standards are
intended to ensure that such development is well-buffered
from and compatible with adjacent property, serves the
needs of occupants thereof, and retains long-term viability
and quality through economies of scale. Further, the
purposes of the Standards include the following:
(a) To achieve the goals and objectives of the
General Plan.
(b) To implement the policies of the General
Plan, including the principles stated in the Land Use Plan.
(c) To guide the general configuration and
appearance of buildings and Projects consistent with the
General Plan.
(d) To preserve the valuations of buildings and
Projects, as well as the valuations of the Surrounding
Properties.
(e) To encourage an aesthetic appearance that
serves to achieve the goals, objectives, policies, and
principles of the General Plan and this Chapter.
(f) To provide a fair, equitable, and predictable
process for the evaluation of Project applications.
(g) To improve the quality of life of
multi-family residents by improving the quality of
Projects and buildings.
(h) To recognize the fact that architectural and
design considerations have a significant impact on the
quality of life of Multi-Family residents and on property
valuations.
(i) To recognize the distinct geographic,
historical, and other contexts that make Tooele City
unique, and to encourage Multi-Family development to do
the same through building and Project design.
(2) Scope.
(a) The requirements of this Chapter shall apply
to all Projects that include multi-family dwellings. This
includes but is not limited to residential condominium
projects, townhomes, apartments, or other housing types
located within any development, subdivision or project
within the City.
(b) The requirements of this Chapter are
intended to apply to all Projects that include multi-family
dwellings in addition to all other applicable regulations,
and the requirements of this Chapter shall not be
construed to prohibit or limit other applicable provisions
of this Title, the Tooele City Code and other laws. In the
event of a conflict between the provisions of this Chapter
and any other provisions of this Title, the Tooele City
Code or other law, the more restrictive regulation shall
apply.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2005-05, 03-02-2005)
7-11a-3. General Provisions.
(1) Development Standards. All multi-family
Projects shall be subject to the terms and regulations of
this Chapter as set forth in this Section and shall comply
with the development standards contained in this Chapter.
(2) The purposes of the standards do not include an
intent to arbitrarily dictate color, materials, style, theme,
and other similar considerations, but to provide
parameters within which the above purposes can be
fulfilled.
(3) Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to
limit the City's exaction authority.
(4) Each Project shall include the creation of an
association, or other legal mechanism acceptable to the
City, with responsibility for, and authority to require and
enforce, the permanent maintenance of all common
ownership areas, including but not limited to amenities,
landscaping and fences, in good condition so as to present
a healthy, neat, and orderly appearance.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2012-10, 04-18-2012)
(Ord. 2005-05, 03-02-2005)
7-11a-4. Project Application, Procedure.
(1) Any person desiring to develop a Multi-Family
Project shall submit to the Department a completed
Application and Project Plan in conformance with Tooele
City Code Chapter 7-11, Site Plan and Design Review.
(2) The Application shall consist of the following
information and documents, among others:
(a) Site plan showing the Project, including the
configuration of all buildings and other improvements.
(b) Site plan showing the Project and all
existing public improvements, utilities, and structures
within a distance of 150 feet from any Project property
line.
(c) Architectural rendering showing the Project
and the configuration of buildings and other
improvements.
(d) Architectural rendering showing building
elevations including all exterior details, proposed color
schemes, and Design Elements.
(e) Architectural rendering showing the Project
and all existing public improvements, utilities, and
structures within a distance of 150 feet from any Project
property line.
(f) All building floor plans anticipated to be
used.
(g) Landscape plan which illustrates lighting
accommodation for automobile and pedestrian networks
and amenities.
(h) Lighting plan.
(i) Parking plan.
(j) Signage plan.
(k) Pedestrian pathway and wheelchair access
(January 22, 2021) 7-30.4
plan.
(l) Storm water management plan.
(m) Plans identifying at least the following:
(i) location of existing or planned utilities
including street lights, utility boxes, mail boxes, fire
hydrants, electric meters, gas meters;
(ii) street centerline, curb, gutter, sidewalk;
(iii) property lines;
(iv) required setbacks;
(v) dimensioned curb cuts and driveways;
and,
(vi) existing and proposed grades with twofoot
contours.
(n) Condominium CC&Rs, if the building
contains dwelling units for sale.
(o) Form of Project common ownership
agreement if not covered by the CC&Rs.
(p) Other information and documents
reasonably required by the Department.
(q) All schematics and drawings shall be to a
scale of 100 feet to the inch, but additional schematics of
higher or lower scales may be submitted.
(r) A final proposed color palette for all
buildings, structures and fencing within the project.
(3) An Application that does not contain all of the
information required by this Chapter, including the
payment of application fees, shall be deemed incomplete,
and shall not constitute a Project Plan, and shall not be
accepted.
(4) A Project Plan shall include consideration of the
following Project site design Elements, among others:
(a) The coordination and integration of internal
pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular circulation routes,
parking areas, and building entries.
(b) The arrangement and adequacy of on-site
and off-street parking.
(c) The location and dimensions of dumpsters
and other similar structures.
(d) The location, type, and dimensions of walls
and fences.
(e) The coordination of the Project with existing
or planned right-of-way alignments and street
improvements.
(f) Sight distances from and to Project streets
and driveways.
(5) A Project Plan shall include consideration of the
following Project landscape Design Elements, among
others:
(a) The manner in which challenges and
questions regarding sensitive lands, as defined in Tooele
City Code Chapter 7-12, will be avoided, mitigated, or
otherwise resolved.
(b) The manner in which Project landscaping
will conceal or screen unsightly areas, including
ground-mounted utility infrastructure.
(c) The location and types of hedges and other
screen plantings.
(d) The manner in which the finish landscaping
will be maintained.
(e) The manner in which sound and sight
buffers will be incorporated both within the Project and
on the Surrounding Property.
(f) The manner in which Common Area will be
incorporated relative to buildings, parking areas, and
internal circulation.
(6) A Project Plan shall include consideration of the
following Project site grading and drainage Elements,
among others:
(a) The manner in which on-site grading and
drainage provides slope and soil stabilization, prevents
erosion, and minimizes off-site impact.
(b) Plans for soil removal, fill work, retainage,
soil stabilization, and erosion control.
(c) Plans for plantings, ground covers, and/or
shrubbery as a means to prevent dust, stabilize soils, and
control erosion.
(d) Integration and preservation of existing and
proposed storm drainage ways, channels, and culverts.
(e) The maintenance of drainageways, channels,
and culverts on and through the Project.
(7) A Project Plan shall include consideration of the
following Project utility Elements:
(a) The incorporation of utility systems in a
manner that does not detract from building or Project
appearance.
(b) The size, location, and maintenance of
service systems.
(c) The location of electrical and telephone
service systems.
(d) The location and screening of transformers
and pad-mount mechanical and electrical equipment.
(e) The location and sizes of all utility lines,
manholes, poles, underground cables, gas lines, wells, and
similar installations and facilities.
(f) Utility service systems maintenance.
(8) At the time of Application, a Project applicant
shall pay all site plan review and other fees approved by
Resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2005-05, 03-02-2005)
7-11a-5. Context and Setting.
(1) Projects shall be designed so as to preserve and
incorporate the Site’s natural features and other features
contributing to a Project’s Context and Setting, such as,
natural grade, natural vegetation, natural storm water and
flood, proximity to historical structures and areas, and the
Surrounding Property (e.g., zoning, existing
development).
(2) Projects shall be designed so as to recognize
existing natural and manmade Elements and Landmarks,
where such Elements and Landmarks are consistent with
the Purposes of this Chapter, by including in the Project
Plan such Elements as are similar in appearance, design,
and purpose.
(3) A Project shall be designed so as to possess a
functional relationship of the Project to its Context and
Setting.
(4) A Project incorporating existing registered
historical structures shall utilize the historical features,
aesthetic elements, design, and architectural elements in
redevelopment. Adjacent projects are encouraged to
incorporate the same into adjacent developments.
(January 22, 2021) 7-30.5
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord 2018-13, 08-15-2018)
(Ord. 2005-05, 03-02-2005)
7-11a-6. Design Standards: Building Orientation.
(1) As a general rule, buildings shall be oriented to
the public rights-of-way and to internal circulation
systems, in that order of priority.
(2) For energy efficiency and resident comfort,
buildings shall be oriented so as to minimize east/west
exposures and should utilize landscaping to create shade
as a heat control mechanism.
(3) Buildings and other structures shall be placed in
a manner so as to minimize impairment to lines-of-sight
for pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular traffic.
(4) Common Areas shall be located between all
buildings so as to encourage relatively even building
distribution on the Site and to discourage concentration of
buildings on any part of the Site. See Figure 1 for
examples of Common Areas.
(5) Setbacks for Multi-family dwelling buildings
shall be within the range of ten to 20 feet from the edge of
the public or private right-of-way. Variation in setback
shall also be provided from internal roads and parking
areas according to the same standard.
(a) No more than 25% of buildings along the
same frontage shall be allowed at the minimum of the
setback range.
(b) Variation in setback shall be not less than
five feet between adjacent buildings along the same
setback.
(c) For projects with front loading garages and
driveways, the garage door shall be setback at 20 feet
from the right-of-way or accessing road to allow for
tandem driveway parking.
(d) The setback range shall be 15 feet to 30 feet
when:
(i) the proposed structure is three or more
stories; or
(ii) the project is adjacent to an existing or
proposed arterial or collector street as shown on the
Master Transportation Plan.
(e) Development on corner lots shall comply
with the provisions of Section 7-2-11 of the Tooele City
Code in which the sight line at an intersection shall not be
obstructed.
(f) Setbacks between buildings shall not be less
than one-half of the total height of the taller of the
buildings between which the measurement applies as
measured from finished grade to the peak of the roof
pitch.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2012-10, 04-18-2012)
(Ord. 2005-05, 03-02-2005)
7-11a-7. Design Standards: Vertical Alignment.
(1) Building rooflines shall be distinguished by
incorporating alignment elements, such as:
(a) stair-stepped rise and/or fall in the roofline;
(b) castle-top rise and fall in the roofline;
(c) roof pitch;
(d) gable; and,
(e) gambrel windows.
(2) Unit Definition. Multi-family buildings shall
include design features that differentiate adjoining units
and create identity for each unit. This goal shall be
achieved through the following requirements:
(a) Multi-family Projects shall include a variety
of unit sizes.
(b) Multi-family Projects shall include a variety
of heights which may include roofline stair-steps or
castle-top rises.
(i) Long, continuous rooflines greater than
50 feet shall not be permitted.
(ii) To encourage height variation,
multi-family buildings shall be allowed to exceed the
maximum allowable height by no more than three feet for
no more than 50% of the building's units, except that in no
event shall structures adjacent to a less intensive land use
exceed the maximum allowable height within 50 feet of
the Project boundary line adjacent to the less intense land
use.
(3) Each roofline stair-step or castle-top rise and/or
fall shall be at least 24 inches in height.
(4) See Photo Group 1 for examples of Roofline
Alignment Elements.
(5) Rooftop heating, air conditioning, and other
mechanical equipment shall be screened from the view of
pedestrians or drivers from a horizontal distance of not
less than 200 feet in all directions from buildings, at street
level, with screening materials, design, and color similar
to the supporting rooftop.
(6) Vent stacks, pipes, and other similar features
shall be black or of a color similar to the supporting
rooftop.
(7) Roofs and gables shall have a slope of at least a
1-to-4 ratio, or 22.5 degrees. Shallower or flat roofs are
prohibited.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2012-10, 04-18-2012)
(Ord. 2005-05, 03-02-2005)
7-11a-8. Design Standards: Horizontal Alignment,
Facades.
(1) Front building facades, and rear facades of
buildings backing onto a public street, shall be articulated
by incorporating wall projections and recesses, AND at
least two of the following horizontal alignment elements,
as described in this Section:
(a) Vertical elements. See Photo Group 3 for
examples.
(i) Two or more pillars, columns, pilasters,
or other similar Vertical Elements, of at least 18 inches
each in width; and,
(ii) Corner treatments such as quoins,
columns, pilasters or other Design Elements. See Photo
Group 4 for examples.
(b) Wainscot.
(c) Windows and balconies.
(2) Side building facades shall incorporate wainscot
where wainscot is incorporated on any other building
facade, and incorporating at least one window per
dwelling unit, as described in this Section.
(3) Wall projections and recesses. See Photo
Group 2 for examples.
(January 22, 2021) 7-30.6
(a) Wall projections and recesses are sections of
building facade that project out from the front vertical
plane of the building, or recess into the front horizontal
plane of the building.
(b) Dimensions.
(i) Projecting and recessed facade sections
shall be at least as wide as a dwelling unit on the first fully
or partially above-ground building floor.
(ii) Each facade projection and/or recess
shall be at least 24 inches deep.
(c) Quantity. The number of projecting and/or
recessed front facade sections shall be as follows:
(i) At least one for buildings with three or
less dwelling units on any building story.
(ii) At least two for buildings with four or
five dwelling units on any building story.
(iii) At least three for buildings with six or
more dwellings units on any building story.
(4) Wainscot. See Photo Group 5 for examples.
(a) Wainscot and trim along the entire building
facade.
(b) The wall areas above and below the
wainscot trim shall be of different colors and/or materials.
(5) Windows and Balconies. See Photo Group 6
for examples.
(a) Bay and/or box windows: at least one in the
front building facade for each one ground-floor dwelling
unit.
(b) Balconies: at least one for each one dwelling
unit above the ground floor.
(6) For purposes of this Chapter, covered dwelling
unit entrances are not considered horizontal alignment
elements.
(7) There shall be a roof overhang at the eaves and
gable ends of not less than 12 inches, excluding rain
gutters, measured from the vertical sides of the building.
The roof overhang requirement shall not apply to areas
above porches, alcoves, and other appendages.
(8) Exposed foundation walls shall not exceed four
feet above the finished grade at any point along the
foundation.
(9) Rear and side building facades that face upon a
public street shall be designed as though a front facade.
(10) Townhouse or other in-line oriented
multi-family unit buildings shall have no more than eight
contiguous units without a separation in the building of at
least the minimum side yard setback prescribed by the
zoning district or the structural separation required by the
Building Code, whichever is greater. Buildings
containing apartment, condominium or other horizontally
and vertically contiguous multi-family units shall be
allowed up to 16 ground floor units with a maximum of
eight ground floor units along any one building facade.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2012-10, 04-18-2012)
(Ord. 2005-05, 03-02-2005)
7-11a-9. Design Standards: Windows.
(1) Front facade windows, and rear facade windows
of buildings backing onto a public street, shall include the
use of one or more of the following window elements:
(a) Shutters, of a color different than the wall
sections adjacent to the shutters, and/or
(b) At least one of the following window trim
elements:
(i) Trim, at least four inches in width, of a
color different than the wall sections surrounding the
window, and/or
(ii) Arches and trim, at least four inches in
width, of a color different than the wall sections
surrounding the window, and/or
(iii) Lintels, of a color different than the wall
sections surrounding the windows.
(2) Windows on facades other than those described
in the previous Subsection shall include trim, at least two
inches in width, of a color different than the wall sections
surrounding the window.
(3) See Photo Group 7 for examples.
(4) For all Design Elements identified in this
Chapter that require a calculation of a facade area,
windows shall be excluded from that area calculation.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2012-10, 04-18-2012)
(Ord. 2005-05, 03-02-2005)
7-11a-10. Design Standards: Building and Dwelling
Unit Entries.
(1) All open building entries (i.e., without doors)
shall be clearly designated with lighted directional and/or
building identification signage.
(2) All closed building entries (i.e., with doors) and
dwelling unit entries located on exposed building facades
(i.e., not located on a breeze-way internal to a building or
between otherwise connected buildings) shall be covered
with a portico, pediment, or similar covering that is
architecturally integrated into, not merely attached to, a
building. See Photo Group 8 for examples. Covers shall
be of dimensions sufficient to cover one person standing
at the entry.
(3) All dwelling unit entries shall utilize trim, at least
four inches in width, of a color different than the wall
sections surrounding the entry.
(4) Building entries shall be directly accessible from
a publicly-owned sidewalk or a privately-owned pathway
open to the public.
(5) Buildings may not have stairwells or stair cases
of more than six stairs leading directly to or from dwelling
unit entries.
(6) All multi-family dwelling units that include a
front-facing attached garage shall have the garage door be
of a color matching that of the color palette of the unit's
front facade.
(Ord. 2020-45, 11-18-2020) (Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019)
(Ord. 2012-10, 04-18-2012) (Ord. 2005-05, 03-02-2005)
7-11a-11. Design Standards: Project Entrances.
(1) All Project vehicular entrances shall include a
signed, lighted entry monument identifying the Project.
See Photo Group 9 for examples.
(2) Acceptable monument materials include rock,
brick, masonry, stucco, and finished wood.
(3) All monuments shall include lighting that
illuminates the sign portion of the monument.
(4) Monument sign lettering shall be solid and
(January 22, 2021) 7-30.7
opaque.
(5) Monument design shall incorporate a variety of
plants, including ground cover, flowers, shrubs, and trees.
(6) All Project entrances shall incorporate ADA
accessible crosswalks, pathways, and accesses.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2012-10, 04-18-2012)
(Ord. 2005-05, 03-02-2005)
7-11a-12. Design Standards: Landscaping.
(1) Purpose: The intent of Project landscaping is to
provide a variety of plant materials to give color and
texture to the Project, to frame views, to screen
undesirable views, and to create areas of public space that
encourage positive human interaction.
(2) Design. All landscaping shall be designed by a
licensed landscape architect or similarly qualified licensed
professional, and installed by a licensed landscaping
contractor in accordance with this Chapter and general
landscaping industry standards.
(3) Land Use Buffers. Landscaping shall be used as
a buffer in areas between multi-family developments and
differing adjacent land uses.
(4) Interior Setback. All Projects shall incorporate
a landscaped area at least ten feet between buildings and
all interior roadways and parking areas. Sidewalks and
pathways shall not count towards this requirement.
(5) Percentage. At least 25% of each Site shall be
landscaped. This requirement may be reduced to 20% if
at least 25% of the 20% landscaping is Dry-Scape.
(6) Quantity. The plantings throughout multi-family
Projects are intended to enhance and beautify community
appearance and to protect welfare by protecting residents
and visitors from the traffic, noise, glare, trash, activity,
vibration, odor, visual disorder and other adverse or
harmful effects associated with some uses. For the
purpose of this Section, a building section shall mean the
area between building entrances, the area between a
building entrance and the edge of the facade, or the
number of horizontal units behind the facade where there
are no building entrances. The following shall be required
for areas of the Project:
(a) In on-site areas between each building and
streets outside of the Project, per building section,
exclusive of right-of-way and parkstrip requirements:
(i) along arterial class roads:
A. at least two shade trees and one
ornamental tree; and,
B. at least 150 square feet of planting
beds containing flowers, shrubs, and non-turf ground
cover;
(ii) along major collector class roads:
A. at least two shade trees and one
ornamental tree; and,
B. at least 100 square feet of planting
beds containing flowers, shrubs, and non-turf ground
cover;
(iii) along minor collector class roads:
A. at least two shade trees; and,
B. at least 100 square feet of planting
beds containing flowers, shrubs, and non-turf ground
cover;
(iv) along local class roads:
A. at least two shade trees; and,
B. at least 75 square feet of planting
beds containing flowers, shrubs, and non-turf ground
cover;
(b) In areas fronting upon a road which fall
between buildings, there shall be at least one tree for
every 40 feet of frontage for that area;
(c) In areas around buildings that border on
Common Areas:
(i) along a side facade of each building
shall have at least one shade tree; and,
(ii) along a rear facade of each building
shall have at least two shade trees:
(d) In areas between buildings and parking areas
or internal access roads:
(i) along a side facade of each building
shall have at least one shade tree; and,
(ii) along a front or rear facade of each
building shall have at least two shade trees and planting
beds containing flowers, shrubs, and non-turf ground
cover that outline the entrance to the building; and,
(e) In areas between buildings and Project
boundaries not abutting a street, the requirements shall be
the same as those for areas between buildings and a minor
collector class street.
(f) Common Areas not immediately adjacent to
a building shall have shade trees and planting beds
containing flowers, shrubs, and non-turf ground cover to
complement usable open amenity areas for residents
identified in Section 7-11a-22 of this Title. The number
of trees to be provided shall not be less than the number
of ground floor dwelling units in the Project and shall be
generally distributed throughout the Project but may be
clustered in Common Areas to provide open activity areas
as identified in Section 7-11a-22 of this Title.
(g) For the purpose of compliance with this
Section, townhouse Projects or portions of Projects
containing townhomes, may reduce the required
landscaping from Subsection (6)(a) herein, along the front
and rear facade to not less than one tree and 50% of the
required planting bed area but shall include the remainder
of this requirement in Common Areas of the Project.
(7) The landscaping plan for a Project shall consist
of ground covers, shrubs and planting beds, and trees.
Projects shall provide a landscaping plan that consists of
at least 25% ground cover that is sod, grass or other
surface material that provides a playable surface and a
maximum of 75% may be planted with such ground
covers. For the purpose of this calculation fall surfaces
around play equipment may be considered as a playable
ground cover surface.
(8) Types. Landscaping includes trees, shrubs,
groundcover, flowerbeds with perennial flowers, Dry-
Scape, and grass. New trees shall be at least two-inch
caliper measured at the base of the tree and at least six
feet in height measured from the top of the root ball.
Drought tolerant and water-wise landscaping is
encouraged.
(9) Projects shall be designed to incorporate existing
mature trees (i.e., ten or more years old, or four-inch
(January 22, 2021) 7-30.8
caliper trunk measured at the base of the tree). The
minimum required number of new trees in any Project
area (i.e. Common Area) may be reduced by three for
every existing mature tree preserved and incorporated into
that area of the Project.
(10) Landscaping used to satisfy any one
requirement of this Section shall not be construed to
satisfy any other requirement. Each requirement shall be
satisfied independent of any other unless otherwise
specified.
(11) Irrigation.
(a) All landscaped areas shall incorporate
permanent, automated, irrigation systems that shall:
(i) Utilize water consumption reducing
mechanisms or devices, such as, low-volume sprinkler
heads, drip emitters, and bubbler emitters; and,
(ii) Utilize water saturation sensors or other
mechanisms or devices that prevent over-watering; and,
(iii) Irrigate trees and shrubs with drip
irrigation; and,
(iv) Reduce wasteful and unnecessary water
usage.
(b) Trees and shrubs shall be located in similar
water usage demand zones.
(12) Maintenance. Each Project shall include the
creation of an association, or other legal mechanism
acceptable to the City, with responsibility for, and
authority to require and enforce, the permanent
maintenance of all landscaping in good condition and free
from refuse and debris so as to present a healthy, neat, and
orderly appearance.
(a) Dead trees, shrubs, and other plantings shall
be replaced within 60 days, or by November 1, whichever
is earlier.
(b) Grassy areas shall be treated in a manner so
as to discourage weed growth.
(c) For the purposes of compliance with this
Chapter, artificial grass which emulates natural grass may
be substituted for natural grass provided that maintenance
is established for the regular cleaning of the surface and
period replacement of the artificial grass as needed.
(13) Parking areas. All landscaped areas shall be
separated from parking and drive surfaces by a curb.
(14) Multi-family redevelopment projects within
an existing registered historical building shall have no
landscaping requirements specific to the historical
building beyond those landscaping areas previously
established with and around the building. Those
previously established landscaping areas shall be
developed according to the provisions of this Section.
(15) Detention basins shall be landscaped and
maintained as a part of the Project landscaping.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2018-13, 08-15-2018)
(Ord. 2012-10, 04-18-2012) (Ord. 2005-05, 03-02-2005)
7-11a-13. Design Standards: Parking and Internal
Circulation.
(1) Parking areas shall be contained within the
interior of the Site or under the buildings. Parking areas
shall be no closer to a public right-of-way or exterior road
than 20 feet or the setback of the closest building to that
same road, whichever is greater.
(2) Direct access to parking areas shall be from
internal roads, not from a public road.
(3) Parking areas of six or more spaces shall be
effectively screened from public streets and Surrounding
Property. Screening may be with fencing, berming, or
landscaping, which landscaping may be credited to the
Common Area landscaping percentage requirements
contained in this Chapter.
(4) The predominant view from the public roads
shall be buildings, not parking areas.
(5) Parking structures, including enclosed parking,
shall utilize materials, colors, and design similar to those
of the nearest building.
(6) Covered parking shall utilize colors and design
similar to those of the nearest building.
(7) At least one required resident parking space per
unit shall be provided as a covered or enclosed parking
space. Parking provided within an enclosed building may
count towards required parking upon provision ensuring
that the enclosed parking must be used for primarily
parking.
(8) All required parking for residents and visitors
shall be provided within the Project, exclusive of roads
and rights-of-way, and:
(a) resident spaces shall be made available to all
residents and their visitors as a part of their residency
without charge or restriction;
(b) resident spaces may be assigned for the
dedicated use of the tenants of specific units;
(c) resident spaces may be restricted from use
by non-residents or visitors; and
(d) visitor spaces shall be dispersed throughout
the Project.
(9) Rows of parking shall not include more than 12
spaces without a landscaping break of not less than five
feet. These breaks are encouraged to include pedestrian
pathways where reasonable for access around and through
the Project and to buildings.
(10) Roads on the interior of a Project, whether
proposed or intended to be public or private, shall comply
with Section 4-8-2 of the Tooele City Code. Standards
for private roads shall not be subject to the provisions of
Section 7-11a-25 herein.
(11) A traffic impact study shall be required for
all multi-family Projects planned to contain 50 or more
units, or as otherwise required by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 2021-03, 01-20-2021) (Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019)
(Ord. 2012-10, 04-18-2012) (Ord. 2005-05, 03-02-2005)
7-11a-14. Design Standards: Signage.
(1) Tooele City Code Chapter 7-25, regarding
signage, shall apply to all Projects except as expressly
provide otherwise by this Chapter.
(2) Building signage shall be designed as an integral
architectural part of building design.
(3) Project signage. See the Subsection, herein,
relating to Project Entrances.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2012-10, 04-18-2012)
(Ord. 2005-05, 03-02-2005)
(January 22, 2021) 7-30.9
7-11a-15. Design Standards: Lighting.
(1) Security and other lighting shall be sufficient to
illuminate every building entrance, pedestrian pathway,
and parking area.
(2) Theme Lighting. Lighting and light fixtures
utilized throughout the Project to illuminate streets,
pathways, parking areas, building entrances, and building
facades shall be consistent and thematic in terms of their
design, placement, and brightness.
(3) Building lighting. Buildings shall be illuminated
with a minimum of one wall-mounted light fixture per
ground-floor building and dwelling unit entrance.
(4) Building Area Lighting. Where any building is
located more than 30 feet from a public street, additional
lighting shall be provided by way of free-standing lighting
fixtures located in the Common Area and/or other area
between the buildings and public streets.
(5) Common Area. Common Areas shall be lighted
to illuminate an area with a radius equal to the distance
between the approximate Common Area center and the
nearest building by installing lighting fixtures.
(6) Street Lights. If a pre-existing abutting public
street is not lighted, the Project Plan shall include
regularly-required street lights.
(7) Parking Areas. Each parking area shall be
illuminated for safety by installing lighting fixtures, with
a maximum fixture height of 16 feet.
(8) Lighting used to satisfy any one requirement of
this Section shall not be construed to satisfy any other
requirement. Each requirement shall be satisfied
independent of any other.
(9) Glare and shielding. All lighting shall be
shielded so as not to shine into adjacent buildings or
Surrounding Property and to reduce glare and waste.
(10) Light pollution. Lighting shall be designed
and installed such that light will not spill onto the
Surrounding Property. All exterior lighting shall comply
with Tooele City Code Chapter 7-30, regarding light
pollution and waste.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2012-10, 04-18-2012)
(Ord. 2005-05, 03-02-2005)
7-11a-16. Design Standards: Utilities.
(1) All new utilities shall be placed underground.
Pre-existing above-ground utilities located on the Project
side of public streets, or on the Site, shall be relocated
underground.
(2) Pad-mounted transformers and/or meter box
locations shall be screened with landscaping or building
materials similar to Project walls, fences, or buildings.
(3) All building and ground-mounted utility
infrastructure, such as meters, shutoffs, junction boxes and
transformers, shall be coordinated with the respective
utility companies such that their final determined locations
are shown on the application plans submitted for
approval. Such infrastructure shall also be planned for
such that their location minimizes their visibility from
outside the Project and shall be screened using
architectural features or landscaping.
(4) Storm water detention and/or retention facilities
shall be incorporated into, and be designed as part of, the
landscaping plan.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2012-10, 04-18-2012)
(Ord. 2005-05, 03-02-2005)
7-11a-17. Design Standards: Walls and Fences.
(1) The Project perimeter property line shall be
fenced, except for the portions of the Project that abut a
public street.
(2) Perimeter fencing shall utilize colors and design
similar to those utilized for buildings.
(3) Allowed fencing materials include natural or
cultured stone masonry, brick masonry, split-faced block
masonry, decorative pre-case concrete panel, stucco,
vinyl, and other similar materials.
(4) All perimeter fences shall have vertical sections,
such as columns or piers, spaced at regular intervals (i.e.,
between eight and ten feet apart).
(5) Prohibited fencing materials include chain link,
barbed wire and other wire materials, wood, and cinder
block masonry, except where covered by stucco or brick
masonry.
(6) Sight-obscuring privacy fencing shall be
provided along Project boundaries abutting properties
zoned for or developed with non-multi-family uses. All
other Project boundaries, when proposed for fencing, shall
be fenced with minimally sight-obscuring fencing, such as
split rail fencing, that creates an open and inviting
atmosphere with openings that permit access from
adjacent streets.
(7) Examples of allowed fencing materials and
vertical sections are shown in Photo Group 10.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2012-10, 04-18-2012)
(Ord. 2005-05, 03-02-2005)
7-11a-18. Design Standards: Building Materials.
(1) Exterior Finishes. Exterior building materials
shall be natural or cultured brick or stone over at least
50% percent of the entire building facade (not including
windows and doors), the remaining 50% being brick,
stone, stucco, clapboard, wood, block/masonry, and/or
vinyl. At least 75% of the 50% shall be on the front
building facade. All building facades that face a public
right-of-way or exterior street shall utilize at least 40% of
these allowable materials.
(2) Roof. Roof materials shall be architectural
asphalt or composition shingles (at least 30-year), ceramic
or clay tiles, or other long-lived weather-resistant
materials.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2012-10, 04-18-2012)
(Ord. 2005-05, 03-02-2005)
7-11a-19. Design Standards: Color.
Colors selected for buildings, parking structures,
dumpster enclosures, fences, and other structures and
materials shall serve to achieve the purposes of the
General Plan and this Chapter, particularly earth tone
colors, and shall take into consideration a Project’s
(January 22, 2021) 7-30.9.1
Context and Setting. Each building facade shall
incorporate not less than two colors per elevation, with
front building facades and rear building facades facing
onto a public street incorporating not less than three
colors each.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2012-10, 04-18-2012)
(Ord. 2005-05, 03-02-2005)
7-11a-20. Design Standards: Vents.
(1) Where vents are utilized, whether functional or
faux, on a building facade, the vents shall be of the same
colors, materials, and style as the building facade upon
which the vents are mounted, but shall be of a color
different than the wall sections surrounding the vents, or
shall be trimmed with a color different than the wall
sections surrounding the vents.
(2) See Photo Group 11 for examples.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2012-10, 04-18-2012)
(Ord. 2005-05, 03-02-2005)
7-11a-21. Design Standards: Dumpster Enclosures.
(1) Garbage dumpsters and receptacles shall be
enclosed on all sides with opaque screening materials.
For at least the three non-vehicular access sides, screening
materials shall be masonry (but not cinder block or
smooth face block). Screening materials for the dumpster
enclosure gate shall be vinyl or other solid, opaque
materials.
(2) Dumpster enclosures shall utilize the same colors
and materials as the buildings.
(3) Dumpsters and waste collection shall be located
within a rear or interior side yard and may otherwise be
located as suitable to minimize noise, dust, odors, or other
nuisances and provide for safe collection.
(4) Dumpster enclosures shall be located so as to not
interrupt, encroach upon, or interfere with the Project’s
vehicular or pedestrian pathways or parking areas.
(5) Dumpster enclosures shall be designed to
minimize the public view thereof by placement interior to
the Project.
(6) Dumpster enclosures shall include landscaping
on at least two sides. Landscaping shall consist of shrubs,
vines, and/or Dry-Scape.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord 2018-13, 08-15-2018)
(Ord. 2012-10, 04-18-2012) (Ord. 2005-05, 03-02-2005)
7-11a-22. Design Standards: Common Areas.
(1) Common Areas shall incorporate Design
Elements that encourage frequent, safe use of the
Common Area by Project residents and visitors. Common
Areas shall be incorporated in the development plans such
that it is made available to everyone residing in the
boundaries of the development.
(2) Common Areas between any two adjacent
buildings shall be of sufficient dimensions to
accommodate pedestrian pathways, landscaping, and area
for activities.
(3) Common Area shall be landscaped in accordance
with the Landscaping Design Standards, above. Common
Area may include pathways, patios, recreational activity
areas, picnic tables, pavilions, gazebos, and water
features. All areas containing play equipment shall
include fall material to a depth of at least 12 inches or a
depth required by the manufacturer, whichever is greater.
(4) The playground facilities are private Project
improvements and shall not entitle the Project to a credit
against City impact fees.
(5) Common Area shall include functional Design
Elements, such as, seating and tables for eating, trash
receptacles, patios, recreational activity areas, picnic
tables, pavilions, gazebos, and water features which shall
be accessible to all residents including to the disabled and
to children, and which shall be designed in relation to
trees and tree groupings for shade and to pedestrian
pathways for access. Areas provided for recreational
activities shall be open areas free from trees or other
Design Elements with grass or other appropriate
surfacing, but not rock or mulch materials, that allows for
general play or activity. Open areas for recreational
activities may be associated with gathering spaces such as
pavilions, seating, picnic or eating areas.
(6) Amenities. Centrally located amenities shall be
provided for all multi-family Projects.
(a) Projects of fewer than 50 dwelling units
shall provide an amenities package including at least one
amenity from the following list.
(i) Tot lot / play structure.
(ii) Courtyard with benches, picnic tables
and BBQ areas with shade structures.
(iii) Swimming pool (indoor or outdoor).
(iv) Sports courts (i.e. tennis, basketball,
volleyball).
(v) Other active or passive recreational
areas that meet the intent of this standard.
(b) Projects of 51 to 100 dwelling units shall
include two amenities listed in Subsection (6)(a) plus a
minimum of one functional social area, inside or outside,
of not less than 1,000 square feet in gathering space.
(c) Projects of 101 to 150 dwelling units shall
include two amenities listed in Subsection (6)(a) plus a
minimum of one inside social area of not less than 1,000
square feet in gathering space and a minimum of one
outside covered social area of not less 1,000 square feet
in gathering space.
(d) Projects containing 151 units or more shall
include those amenities identified in Subsection (6)(c)
plus one additional amenity listed in Subsection (6)(a) for
every 50 units or portion thereof thereafter.
(e) Projects located on properties identified by
any City master plan to contain or are adjacent to
corridors for trails shall incorporate and construct the
trails pursuant to the terms of the master plan.
(7) Phasing. Projects proposed to be constructed in
phases shall design for amenities needed for a total
buildout prior to approval of the first phase. Amenities
may be constructed such that amenities are implemented
as phases include the number of units requiring those
amenities. Amenities shall be constructed and completed
prior to the completion and occupancy of the phase that
necessitates those amenities.
(8) Slope Areas. A maximum of 25% of a Project's
slope areas in excess of 30% can be included in the
(January 22, 2021) 7-30.9.2
required area calculation for Common Space provided
that all slope areas in excess of 30% are preserved from
disturbance. Inclusion of sloped area in the calculation of
required Common Space is intended to be complimentary
and shall not relieve the requirement for the provision of
amenities, pathways, or any other Common Space
requirement.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2012-10, 04-18-2012)
(Ord. 2005-05, 03-02-2005)
7-11a-23. Design Standards: Pedestrian Pathways.
(1) All improved pathways shall be ADA accessible.
(2) Crosswalks shall utilize materials and colors
different than the road sections that the crosswalks
traverse.
(3) All Sites shall incorporate continuous, ADA
accessible pedestrian pathway that provides direct access
to each building, Common Area, parking area, and public
sidewalk.
(4) Pedestrian pathways shall be provided between
development access points, entryways, gathering nodes,
parking areas and linking the Project to surrounding
neighborhoods.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2012-10, 04-18-2012)
(Ord. 2005-05, 03-02-2005)
7-11a-24. Design Standards: Zoning.
Cross reference Tooele City Code Chapter 7-14 for
questions of zoning, including allowed uses, required
setbacks, and maximum building heights.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2012-10, 04-18-2012)
(Ord. 2005-05, 03-02-2005)
7-11a-25. Deviation From Design Standards.
(1) Purpose. In the event an applicant requests a
deviation from the development standards of this Chapter
and has submitted a project that contains features or
design above and beyond those required, the City Council
shall have the discretion, but be under no obligation, to
approve a deviation following a recommendation from the
Planning Commission to some or all of the design
standards as long as:
(a) such deviation is consistent with the purpose
and intent of the policies and development standards
described in this chapter; and
(b) all required findings of this Section are
satisfied.
(2) Scope. Deviations from the design standards of
this Chapter, as outlined in this Section, shall apply only
to standards identified in this Chapter. Deviations may be
requested for applications for development projects to be
applicable on a project-wide basis. Deviations from
design standards shall not be permitted on unit-by-unit,
lot-by-lot, building-by-building, or similar basis unless
such deviation is approved with the specific finding of
creating variety prior to approval of the project to which
it would apply. Requests for deviations shall not be
permitted to the standards of density or the method of
calculation of density.
(3) Deviation Criteria. Requests for a deviation shall
be examined against at least three of the following criteria
when considered for approval of a deviation to the design
standards of this Chapter:
(a) the deviation being requested serves to
further the purposes and intents of this chapter, as
identified in Section 7-11a-2, beyond what could be
achieved without the deviation;
(b) the project contains amenities such as
pedestrian and bicycle connectivity in excess of what is
required in the General Plan and this Title;
(c) the overall percentage of dedicated public or
private landscape, open space area, and amenities exceeds
the required amount by at least 10%;
(d) the deviation being requested serves the
specific purpose of addressing and minimizing or
eliminating impacts, potential impacts, or nuisances on
surrounding neighborhoods, including but not limited to
traffic and viewscapes, are minimized through creative
design;
(e) accumulation or clustering of building
materials on the most publicly visible sides of structures
where:
(i) the overall utilization of building
materials exceeds that of the base standard being deviated
from;
(ii) the amount of materials used for street
facing facades is at least 10% greater than the minimum
required by this Chapter; and
(iii) the design of the structure meets or
exceeds the intent and purpose of the standard being
deviated from; and
(f) the deviation request serves to increase the
functionality of the features within the project;
(g) the deviation requested will not result in an
increase in the number of dwelling units within the
project;
(h) the building design is a specific architectural
style which utilizes facade materials differently than
prescribed in this Chapter, is designed by a licensed
architect, but still meets the intent of the requirement
being deviated; and
(i) the deviation requested serves to preserve,
protect, and enhance an environmentally sensitive feature
which is included into the design of the project.
(4) Request Responsibility. It shall be the
responsibility of the applicant to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the City Council the benefit of deviating
from the standards of this Chapter by:
(a) providing a written request for a design
review for the project application in which the deviation
would be applied;
(b) providing a written description and analysis
of the specific development standards to be deviated from
prepared by a licensed professional, such as an architect,
engineer, or landscape architect; and,
(c) providing a written justification that
addresses each of the required findings listed in
Subsection 5 of this Section.
(5) Findings Required. The City Council may
approve deviations from the development standards listed
in this Chapter only if it finds:
(a) that the requested deviations are based upon
(January 22, 2021) 7-30.9.3
a finding of facts in the record, from specific criteria
identified in Subsection 3 of this Section;
(b) that the deviation is in the benefit of the
health, safety, and welfare of the residents of and visitors
to the project;
(c) that the deviation is in the benefit of the
public health, safety, and welfare and the community as a
whole;
(d) that the deviation from any one design
criteria approved will not create the potential for an
increased impact or nuisance from any other design
criterion, either within the same project or upon
neighboring properties; and
(e) that the deviations approved are anticipated
to produce a development that exhibits features and
design that match or exceed that intended and anticipated
in the standards being deviated from.
(Ord. 2020-45, 11-18-2020)
7-11a-26. Figures.
Figure 1: Common Area
(Ord. 2020-45, 11-18-2020) (Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019)
(Ord. 2005-05, 03-02-2005)
7-11a-26. Photo Groups.
Photo Group 1: Roofline Articulation
Photo Group 2: Wall Projections and Recesses
Photo Group 3: Vertical Elements
Photo Group 4: Corner Treatments
Photo Group 5: Wainscot
Photo Group 6: Windows and Balconies
Photo Group 7: Windows
Photo Group 8: Building and Dwelling Unit Entries
Photo Group 9: Project Entry Monuments
Photo Group 10: Fencing
Photo Group 11: Vents
(Ord. 2020-45, 11-18-2020) (Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019)
(Ord. 2005-05, 03-02-2005)
(April 23, 2012) 7-30.21
CHAPTER 7-11b. DESIGN STANDARDS:
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
7-11b-1. Defined Terms: General
7-11b-2. Defined Terms: Architectural
7-11b-3. Purposes of Design Standards
7-11b-4. Project Application, Procedure
7-11b-5. Design Standards: Mandatory
Elements
7-11b-6. Design Standards:Table1—Elective
Elements
7-11b-7. Design Standards: Table 2—Elective
Elements
7-11b-8. Planned Unit Development (PUD)
7-11b-9. Appeals of Point Determination
7-11b-10. Applicability
7-11b-1. Defined Terms: General
(1) “Application” means a complete Project Plan
submission satisfying the requirements of this Chapter
and has the same meaning as “Project Application.”
(2) “Building” means a single-family dwelling.
(3) “Department” means the Community
Development Department or successor department.
(4) “Design Elements” means factors, features,
elements, and considerations related to Building and
Project design, and has the same meaning as
“Elements.”
(5) “Director” means the director of the
Community Development Department, or designee.
(6) “Dwelling Unit” has the same meaning as
Tooele City Code §7-1-5, as amended.
(7) “Elements” has the same meaning as “Design
Elements.”
(8) “General Plan” means the 1998 Tooele City
General Plan and its various infrastructure elements, as
amended, including culinary water, sanitary sewer,
storm water, rights-of-way, transportation, parks and
recreation, trails, police and fire, affordable housing,
and land use.
(9) “Land Use Plan” means the Land Use Element
of the 1998 Tooele City General Plan.
(10) “Project” means a Single-Family residential
development project and includes the term Subdivision
as defined in Tooele City Code §7-1-5, as amended.
(11) “Project Plan” means that set of
documents comprising a completed Application for a
Single-Family residential development Project,
including, but not limited to, all information and
documents required by this Chapter and Chapter 7-19.
(12) “Single-Family Dwelling” has the same
meaning as the term “Dwelling: Single-family” as
defined in Tooele City Code §7-1-5, as amended.
(13) “Standards” means the Single-Family
Residential Design Standards contained in this Chapter.
(14) “Surrounding Property” means all
properties touching or adjacent to, or abutting a street
adjacent to, a Project.
(Ord. 2012-10, 04-18-12); (Ord. 2006-22, 10-04-2006)
7-11b-2. Defined Terms: Architectural
(1) “Cantilever” means a projecting beam or
member supported at only one end, i.e., a bracketshaped
member(s) supporting a balcony, cornice, or
enclosed room.
(2) “Column” means a supporting pillar with a
rectangular or cylindrical shaft.
(3) “Dormer Window” means a window set
vertically in a structure projecting through a sloping
roof.
(4) “Dutch Hip” means a roof having a hipped end
truncating a gable.
(5) “Eave” means the overhanging lower edge of
a roof.
(6) “Façade” means the front of a building or any
of its sides facing a public way or space, esp, one
distinguished by its architectural treatment.
(7) “Fascia” means a horizontal piece (as a board)
at the end of a projecting eave or overhand; also, the
vertical edge of a roof.
(8) “Gable” means a triangular section of wall at
the end of a pitched roof, or a triangular ornamental
seat over a window or door.
(9) “Gambrel” means a ridged roof or ornamental
openings divided on each side into a shallower slope
above a steeper one.
(10) “Hip Roof” means a roof having sloping
ends and sloping sides.
(11) “Keystone” means the wedge at the center
or top of an arch, serving to lock all of the other pieces
into place.
(12) “Lintel” means a beam supporting the
weight above a door or a window.
(13) “Porch” means an exterior appendage to
a building forming a covered approach or vestibule to
a doorway.
(14) “Quoin” means an exterior corner
treatment distinguished from the adjoining surfaces by
texture, color, material, size, or projection.
(15) “Shutter” means a louvered or solid panel
at the sides of a window mimicking operating panels
used to close and protect a window opening.
(16) “Trim” means a finished woodwork or the
like used to decorate, border, or protect the edges of
openings or surfaces.
(17) “Wainscot” means a facing of finish
material which typically covers the lower portion of a
wall.
(Ord. 2006-22, 10-04-2006)
7-11b-3. Purposes of Design Standards
(1) The purposes of the Standards include the
following:
(a) To achieve the goals and objectives of the
General Plan.
(b) To implement the policies of the General
(April 23, 2012) 7-30.2
Plan, including the Principles stated in the Land Use
Plan.
(c) To guide the general configuration and
appearance of Buildings and Projects consistent with
the General Plan, including design, building materials,
appearance, and landscaping.
(d) To preserve the valuations of Buildings
and Projects, as well as the valuations of the
Surrounding Properties.
(e) To encourage an aesthetic appearance that
serves to achieve the goals, objectives, policies, and
principles of the General Plan and the Purposes stated
in this Chapter.
(f) To provide a fair, equitable, and
predictable process for the evaluation of Project
Applications.
(g) To improve the quality of life of Single-
Family residents by improving the quality of Projects
and Buildings.
(h) To recognize the fact that architectural
and design considerations have a significant impact on
the quality of life of Single-Family residents and on
property valuations.
(i) To recognize the distinct geographic,
historical, and other contexts that make Tooele City
unique, and to encourage Single-Family development to
do the same through Building and Project design.
(2) The Purposes of the Standards do not include
an intent to arbitrarily dictate color, materials, style,
theme, and other similar considerations, but to provide
reasonable general parameters within which the above
Purposes can be fulfilled.
(3) Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to
limit the City’s exaction authority.
(Ord. 2012-10, 04-18-12); (Ord. 2006-22, 10-04-2006)
7-11b-4. Project Application, Procedure
(1) Any person desiring to develop a Single-
Family Project shall submit to the Department a
completed Application and Project Plan in conformance
with the procedures and requirements set forth in
Tooele City Code Chapter 7-19, Subdivisions.
(2) An Application that does not contain all of the
information required by this Chapter and Chapter 7-19
shall be deemed incomplete, and shall not constitute a
Project Plan.
(3) At the time of Application, a Project applicant
shall pay all subdivision review and other fees approved
by Resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 2006-22, 10-04-2006)
7-11b-5. Design Standards: Mandatory Elements
The following design elements shall be required:
(1) Building Materials.
(a) Both the exterior building design and the
exterior building materials of all Buildings shall be of
sufficient quality, durability, and resistance to the
elements to satisfy the purposes of this
Chapter. Exterior siding materials may include, but
shall not be limited to, brick or stone masonry,
concrete, glass, aluminum or steel lap, vinyl lap, tile,
stucco, fiber-cement board, and/or wood. All exterior
materials shall be installed in a professional
workmanlike manner and be guaranteed to be
maintenance-free for at least 10 years from the date of
installation. Finishes upon exterior materials shall be
guaranteed to be maintenance-free for a at least five
years from the date of installation. Materials or finishes
without such guarantees shall not be permitted.
Guarantees shall be in writing from the manufacturer.
(b) All Building exteriors shall be constructed
of either (i) 20% or more masonry materials for all
exterior surfaces or (ii) 35% or more masonry materials
for all street facing exterior surfaces. Masonry is
defined as brick, stucco and/or stone and the percentage
calculation shall include the associated doors and
windows.
(c) Any Building sides facing a street shall
include distinctive features that add significant variety
to the exterior Building surfaces, such as, pop-outs on
windows, bay windows, color variations, texture
changes, and brick or stone decorative elements.
(2) Foundation. Each Building shall have a sitebuilt
concrete or masonry foundation around the entire
perimeter with interior supports as necessary to meet
applicable building codes. The dwelling shall be
permanently tied to the foundation system in
accordance with applicable building codes and City
policies.
(3) Roofs. The roof of each Building shall have a
minimum pitch of 3:12. At non-gable ends of the roof
there shall be an overhang at the eaves of not less than
12 inches inclusive of rain gutters. For Buildings with
cantilevers, 60 percent of the total eave length of the
home shall have an overhang of not less than 12
inches. The roof overhang shall be measured
perpendicular to the vertical side of the Building. These
pitch and overhang provisions shall not apply to porch
covers, bay windows, or similar appendages.
Unfinished galvanized steel or aluminum roofing shall
not be allowed.
(4) Building Depth. Each Building shall be not
less than 20 feet in depth at the shallowest point. The
depth shall be considered to be the lesser of the two
primary dimensions of the Building exclusive of
attached garages, bay windows, room additions, or
other similar appendages.
(5) Design Variation. In order to insure exterior
design variation, the same or nearly the same exterior
design, as determined by the City, shall not be allowed
on adjacent lots. Twin homes, however, may
incorporate the same or similar exterior design.
(6) Building Size.
(a) In the R1-8 and higher-density zoning
districts, the minimum square footage of finished,
above-ground, habitable floor space of any Building
(April 23, 2012) 7-30.23
shall be 1,100 square feet.
(b) In the R1-10 and lower-density zoning
districts, the minimum square footage of finished,
above-ground, habitable floor space of any Building
shall be 1,300 square feet.
(7) Garages.
(a) Each Building shall include a garage with
interior minimum interior dimensions of 20 feet wide by
22 feet deep.
(b) The depth of a garage shall be defined as
being measured perpendicular from the vehicular door
to the rear wall of the garage.
(8) Site Grading. Final grading of individual lots
shall be performed in such a way that excess water shall
be contained entirely on the site, directed to an
improved street, or directed to an approved drainage
inlet, drainage channel, or drainage easement. Excess
water shall not be allowed to drain onto adjacent private
property unless approved by the City as part of an
overall system, as reflected in the subdivision
approval. In order to more effectively direct storm
runoff, rain gutters shall be installed on all eaves of
Buildings.
(9) Covered Porch. The main entry of the
Building shall have a covered porch which shall be no
less than 6 feet deep and 30 square feet in area.
(10) Recreational Vehicle (RV) Pads. RV pads
shall not be allowed in the front yard or forward of the
Building front façade.
(11) House Numbers. House numbers shall be at
least 4 inches in height and located to as to be easily
visible from the street.
(12) Exterior Building Lighting. All lighting
located on or illuminating Building exteriors shall be
shielded to minimize the glare upon surrounding
properties.
(13) Street Lighting. Street lighting fixtures shall
be selected from those identified by administrative
policy promulgated by the Public Works Director.
(14) Ventilation Fixtures. Ventilation fixtures,
such as plumbing stand-offs and HVAC stand-offs,
shall not protrude from the front-facing slope of the
Building roof, but shall be located behind the roof peak
on the rear-facing slope of the roof, on in a gable roof
associated with the rear-facing slope of the roof.
(15) Downspouts. Gutter downspouts shall not be
located in such a manner so as to discharge their
contents across a driveway or walkway.
(Ord. 2012-10, 04-18-12); (Ord. 2007-15, 04-18-2007);
(Ord. 2007-09, 04-04-2007); (Ord. 2006-22, 10-04-
2006)
7-11b-6. Design Standards: Table 1—Elective
Elements
In addition to the mandatory elements contained in
Section 7-11b-5, above, all Buildings shall contain
elective design elements sufficient to satisfy the point
system detailed in Table 1, below. Included in the table
are six categories of design elements. Each category
includes several elements and each element contains a
point value. The combination of different elements
must equal or exceed 180 points for rambler Buildings
and 200 points for all other types Buildings. When
selecting design elements from Table 1 to include in the
Building design, each Building shall include at least one
element from each of the first five categories, namely,
Roofing Treatments, Relief Treatments, Material
Selections, Entry Features, and Garage Treatments. If
the point value of the design elements selected from
each of the first five categories does not meet the
minimum number of points required for a given
Building, additional elements shall be selected to satisfy
the minimum required points.
(Ord. 2012-10, 04-18-12); (Ord. 2006-22, 10-04-2006)
(April 23, 2012) 7-30.24
Table 1
1. Roofing Treatments (must use at least one) Points
A. Dominant roof pitch of not less than 6:12 40
B. Dominant roof pitch of not less than 5:12 30
C. Title or laminated architectural shingles that simulate the depth of wood 40
D. Two or more gable ends on front façade, hip style roof, or two or more roof panels/levels 60
E. Dormer windows 40
F. 6” or larger decorative roof fascia 20
2. Relief Treatments (must use at least one) Points
A. At least one foundation jog (not including the garage) on the front façade 60
B. Bay or box window or other projection that is not part of the foundation on the front façade 20
C. At least one cantilevered living area on the front façade 40
3. Material Selections (must use at least one) Points
A. Full stucco exterior including accent trim that is a complimentary but different color from the
primary house color, around all windows and doors–no brick or stone
20
B. Full stucco including accent trim, which is a complimentary but different color from the primary
house color, around all windows and doors on exterior of home, plus full perimeter wainscot of brick or
stone masonry
40
C. Full brick or stone masonry exterior 60
D. 35% masonry exterior (includes stucco, brick or stone masonry, and fiber-cement board) 10
E. 35% masonry exterior for all street-facing exterior surfaces (includes stucco, brick or stone masonry,
and fiber-cement board)
5
F. 20% masonry exterior (includes stucco, brick, or stone masonry, and fiber-cement board) 0
4. Entry Features (must use at least one) Points
A. Decorative windows (e.g., non-rectangular, transom over entry)—at least 2 10
B. Use of 8”x 8” minimum columns or similar support features for covered front porch 10
C. Covered front porch that extends across less than 40% of the entire length of the front façade and
is at least 6’ deep with no less than 60 sq. ft. of usable, unobstructed space
40
D. Covered front porch that extends across at least 50% of the entire length of the front façade and is
at least 6’ deep with no less than 90 sq. ft. of usable, unobstructed space
60
5. Garage Treatments (must use at least one) Points
A. Front of garage located at least 5’ behind front façade 30
B. Garage flush with the front of the house 20
C. Side entry garage 40
D. Usable open space with a trellis or roof (covered porch) above the garage extending to or beyond
the front face of the garage
60
E. Color coordinated, textured garage door 10
6. Additional Material / Design Selections (optional) Points
A. One or more non-rectangular (round, oval, arched, etc.) windows used on the front façade not
including any window used to meet item 4A above
10
B. Six or more windows of any size used on the front façade (does not include windows in garage
doors or windows used to meet item 4A above)
20
C. Decorative vents (oval, octagonal, or arched) on all front façade vents 10
D. Decorative vents (oval, octagonal, or arched) on all vents on other façades 10
E. Decorative shutters on all front façade windows 30
F. Decorative shutters on all windows of other façades 20
G. Stucco or precast quoins on at least two corners 20
H. Stucco or precast keystones 10
I. Change of color on exterior materials (excluding doors, shutters, trim, roof material or material
changes)
10
J. Window trim at least 4” (at least) wide around all front façade windows 20
K. Combination of either decorative shutters or 4” (at least) trim for all front façade windows 20
L. Combination of either decorative shutters or 4” (at least) trim for all windows on all façades other
than the front façade
20
(Ord. 2007-15, 04-18-2007); (Ord. 2006-22, 10-04-2006)
(April 23, 2012) 7-30.25
7-11b-7. Design Standards: Table 2—Elective
Criteria
For Buildings with a side or rear façade that faces
a street, design elements totaling at least 70 points,
selected from Table 2, below, shall be applied to all
street facing façades other than the front façade. In the
process of choosing design elements from Table 2, each
Building shall include at least one feature each from
categories 2) Roofing Treatments and 3) Design
Treatments.
(Ord. 2012-10, 04-18-12); (Ord. 2006-22, 10-04-2006)
Table 2
1. Relief Treatments (optional) Points
A. At least 1 foundation jog that is at least 10’ long and is no more than 20’ deep 40
B. Bay or box window or other projection that is not part of the foundation 30
C. At least one cantilevered living area 30
2. Roof Treatments (must use at least one) Points
A. A minimum 6” overhang at the eaves on gable ends 10
B. Dutch hip on a gable end 10
C. Hip roof instead of a gable end 20
D. One or more gables on rear façades 20
E. Two or more gables on side façades 10
F. One cross gable on side façades 10
G. Two cross gables on side façades 20
3. Design Treatments (must use at least one) Points
A. One or more windows that are at least 3 sq. ft. each in area (does not include windows in
garage doors, bay windows, box windows, or windows that are in or partially in window wells). Each
window counts as 10 points up to a maximum of 50 points.
10
B. Trim around each window for homes with stucco, vinyl, or fiber-cement board exteriors 10
C. Decorative vents (oval, octagonal, or arched): maximum of 10 points 10
D. Decorative window shutters when used for all widows on the street-facing façade 10
E. Stucco or precast quoins on at least two corners 10
F. Stucco or precast keystones 10
G. Knee braces 10
H. Change of color on exterior materials applied to at least 20% of the façade (excluding doors,
shutters, trim, roof material or material changes)
10
I. Change of material (i.e., brick or stone masonry wainscot) applied to at least 15% of the streetfacing
façade
20
J. For side façades, a covered porch that extends to the street-facing façade 20
(Ord. 2006-22, 10-04-2006)
7-11b-8. Planned Unit Development (PUD)
These Standards shall be used as a minimum in a
Planned Unit Development (PUD), and may be
increased by the City for a PUD.
(Ord. 2012-10, 04-18-12); (Ord. 2006-22, 10-04-2006)
7-11b-9. Appeals of Point Determination
A builder who disagrees with the Department’s
valuation of Table 1 and Table 2 points may appeal in
writing to the Director, whose determination shall be
final.
(Ord. 2006-22, 10-04-2006)
7-11b-10. Applicability
These Standards shall apply to all Buildings
constructed pursuant to building permit applications
submitted after December 31, 2006, with the exception
of Buildings constructed on lots created by subdivision
final plat approved by the Tooele City Council before
December 16, 1998.
(Ord. 2012-10, 04-18-12); (Ord. 2007-09, 04-04-2007);
(Ord. 2006-22, 10-04-2006)
(April 23, 2012) 7-30.26
RESERVED FOR
CHAPTERS 7-11c et. seq.
(October 1, 2013) 7-31
CHAPTER 12. SENSITIVE AREA OVERLAY
ZONING REGULATIONS
7-12-1. Short title.
7-12-2. Purpose.
7-12-3. Definitions.
7-12-4. Scope and application.
7-12-5. Density and lot size; basement cuts and fills.
7-12-6. Lot coverage, usable area and flag lots.
7-12-7. Development standards.
7-12-8. Review and approval procedure.
7-12-1. Short title.
This Chapter shall be known as the "Sensitive Area
Overlay Zoning Ordinance." (Ord. 2010-03, 04-21-
2010); (Ord. 94-28; 05-24-94)
7-12-2. Purpose and intent.
(1) The purpose and intent of this Chapter is to
provide regulatory standards, guidelines, and criteria
having the effect of minimizing flooding, erosion,
destruction of natural plant and wildlife habitat,
alteration of natural drainages, and other environmental
hazards, and protecting the natural scenic character of
the hillside and mountain areas. In support of this
purpose and intent, this Chapter recognizes the
importance of the unique hillside and mountain areas of
Tooele City to the scenic character, heritage, history,
and identity of Tooele City and of adjoining areas of
unincorporated Tooele County. In support of this
purpose and intent, Tooele City finds that it is in the
public interest to regulate the development of sensitive
areas in a manner so as to minimize the adverse impacts
of development on scenic open spaces and on sensitive
or vulnerable organic and inorganic systems.
(2) The standards, guidelines, and criteria
established by this Chapter are intended to support the
purpose and intent of this Chapter by working to
accomplish the following:
(a) to protect the public from the natural
hazards of storm water runoff, erosion, and landslides;
(b) to minimize the threat of fire;
(c) to preserve and protect wildlife and
wildlife habitat;
(d) to allow reasonable public, non-motorized
access to hillside and mountain areas;
(e) to preserve and protect natural
topographic and geologic features, such as, drainage
channels (whether of constant, periodic, or intermittent
flow), streams, lakes and ponds, ridge lines, rock
outcroppings, hillsides and mountainsides, hilltops and
mountaintops, scenic vistas, trees, and natural
vegetation;
(f) to preserve and enhance natural panoramic
vistas and scenic open space, both from within and
outside sensitive areas;
(g) to allow for reasonable transportation
systems consistent with the preservation and protection
of sensitive areas and the purpose and intent of this
Chapter, and that protect the public health and safety;
(h) to encourage the use of a variety of
development designs, concepts, and materials that are
consistent with the purpose and intent of this Chapter,
that accommodate the vulnerabilities of sensitive areas,
and that protect the public health and safety;
(i) to establish land use management policies,
practices, and implementation criteria that will encourage
protection of sensitive areas, that are consistent with the
purpose and intent of this Chapter, and that protect the
public health and safety;
(j) to regulate the location, design, and
development of building sites located on sensitive areas
in order to further the purpose and intent of this Chapter
and to protect the public health and safety;
(k) to encourage a public and private regard for
the scenic character, heritage, history, and identity of
Tooele City through the preservation and protection of
sensitive areas in Tooele City and adjoining areas of
unincorporated Tooele County; and,
(l) to balance the purpose and intent of this
Chapter, including public health and safety, with the
promotion of human enjoyment of private and public
lands. (Ord. 2010-03, 04-21-2010); (Ord. 94-28; 05-
24-94)
7-12-3. Definitions.
As used in this Chapter:
(1) "Average slope" means and is determined by
the use of the following formula:
S = .00229 (I) (L)
A
where:
S = average slope of the site before development or
construction;
A = total number of acres in the parcel;
L = summation of the length of all contour lines in feet;
I = contour interval in feet.
Average slope of a development site need not include the
acreage (A) having a slope greater than 30 percent. If
such areas are excluded, they shall not be included as
part of the development site for purposes of determining
the number of dwelling units allowed.
(2) "Development site" or “site” means and
includes the total perimeters of:
(a) a subdivision;
(b) a residential planned unit development;
and,
(c) a tract, lot, or parcel of land intended to be
used as a commercial, public, quasi-public, utility, or
other building site.
(3) "Gross acreage" means the total area of the
development site, including all rights-of-way and other
nonresidential uses.
(4) "Impervious materials" means any surface
material which does not allow for the natural percolation
of water into the soil, including, for example, roofs,
(October 1, 2013) 7-32
concrete patios, concrete or asphalt driveways, and
tennis and play courts of concrete or similar material.
(5) "Institutional buildings" means churches,
schools, hospitals, public and quasi-public buildings,
and similar buildings.
(6) "Natural vegetation" includes orchards, trees,
shrubs, lawn, grass, and perennial growth of varieties
endemic to the land on which they grow.
(7) "Net residential acreage" means all land within
a development site devoted exclusively to a residential
use, and includes houses, sheds, driveways and other
impervious on-site surfaces.
(8) "Open space" means land that is designated by
the developer and approved by the City as open space
on the development site plan.
(9) "Usable land" means that contiguous parcel of
natural land and/or compacted fill, as permitted by both
this Chapter and the applicable building codes, included
within the lot, no part of which has a slope exceeding 30
percent.
(10) "Undevelopable areas" means unstable
slopes, as determined by this Chapter, and all slopes
exceeding 30 percent. Undevelopable areas shall not be
usable land.
(Ord. 2013-15, 09-18-2013) (Ord. 2010-03, 04-21-
2010); (Ord. 2004-15, 10-20-04); (Ord. 94-28; 05-24-
94)
7-12-4. Scope and application.
(1) The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to
all lands in Tooele City that lie within the area
designated by ordinance of the City Council as the
Sensitive Area Overlay Zone, as shown in Figure 1.
Regulations of this Chapter shall apply to areas outside
of the mapped Sensitive Area Overlay Zone upon
determination by the City Council, by ordinance, that
environmental and other conditions of the subject areas
qualify them as sensitive areas. Figure 1 shall thereafter
be amended administratively to include such areas in the
Sensitive Area Overlay Zone. All approved subdivision
plats and site plans that lie within the Sensitive Area
Overlay Zone shall include a note indicating that the
plat and its lots are subject to this Chapter.
(2) This Chapter makes additional provisions to
those set forth elsewhere in Title 7 of the Tooele City
Code, as amended. In the event of conflict between the
existing zoning classification, building codes, or
subdivision ordinance and the regulations contained in
this Chapter, the most restrictive provision shall apply.
(3) In the Sensitive Area Overlay Zone, no
property shall be used and no building shall be erected
or altered so as to be arranged, intended, or designed to
be used for a purpose other than those permitted in the
base zoning district classification. (Ord. 2010-03, 04-
21-2010); (Ord. 94-28; 05-24-94)
7-12-5. Density and lot size; basement cuts and fills.
Lots within the Sensitive Area Overlay Zone shall
comply with the following minimum requirements:
(1) Minimum lot size. Each lot or parcel of land
shall abut a public street for the minimum distances
identified herein on a line parallel to the center line of
the street or a distance of 35 feet along the circumference
of a cul-de-sac right-of-way improved to City standards.
Average Slope of
Development Minimum Minimum
Site Lot Size Lot Width
0 - 8% determined by determined by
base zone base zone
8.1 - 15% 16,000 sq. ft. 100 feet
15.1 - 20% 22,000 sq. ft. 120 feet
20.1 - 30% 30,000 sq. ft. 150 feet
(2) Undevelopable areas. Undevelopable areas
shall be identified on the subdivision plat.
(3) Basement cuts and fills. Without being
construed as altering the established ground or any
heights measured therefrom, up to four feet of fill may be
used in order to bring the exposed portion of the lower
level of an exterior wall of a building within the
definition of a basement when the majority of the lower
level already complies with the definition of a basement.
(Ord. 2013-15, 09-18-2013) (Ord. 2010-03, 04-21-
2010); (Ord. 94-28, 05-24-94)
7-12-6. Lot coverage, usable area, and flag lots.
(1) Building Site Requirements.
(a) Each lot shall constitute a primary building
site able to accommodate the primary structure, and must
be in compliance with all applicable setbacks, side yards,
rear yards, and other requirements of this Chapter. The
ability of each lot to support such a building pad shall be
shown by displaying an exemplar of such a building lot
on all preliminary and final subdivision plats.
(b) Single-family dwellings shall be located
only upon usable land, which shall be fully contiguous
and at least 5,000 square-feet in size. No portion of a
dwelling may be located on undevelopable areas.
(c) Grading of the lot in connection with the
creation of the primary building site or construction of
the primary building shall not extend more than 30 feet
horizontally, in front, to the rear, or to the side of the
proposed primary building unless the average natural
slope of the area being graded and the additional area
desired to be graded does not exceed 8 percent.
(d) Driveways to the building site shall have a
maximum slope of 10 percent and shall have direct
access to a public or private street. The Tooele City fire
chief may approve steeper grades for private driveways
to building sites in accordance with the International Fire
Code.
(2) Flag Lots. Flag or L-shaped lots may be
allowed subject to the following conditions:
(a) A flag or L-shaped lot shall be comprised
of a staff portion contiguous with the flag portion
thereof.
(b) The staff portion of said lot shall front on
and be contiguous to a public or private street. The
(October 1, 2013) 7-33
minimum unobstructed paved width of the staff portion
of flag lots shall be 20 feet and the maximum length
shall be 220 feet unless allowed by the fire chief
pursuant to the International Fire Code.
(c) No building or construction, except for
driveways, shall be allowed to encroach upon the 20-
foot-wide minimum area of the staff portion of said lot.
(d) The front side of the flag portion of said
lots shall be deemed to be that side nearest to the public
or private street upon which the staff portion fronts.
(e) The staff portion of said lots shall be
deemed to end and the flag portion of said lots shall be
deemed to commence at the extension of the front lot
line.
(f) The square footage located in the flag
portion of said lot, which shall be exclusive of the
square footage located in the staff portion of said lot,
shall be the same or greater than the minimum square
footage as required by this Chapter.
(g) The side and rear yard requirements of the
flag portion of said lots shall be as required by this
Chapter.
(h) The minimum front setback requirements
for all buildings shall be 30 feet from the front lot line
of the flag portion thereof, and shall not include the staff
portion of said lot.
(i) No more than three flag lots may share or
be served by one staff portion of said lots.
(j) The maximum number of flag lots in the
development site shall be not more than 20 percent of
the total number of lots within the development site.
(k) Figure 2 is an example of a "flag lot" and
is included herein to illustrate the concept of "flag" or
"L-shaped" lots.
(3) Setbacks, yards, and buildable space
requirements.
(a) Any buildings constructed in the Sensitive
Area Overlay Zone shall be required to maintain
minimum side yard setbacks of 20 feet on each side and
a minimum rear yard setback of 40 feet, except that no
dwelling shall be located within an average of 25 feet,
no point being closer than 20 feet, of any portion of a
hillside slope, either up or down, exceeding 30 percent.
(b) Except for flag lots, front yard setbacks
shall be those required by the base zone.
(c) The City may require greater setbacks
when a geotechnical report recommends that greater
setbacks are necessary for the protection of life, safety,
or property.
(4) Maximum Impervious Material Coverage.
The maximum impervious material coverage allowed
upon any lot shall be 30 percent of the total lot area, or,
for clustered development, 30 percent of the total
combined area of the clustered lots. (Ord. 2010-03,
04-21-2010); (Ord. 94-28; 05-24-94)
7-12-7. Development standards.
(1) Scope. It is intended that the development
standards and provisions as set forth in this Section shall
be required in connection with all building and
construction in the Sensitive Area Overlay Zone. The
applicant shall submit to the Community Development
Department the information required by this Section
prior to the issuance of a building permit.
(2) Site Plan. The applicant shall submit an
engineered site plan, to include at least the following
information:
(a) dwelling location;
(b) contour lines at one-foot intervals;
(c) location of retaining walls with heights
greater than 18 inches above finished grade; and,
(d) vegetation types and locations.
(3) Cross-section. The site plan shall be
accompanied by a cross-section showing the information
required in this Section as well as driveway slope and
slope percentage for each change in slope.
(4) Drainage and Erosion. The area of the
watershed, together with other relevant information, shall
be used to determine the amount of storm water runoff
generated before and after construction.
(a) The "Rational Method", or other method as
approved by the Building Official or City Engineer, shall
be used in computing runoff. The basic formula for the
"Rational Method" is:
Q = CIA in which:
Q = Runoff in cubic feet per second (c.f.s.)
C = Coefficient of runoff or the portion of storm water
which runs off a given area. The following ranges for C
value are typical examples. The actual C value used
shall be approved by the City Engineer.
Type of Development Runoff Coefficient
Industrial & Commercial .80 - .90
Residential .30 - .40
Parks .15 - .24
Agricultural .10 - .20
I = Average rainfall intensity during time of
concentration for both 10- and 25-year return periods in
inches per hour. The time of concentration shall be
defined as the time required for water to flow from the
most remote point of the section under consideration.
A = Drainage area in acres.
(b) Lots shall be arranged to ensure adequate
setbacks from drainage channels. The 100 year return
event storm shall be that basis for calculating setbacks,
drainage conveyance around structures, and foundation
elevations. No structures shall be allowed in the 100
year flood plain or the special hazard flood area.
(c) Facilities for the collection and conveyance
of storm water runoff shall be constructed on
development sites according to the following
requirements:
(i) Such facilities shall be among the first
improvements or facilities constructed on the
development site.
(ii) Such facilities shall be designed so as
(October 1, 2013) 7-34
to detain safely and adequately the maximum expected
storm water runoff for a 25-year storm, not to exceed
0.2 cubic feet per second per acre, or the 10-year storm,
not to exceed 0.1 cubic feet per second per acre,
whichever is more restrictive, on the development site.
(iii) Such facilities shall be so designed as
to divert surface water away from cut faces or sloping
surfaces of a fill.
(iv) The existing natural drainage system
will be utilized, as much as possible, in its unimproved
state.
(v) Where drainage channels are
required, wide shallow swales lined with appropriate
vegetation shall be used instead of cutting narrow, deep
drainage ditches.
(vi) Flow retarding devices such as
detention ponds and recharge berms shall be used where
practical to minimize increases in runoff volume and
peak flow rate due to development. Areas which have
shallow or perched groundwater or areas that are
unstable must be given additional consideration.
(d) Construction on the development site shall
be of a nature that will minimize the disturbance of
vegetation cover, especially between October 15 and
March 15 of the following year.
(e) Erosion control measures on the
development site shall be required to minimize the
increased solids loading in runoff from such areas. The
detailed design system to control storm water erosion
during and after construction shall be contained in the
Grading and Drainage Report.
(5) Vegetation and Revegetation.
(a) Vegetation shall be removed only when
absolutely necessary, i.e., for buildings, filled areas,
roads, and firebreaks. Every effort shall be made to
conserve topsoil which is removed during construction
for later use on areas requiring vegetation or
landscaping, i.e., cut-and-fill slopes. Vegetation
sufficient to stabilize the soil shall be established on all
disturbed areas, including lots which may be subject to
future grading, as each stage of grading is completed.
Areas not contained within lot boundaries shall be
protected with adapted fire-resistant species of perennial
vegetative cover after all construction is completed.
(b) All areas on development sites cleared of
natural vegetation in the course of construction of
public improvements shall be replanted with
revegetation which has good erosion control
characteristics.
(c) New planting shall be protected with
mulch material and fertilized in conjunction with the
planting and watering schedule.
(d) Installation of all required landscaping
shall begin no later than one month after the date that
the main structure on the property is ready for
occupancy or by March 15, whichever is later.
(e) Vegetation shall be a mixture of plant
materials; i.e., trees, shrubs, grass, and forbs. Native
plant materials are preferred.
(f) Landscaping shall be substantially
completed within nine months after the date the primary
structure is ready for occupancy.
(g) Front yards and side yards shall be
completely landscaped except for driveways, walkways
and on-grade patios.
(h) All other areas disturbed during
construction shall be either landscaped or revegetated to
a natural state.
(i) Lawns or gardens are prohibited in the
undevelopable areas.
(j) No vegetation shall be removed on a
continuous hillside, crest (upslope or downslope) or a
slope 30% or greater unless otherwise determined in
writing by the Mayor upon recommendation of the City
Engineer for public uses such as trails and open space
improvements. Any revegetation of such a hillside shall
have the approval of the City Engineer.
(k) Topsoil removed during construction shall
be conserved for later use on areas requiring vegetation
or landscaping; i.e., cut and fill slopes.
(l) All disturbed soil surfaces shall be
stabilized or covered prior to the first day of November.
If the planned impervious surfaces such as roads and
driveways cannot be established prior to November 1st, a
temporary treatment adequate to prevent erosion shall be
installed on those surfaces.
(m) The property owner and/or developer shall
be fully responsible for any destruction of native or
applied vegetation identified as necessary for retention
and shall be responsible for such destroyed vegetation.
They shall carry the responsibility both for employees
and subcontractors from the first day of construction
until the final acceptance of improvements. The
property owner and developer shall replace all destroyed
vegetation.
(6) Geology.
(a) No structures shall be built on any zones of
deformation with respect to active faults.
(b) No structures or public improvements shall
be allowed on any active landslide, rock fall zone, or
flow field area.
(c) Problems associated with development on
or near perched ground water and shallow ground water
must be mitigated in a manner as approved by the City
Engineer. (Ord. 98-33-B, 10-07-98)
(7) Fire Protection.
(a) Lots shall not be allowed or approved
where the static water pressure from the City water
system serving the proposed lot or lots is less than 40
pounds per square inch or where fire flow as specified in
the International Fire Code is not met.
(b) Fire hydrants required to be constructed on
private property shall be installed at the expense of the
property owner, shall be privately owned and
(October 1, 2013) 7-35
maintained, and shall be connected by a privately
owned and maintained eight-inch water line from the
water main. The hydrant shall be located in accordance
with the International Fire Code. Fire hydrants shall be
located on all required access roads or driveways as
required by Tooele City and shall be located within five
feet of the paved surface of the required access road or
driveway. If in the opinion of the Fire Chief, fire
hydrants are vulnerable to vehicular damage,
appropriate crash posts shall be required. No
obstruction shall exist within a three-foot working area
of each fire hydrant. Required crash posts shall be a
four-inch minimum diameter concrete filled pipe,
having a minimum of three feet in height above grade,
with 30 inches of pipe below grade set in concrete.
Hydrant shut-off valves shall be located no closer than
five feet from the hydrant and no further than 20 feet.
(c) The property owner shall grant unto the
City a public utility easement along the course and full
width of the access road or driveway.
(d) Each development site and building permit
for private lots, flag lots, and lots where the front
setback is greater than 50 feet shall be reviewed by the
fire department to see that it complies with the
International Fire Code, Access Roadways for Fire
Apparatus.
(e) Development adjacent to public lands
shall provide access for fire protection vehicles and
equipment.
(8) Grading, Cuts, and Fill.
(a) A grading and drainage plan shall be
prepared by a professional engineer registered in the
state. The plan must be sufficient to determine the
erosion-control measures necessary to prevent soil loss
during construction and after project completion.
(b) Grading and other surface-disturbing
activities are prohibited in all undevelopable areas
within the lot or the subdivision. Prior to any grading or
other surface-disturbing activity on the property, the
undevelopable areas shall be clearly delineated by
temporary fencing or flagging. Any flagging stakes
used to delineate undevelopable areas shall be a
minimum of four feet above grade and no more than
eight feet apart.
(c) No grading within the limits of the
proposed development shall be permitted prior to
approval of the final plat by the City Council and
approval of the construction drawings by the City
Engineer, and no grading of individual lots shall be
permitted prior to the issuance of a building permit.
The established ground of any lot shall not be raised or
lowered more than four feet at any point for the
construction of any structure or improvement, except:
(i) within the buildable area, established
ground may be raised or lowered a maximum of six feet
by grading or retaining walls; and,
(ii) as necessary to construct driveway
access from the street to the garage or parking area,
grade changes and/or retaining walls up to six feet from
the established ground may be permitted.
(d) Exposed surfaces of an excavation or fill
shall not be steeper than one vertical to three horizontal,
or as recommended by the geotechnical report.
(e) The top and bottom edges of slopes caused
by an excavation or fill shall be at least three horizontal
feet from the property line or public right-of-way lines,
or greater as required by the geotechnical report.
(f) The maximum vertical height of all cuts or
fills shall be ten feet. Fills for slumps or other natural
depressions, necessary for public roads or other City
utilities, may exceed ten feet if approved by the Mayor
upon recommendation of the City Engineer.
(g) All structures, except retaining walls or soil
stabilization improvements, shall have a setback from the
crest of the fill or base of the cut of a minimum distance
equal to the depth of the fill or the height of the cut,
unless a structurally sound, engineered retaining wall is
built for the cut or fill slope.
(h) No grading, cuts, fills, or terracing will be
allowed on a continuous hillside, crest (upslope or
downslope) or a slope of 30 percent or greater, unless
otherwise determined necessary for public purposes by
the Mayor upon recommendation of the City Engineer.
(9) Streets and Ways. Streets, roadways and
private access ways shall follow as nearly as possible the
natural terrain.
(a) Roads and other vehicular routes shall not
cross property having a slope greater than 30 percent
unless, after review by the City Engineer,
recommendation of the Planning Commission, and a
finding by the City Council that:
(i) appropriate engineering measures can be
taken to minimize the impact of the cuts and fills,
consistent with the purpose of this Chapter; and,
(ii) the environment and aesthetics of the
area will not be significantly affected.
(b) The following additional standards shall
apply:
(i) At least two ingress and egress routes
shall be provided for each subdivision or PUD project.
(ii) Cu l - d e - s a cs shall me et t h e
requirements of Tooele City Code §4-8-2, as amended.
(iii) Points of access shall be provided to
all developed and nondeveloped areas for emergency and
fire fighting equipment. Driveways located upon each
lot extending from a public street or access road shall be
a minimum of 20 feet wide. Where such roadway is
adjacent to required fire hydrants, the width shall be a
minimum of 26 feet within 20 feet in either direction
from the hydrant. Such required widths shall be
unobstructed, including parking of vehicles, and shall
have a minimum vertical clearance of 13 feet six inches.
(c) Centerline curvatures shall not be less than
a 100 foot radius on any street.
(October 1, 2013) 7-36
(d) Variations of the street design standards
developed to solve special hillside visual and functional
problems may be presented to the Planning Commission
for recommendation to the City Council. Examples of
such variations may be the use of split roadways to
avoid deep cuts, one-way streets, modifications of
surface drainage treatments, sidewalk design, or the
extension of a cul-de-sac.
(e) Development sites which are located near
canyon trails will provide access to those trails. Parking
areas at trail heads may be required by the City Council
upon recommendation of the Planning Commission.
(f) Property owners shall be required to
identify and mark fire lanes to the satisfaction and
approval of the fire chief. Signs shall be posted near the
entrances of access roadways and driveways. Spacing
and placing of signs shall be subject to the approval of
the fire chief. Signs shall be a minimum of 17 inches by
24 inches in one inch block lettering with one-half inch
stroke on a contrasting background. Signs shall read
"No Parking - Fire Department Access Road."
(g) The maximum amount of impervious
surface for streets and roadways shall be 20 percent of
the entire development site.
(h) Any access road or driveway shall be
extended to within 150 feet of all portions of the
exterior walls of the first story of any building.
(i) All public or private streets for vehicular
traffic shall have a maximum grade of 10 percent.
(j) An all-weather surface capable of
supporting the imposed load of fire apparatus shall be
provided. If constructed of asphalt, the street or
driveway shall be a minimum of three inches of asphalt
over a minimum of eight inches of compacted road
base, or as indicated in the geotechnical report,
whichever is greater. If constructed of concrete, the
access road or driveway shall have a minimum of six
inches of concrete over a compacted road base, or as
indicated in the geotechnical report, whichever is
greater.
(k) The street or driveway shall be maintained
by the property owner or possessor of the premises in
good condition and repair and with adequate snow
removal so as to provide free and uninhibited access by
emergency service vehicles.
(l) Roads shall be designed to meet the City
design standards.
(10) Architectural Design.
(a) Buildings proposed for construction in
hillside or canyon areas within the Sensitive Area
Overlay Zone shall be designed to be visually
compatible with the natural beauty of the hillsides and
canyons. The use of building materials in colors that
will blend harmoniously with the natural settings are
encouraged. Such materials as natural woods, brick in
earth colors and stone are considered to be most
appropriate. Roof colors should be earth tones. White,
bright and reflective materials are not encouraged on
roofs. Tile, slate, architectural asphalt shingles and fireretardant
wood are permitted as roofing materials.
(b) All residential building permits shall be
subject to the design standards contained in Tooele City
Code Chapter 7-11a and 7-11b.
(11) Mechanical equipment. Mechanical equipment
including swamp coolers, air conditioning, heat
pumps, vents, blowers and fans shall be screened from
view or painted to match the structure color adjacent to
the equipment, and shall not extend above the highest
roof ridge line. Roof-mounted solar collections panels
need not be screened or painted so long as they are
mounted parallel to and flush with the roof slope and do
no project above the ridge line of the roof segment upon
which they are mounted.
(12) Satellite or wireless antennae. Satellite or
wireless antennae having a diameter of 30 inches or
more, including receive-only antennae, shall only be
constructed within the rear yard of the lot and not on any
building. Satellite antennae shall be painted
nonreflective black or other dark earth-tone colors.
Satellite dishes shall be limited to 13 feet in overall
height, including the base upon the established ground,
and shall be no more than twelve feet in diameter.
(13) Exterior lighting. Floodlighting of
structures is prohibited. Exterior lighting shall be
architecturally integrated decorative lighting. Yard areas
may be lit only with "directional" lighting and no direct
light beam may impact any other property except for
security lights intended to be activated only at limited
times as necessary for immediate security.
(14) On-site development. The property owner
shall be fully responsible for making all improvements in
accordance with the development site approval.
(15) Utilities. To the maximum extent practical,
all utilities shall be placed within existing road rights-ofway
and front yard setbacks. All water, sewer, electrical,
telephone, cable television and other utilities shall be
placed underground except that transformers, pedestals
and other appurtenances which are normally located
above ground in connection with the underground
installations are permitted. All areas disturbed by the
installation of underground utilities shall be revegetated
to a natural state. Temporary or emergency utilities may
be erected and maintained above ground for no more
than four months.
(16) Bond. In addition to the provisions
requiring the posting of a bond as set forth elsewhere in
the ordinances of Tooele City, a cash bond or a letter of
credit may be required by the City to guarantee the
completion of revegetation projects, the stabilization of
gradings, cuts and fills and constructions of storm water
runoff facilities. If such bond is required, it shall be in
an amount equal to the cost of construction of such
projects and shall continue for one year after the
completion date of such projects, improvements, or
facilities.
(October 1, 2013) 7-37
(17) Retaining walls. All cuts and fills shall be
supported where required by engineered retaining walls.
No retaining wall may exceed four feet in height from
the finished grade except as provided in Section 7-12-
8(c) and (f). In a terrace of retaining walls each fourfoot
vertical retaining wall must be separated by a
minimum of three horizontal feet, and any six foot
retaining wall must be separated from any other
retaining wall by a minimum of five horizontal feet, or
as recommended by the geotechnical report, whichever
is greater.
(18) Fencing. All chain link fences shall be
vinyl coated to blend in with the native landscaping.
Walls and fences in front yards and along roadways
shall not exceed a maximum of 42 inches in height.
Fence construction shall comply with the fence
regulations in Chapter 7, Title 2 of the Tooele City
Code for setback and other requirements. (Ord. 2010-
03, 04-21-2010); (Ord. 94-28; 05-24-94)
7-12-8. Review and approval procedure.
(1) Review process standards. As a land use
application for development within the Sensitive Area
Overlay Zone is reviewed by the Planning Commission,
the Commission’s findings of fact shall be listed and
included in all recommendations to the City Council.
(2) Approval by City Council. Before a planned
unit development (PUD), cluster subdivision,
subdivision, or a commercial development is allowed
within the Sensitive Area Overlay Zone, approval must
be first granted by the City Council.
(3) Administrative approval. Before construction
of any primary structure, or any accessory structure
requiring a building permit, approval must first be
obtained from the Building Official and City Engineer.
The application shall contain information, plans, and
reports as are required by the City.
(4) Application to Planning Commission. All land
use applications for development within the Sensitive
Area Overlay Zone shall be submitted to the
Community Development Department. All subdivision
or PUD project plans and/or reports shall be drawn to
scale, not smaller than 1" = 100' and shall show
topography at five-foot intervals for slopes greater than
30%, and one-foot contours for slopes less than 30%.
All site plans and/or reports for building permits shall
be drawn to scale, not smaller than 1" = 10', said site
plans and/or reports shall show topographical contours
at one-foot intervals.
(5) Engineering calculations made available to the
City. All engineering calculations performed and
acquired pursuant to the provisions of the ordinances of
Tooele City shall be made available to the City
Engineer as a part of the land use application review
and approval process. The City Engineer shall then
have access to the engineering calculations in order to
better advise the Planning Commission with regard to
further review and approval of a proposed development.
(6) Conceptual Review. A land use application
submitted under this Chapter shall first be reviewed
conceptually by City staff, the Planning Commission,
and the City Council. Conceptual review of
development within the Sensitive Area Overlay Zone is
intended to be a scoping process wherein initial
development concerns and potential environmental
hazards are evaluated. Additional information, studies,
and reports will be required for preliminary approval.
Conceptual review and approval does not bestow any
vested rights. The only entitlement bestowed by
conceptual review and approval is the procedural
entitlement to proceed to the preliminary review.
(a) All applications shall comply with the
provisions of the ordinances of Tooele City. All
applications shall be accompanied by a site plan drawn
to scale. Applications shall be prepared by a registered
engineer, retained by the development applicant, licensed
to practice in the State of Utah.
(b) Site plans shall include the following:
(i) a topographic contour map, tied to a
land base survey, showing areas within the development
site with slopes of less than ten percent, areas between
ten and 20 percent, areas between 21 and 30 percent, and
areas of greater than 30 percent;
(ii) location of the proposed planned unit
development, subdivision, cluster subdivision, or
commercial development, in relation to abutting public
streets;
(iii) the total acreage, number of lots,
proposed total density, and slope analysis;
(iv) the location and approximate size of
the proposed lots;
(v) a general street location, width, and
grade of all proposed streets and radii of any cul-de-sacs;
(vi) location of existing or proposed
schools, churches, or parks;
(vii) location of known geologic hazards
such as land slides, flow fields, faults, drainages and
rockfall, and the boundaries of the 100 year flood plain;
(viii) soil type and general description; and,
(ix) land use data, such as the amount of
residential land and streets by acreage and percent.
(c) The Planning Commission shall consider
applications for planned unit developments,
subdivisions, or commercial developments, and shall
forward their findings to the City Council for review. If
the Planning Commission has a positive evaluation of the
conceptual submittal, the Commission may allow the
application to proceed with such conditions as the
Commission deems necessary to secure the purposes as
set forth in this Chapter.
(d) After receiving findings by the Planning
Commission, the City Council shall make a
determination whether the application complies with the
requirements of this Chapter and should be allowed to
proceed to preliminary approval.
(October 1, 2013) 7-38
(e) Expiration. Following conceptual review
and approval, the applicant shall have 180 days to
submit the completed land use application for
preliminary review. Failure to do so shall result in the
expiration of the conceptual approval.
(7) Preliminary Approval. In addition to the
information required for preliminary approval for
planned unit developments, cluster subdivisions,
subdivisions, or commercial developments by other
ordinances of Tooele City, additional information as set
forth in this Section shall be required for developments
in the Sensitive Area Overlay Zone. All reports as
required herein shall be prepared by persons or firms
licensed to practice their specialty or expertise in the
State of Utah.
(a) Soil Characteristics Report. Data
regarding the nature, distribution, and strength of soils
within the project area shall be provided. The soil
report shall include:
(i) unified classification of all solid soils
with liquid limit, shrink-swell potential, and general
suitability for development;
(ii) an estimate of the normal highest
elevation of the seasonal water table;
(iii) flood history and potential; proximity
to known special hazard flood areas, flood plain areas,
and drainage channels;
(iv) topographic contours;
(v) depth of virgin soil below natural
grade;
(vi) abundance, distribution, and general
nature of exposures of earth materials; and,
(vii) soil stability at natural grade.
(b) Vegetation Report. An application shall
include a slope stabilization and a revegetation report
which shall include:
(i) location and identification, by species,
of existing vegetation;
(ii) the vegetation to be removed and the
method of disposal;
(iii) the vegetation to be planted;
(iv) slope stabilization measures to be
installed;
(v) analysis of the environmental effect of
such operations including effects on slope stability, soil
erosion, water quality, fish and wildlife, and fire hazard;
(vi) a designation of topsoil stockpile
areas;
(vii) solar orientation; and,
(viii) location and identification, by
species, of existing vegetation, and an indication of
vegetation proposed for removal and revegetation
proposal.
(c) Geologic Conditions Report. An
application shall include the following information:
(i) definition of any zones of deformation
with respect to active faults and other mass movements
of soil and rock;
(ii) identification of anomalies of the
terrain or characteristics of the geological materials
which would have any potential impact upon the use of
the site;
(iii) ground water characteristics;
(iv) depth to bedrock and geological
evaluation;
(v) wri t ten recomme n d a tions fo r
construction of proposed improvements to avoid impact
of any potential geologic hazards;
(vi) rock fall and debris flow potential;
(vii) earthquake potential;
(viii) bedrock depth at proposed building
footing locations;
(ix) bedrock: igneous, sedimentary, and
metamorphic types; and,
(x) s t ructu ral fe a tures, including
stratification, stability, folds, zones of contortion or
crushing, joints, fractures, shear zones, faults, and any
other geologic limitations.
(d) Geotechnical Report. The application for
preliminary approval shall include a geotechnical report
prepared by a person or firm qualified by professional
license, training, and experience to have expert
knowledge of the subject. The report shall contain at
least the following information:
(i) a geologic map, reflecting the items
listed below. A clear distinction should be made
between observed and inferred features and/or
relationships.
(ii) location and size of subject area and its
general setting with respect to major geographic and
geologic features;
(iii) nature and source of available
subsurface information;
(iv) stability of cut and reconfigured
slopes, especially at the base of the cut slope;
(v) topography and slope analyses;
(vii) c o n c l u s i o n s a n d
recommendations regarding the effect of geologic
conditions on the proposed development, and
recommendations covering the adequacy of sites to be
developed, including pavement design, slope stability,
etc.;
(viii) a written statement by the person or
firm preparing the report identifying the means proposed
to minimize hazard to life or property, adverse effects on
the safety, use or stability of a public right-of-way or
drainage channel, and adverse impact on the natural
environment;
(ix) slope stability analysis of conditions
both before and upon completion of proposed
development activities, including identification of slide
areas, unstable soils, flow fields, etc.; and,
(x) any other geologic hazards or
conditions identified by the person or firm preparing the
(October 1, 2013) 7-39
geotechnical report which are not referenced above.
(d) Grading and Drainage Report. The
application for preliminary approval shall include a
storm water management and erosion grading plan on
the methods by which surface water, natural drainages,
flooding, erosion and sedimentation loss will be
accommodated during and after construction. The
report and plan shall show:
(i) present topography, tied to a land
base survey, to include elevations, lines and grades
including the location and depth of all proposed fills
and cuts of the finished earth surfaces using a contour
interval of two feet of less;
(ii) access or haul road location,
treatment and maintenance requirements;
(iii) a description of the methods to be
employed to achieve stabilization and compaction;
(iv) drainage features;
(v) a clear delineation of the proposed
area to be graded and the area amount stated in square
feet.
(vi) location of existing buildings or
structures on the site and location of existing buildings
and structures on adjacent properties within 100 feet of
the site, or which may be affected by any proposed
grading or construction operations;
(vii) estimate of the normal
highest elevation of the seasonal high-water table;
(viii) the location and size of swamps,
springs, and seeps, and the reasons for the occurrence of
these underground water sources; and,
(ix) (A) all calculations and proposed
details used for design and construction of debris
basins, impoundments, diversions, dikes, waterways,
drains, culverts and other water management or soil
erosion control measures. Calculations shall employ
predictions of soil loss from sheet erosion using the
Universal Soil Loss Equation or an appropriate
equivalent. Equations should include factors of:
rainfall intensity and energy; soil erodibility; land slope
and length of slope or topography; condition of the soil
surface and land management practices in use; and,
surface cover; grass, woodland, crop, pavement, etc.
(B) An appropriate scale shall be
used which most clearly presents the proposed action,
generally 1" = 100' or larger.
(C) Depending upon the slope and
complexity of a development with the Sensitive Area
Overlay Zone, the Planning Commission may require
proposed lots and/or streets to be staked for field
inspection before plat approval.
(e) Planning Commission action. The
Planning Commission shall consider the land use
application and shall recommend to the City Council
approval or disapproval. If the Planning Commission
recommends preliminary approval of the application,
the Planning Commission may attach such conditions as
they deem necessary to secure the purposes as set forth
in this Chapter.
(f) City Council action. After receiving
recommendations for preliminary approval or
disapproval of the land use application by the Planning
Commission, the City Council may approve, approve
with conditions, or disapprove the application. If the
City Council approves the application, they may attach
such conditions as they deem necessary to secure the
purposes as set forth in this Chapter.
(g) Expiration. Following preliminary approval
by the City Council, the land use application shall be
filed with the Community Development Department for
final approval. Failure to do so within 90 days of the
approval shall result in the expiration of the preliminary
approval.
(8) Final Approval.
(a) The land use application submitted for final
review and approval shall include the information
required by the provisions of this Chapter and the City's
Subdivision Ordinance, including information required
by the City Council and City Engineer as part of the
preliminary approval. The City Engineer shall verify the
completeness of the final land use application. The
Community Development Director shall then approve the
final land use application administratively in writing.
(b) Application for final approval shall include
with the improvements drawings, spot elevations on all
lot corners and contour grading plans. The scale will be
the same as on the improvement drawings.
(c) All streets and building lots shall be named
and addressed in compliance with City ordinances and
policies.
(d) There shall be no construction,
development or grading upon the development site until
final approval described in this Section has been granted.
Before the construction of single family dwelling units
upon lots shall be allowed, a site plan drawn to a scale of
at least 1" = 10' for such lots shall be submitted to the
Community Development Department, which site plan
shall show lot lines, existing and proposed contours at
one-foot intervals, location of proposed single family
dwelling units, walks, driveways and patio areas. The
site plan shall also show vegetative, drainage, retaining
walls, and erosion controls. Such site plan shall be
attached to the building permit.
(e) Nothing in this Chapter shall exempt an
applicant from compliance with the provisions of Tooele
City Code Chapters 7-11 and 7-19 regarding site plan
and subdivision. Separate land use applications are
required by those chapters. (Ord. 2010-03, 04-21-2010);
(Ord. 94-28; 05-24-94)
Figure One: Sensitive Area Overlay Map
Figure Two: Illustrative Flag Lot Configurations
(October 1, 2013) 7-40
(Page 7-40 Reserved)


7-42 (April 5, 2019)
CHAPTER 13. ZONING DISTRICTS
7-13-1. Establishment of Zoning Districts.
7-13-2. Rules for Locating Boundaries.
7-13-1. Establishment of Zoning Districts.
(1) In order to accomplish the purposes of this
Title, Tooele City is hereby divided into the following
zoning districts:
(a) Multi-Family Residential (MR-25)
(b) Multi-Family Residential (MR-16);
(c) Multi-Family Residential (MR-8);
(d) Medium Density Residential (R1-7);
(e) Medium Density Residential (R1-8);
(f) Medium Density Residential (R1-10);
(g) Low Density Residential (R1-12);
(h) Low Density Residential (R1-14);
(i) Low Density Residential (R1-30);
(j) Low Density Residential (RR-1);
(k) Low Density Residential (RR-5);
(l) Low Density Residential (RR-20);
(m) Multiple Use (MU-160);
(n) Mixed Use - General (MU-G);
(o) Mixed Use - Broadway (MU-B);
(p) Neighborhood Commercial (NC);
(q) General Commercial (GC);
(r) Regional Commercial (RC);
(s) Light Industrial (LI);
(t) Industrial (I); and,
(u) Research and Development (RD).
(2) The location and boundaries of each of the
zoning districts are shown on the zoning map entitled,
"Tooele City Zoning." All boundaries, notations, and
other data shown thereon are hereby adopted as part of
this Title.
(3) Special Purpose Overlay Zoning Districts.
From time to time the City may establish overlay zoning
districts for specific purposes that apply on top of the
base zoning districts identified in this Section. These
overlay zoning districts may be established in other
chapters of this Title based on their intended purpose.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-19) (Ord. 97-21, 06-04-97) (Ord.
1992-04, 06-09-1992)
7-13-2. Rules for Locating Boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any
District, the following rules shall apply:
(1) Wherever the District boundary is indicated as
being approximately upon the centerline of a street,
alley or block or along a property line, then, unless
otherwise definitely indicated on the map, the centerline
of such street, alley, block or such property line, shall
be construed to be the boundary of such District.
(2) Wherever such boundary line of such District
is indicated as being approximately at the line of any
river, irrigation canal or other waterway, or railroad
right-of-way, or public park or other public land, or any
section line, then in such case the center of such stream,
canal or waterway, or of such railroad right-of-way, or
the boundary line of such public land or such section
line shall be deemed to be the boundary of such District.
(3) Where such District boundary lines cannot be
determined by the above rules, their location may be
found by the use of the scale appearing upon the map.
(4) Where the application of the above rules does
not clarify the District boundary location, the Board of
Adjustment shall interpret the map.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-19) (Ord. 1983-05, 04-20-1983)
7-43 (January 12, 2011)
CHAPTER 13a. OS OPEN SPACE ZONE
7-13a-1. Purpose.
7-13a-1.1 Land Use Designation.
7-13a-2. Conditional uses.
7-13a-3. Temporary activities.
7-13a-4. Area requirements.
7-13a-5. Frontage requirements.
7-13a-6. Building height, size, and setbacks.
7-13a-7. Parking requirements.
7-13a-8. Landscaping.
7-13a-9. Screening at district boundaries.
7-13a-10. Signs.
7-13a-11. Public improvements.
7-13a-12. Facilities maintenance.
7-13a-13. Above-ground utilities prohibited.
7-13a-1. Purpose.
The purpose of the Open Space Zone (OS) zoning
district is to establish areas in the City where only open
and generally undeveloped lands are to be permitted.
Development of a comprehensive network of permanent,
multi-functional, and publicly and privately owned open
spaces are encouraged. Restrictions in this zone are
designed to prevent the encroachment of permanent or
long-term residential, commercial, and industrial uses into
these open space areas which would be contrary to the
purpose and characteristics of this zone.
(Ord. 2010-12, 11-03-10); (Ord. 2003-09, 04-16-03);
(Ord. 96-10, 03-06-96)
7-3a-1.1 Land Use Designation.
Land in the OS zoning district shall carry the OS
designation in the General Plan-Land Use Element.
(Ord. 2010-12, 11-03-10);
7-13a-2. Conditional uses.
The following shall be the conditional uses permitted in
the OS zoning district:
(1) Botanical and zoological gardens;
(2) Forests;
(3) Conservation areas, including but not limited to
wilderness areas, watershed areas, wildlife refuges, and
wetlands;
(4) Public and private parks and recreation areas,
including but not limited to playgrounds, athletic fields,
golf courses, country clubs, tennis courts, swimming
pools, and accessory uses to the above. Accessory uses
include but are not limited to golf, tennis, swimming, the
preparing and serving of food and beverages, and the sale
of equipment and supplies in connection with the
recreational activities engaged in upon the premises;
(5) Historic preservation and monument sites;
(6) Publicly dedicated open space;
(7) Open air theaters and meeting places;
(8) Public services;
(9) Public schools;
(10)Cemetery; and,
(11)Fair grounds.
(Ord. 2010-12, 11-03-10); (Ord. 2003-09, 04-16-03);
(Ord. 96-10, 03-06-96)
7-13a-3. Temporary activities.
(1) Temporary activities are permitted. For purposes
of this Chapter, a temporary activity is an activity or event
of limited duration to which the general public is invited.
(2) For purposes of this Chapter, a temporary vehicle
sale at a fairground or park is a temporary activity.
However, any such sale shall comply with Chapter 7-11a,
as amended, and all other applicable regulations.
(Ord. 2010-12, 11-03-10); (Ord. 2003-09, 04-16-03);
7-13a-4. Area requirements.
A minimum 15,000 square-foot lot area is required
for a parcel to be eligible for OS zoning designation. Lot
area must be contiguous throughout with a minimum
width in area of 20 feet.
(Ord. 2003-09, 04-16-03); (Ord. 96-10, 03-06-96)
7-13a-5. Frontage requirements.
A minimum frontage of thirty-five (35) feet at the
street right-of-way line is required for any parcel to be
eligible for OS zoning designation.
(Ord. 2003-09, 04-16-03); (Ord. 96-10, 03-06-96)
7-13a-6. Building height, size, and setbacks.
All building height, size, and setback requirements
shall be as specified in this Title for structures within
residential or commercial zones and as determined by the
Community Development Department and the Planning
Commission as part of the conditional use approval
process.
(Ord. 2003-09, 04-16-03); (Ord. 96-10, 03-06-96)
7-13a-7. Parking requirements.
Parking shall be governed by Title 7, Chapter 4 of
this Code, as amended.
(Ord. 2003-09, 04-16-03); (Ord. 96-10, 03-06-96)
7-13a-8. Landscaping.
As a condition of both site plan and conditional use
permit approval for uses permitted under Section 7-13a-2,
all open space areas to be developed, not covered by
building, pavement for roads and parking lots, or
walkways, shall be landscaped as required by the Planning
Commission as part of the conditional use approval
process. A minimum of 20% of the site shall be fully
landscaped.
(Ord. 2010-12, 11-03-10); (Ord. 2003-09, 04-16-03);
(Ord. 96-10, 03-06-96)
7-13a-9. Screening at district boundaries.
All open space properties abutting commercial or
industrial areas shall be fenced, with view obscuring
fencing. Further, all open space properties abutting
residential areas shall be screened with appropriate
landscaping that provides a transitional visual screen.
Fencing and screening shall be the obligation of the
industrial, commercial, or residential development
abutting the OS property, and shall be a condition of
subdivision and/or site plan approval. Fencing
requirements for other open space properties shall be
7-44 (January 12, 2011)
determined by the Community Development Department
and the Planning Commission as a part of the conditional
use approval process.
(Ord. 2010-12, 11-03-10); (Ord. 2003-09, 04-16-03);
(Ord. 96-10, 03-06-96)
7-13a-10. Signs.
The only signs permitted in the OS zoning district
shall be monument signs, guide signs, directional signs,
wall signs, and temporary promotional signs compatible
with the general purpose of this zone. All signs except
temporary promotional signs must be approved by the
Planning Commission as part of the conditional use
approval process.
(Ord. 2010-12, 11-03-10); (Ord. 2003-09, 04-16-03);
(Ord. 96-10, 03-06-96)
7-13a-11. Public improvements.
Public improvements may be required by the
Community Development Department and the Planning
Commission as a part of the site plan and conditional use
approval processes. The need for public improvements
will be based on the details of the proposed development
and use of the property. The improvements which may be
required include but are not limited to the following:
(1) Curbs, gutters and drive approaches
(2) Sidewalks
(3) Waterways
(4) Medians
(5) Road base
(6) Paving and striping
(7) Fire hydrants
(8) Water and sewer main lines
(9) Water and sewer laterals
(10) Flood control and irrigation systems
(11) Any other required public improvements
(12) Street lights
(Ord. 2010-12, 11-03-10); (Ord. 2003-09, 04-16-03);
(Ord. 96-10, 03-06-96)
7-13a-12. Facilities maintenance.
Developers must submit to the Planning Commission
a plan for the permanent care and maintenance of all open
space properties and associated facilities provided for in
the site plan. Acceptance of the plan shall be required for
approval of a conditional use permit.
In the event the open space properties and associated
facilities are not maintained consistent with the approved
plan, the City may at its option cause such maintenance to
be performed and assess the costs incurred to the property
owner(s) or other responsible parties.
(Ord. 2003-09, 04-16-03); (Ord. 96-10, 03-06-96)
7-13a-13. Above-ground utilities prohibited.
In OS areas owned or maintained for purposes of
viewshed, scenic vista, open space, watershed, or wildlife
habitat protection, above-ground major utilities and
corresponding utility corridors shall be prohibited. For
purposes of this Section, a major utility is any utility
transmission facility that is designed to serve, or that
serves, properties or customers located outside any OS
area. Tooele City deems such above-ground major
utilities and corresponding utility corridors to be a threat
to the City’s ability to protect these OS areas for the
important public purposes to which they have been
appropriated. The prohibition in this Section excludes
non-conveyance above-ground utility facilities, such as,
water tanks, pump houses, chlorinators, valves, and vents.
(Ord. 2010-12, 11-03-10)
7-45 (November 19, 2020)
CHAPTER 14. RESIDENTIAL ZONING
DISTRICTS
7-14-1. Residential Zoning Districts.
7-14-1.1 In-Fill Overlay District.
7-14-1.2. In-Fill Overlay District Streets.
7-14-2. Residential Zoning Districts Purpose.
7-14-3. Uses Allowed within the Residential Zoning
Districts.
7-14-4. Table of Allowed Density and Table of Site
Planning and Development Standards.
7-14-5. Table of Minimum Dwelling Unit Size.
7-14-6. Accessory Structure Requirements.
7-14-7. Porches.
7-14-8. Requirements.
7-14-9. Keeping of Animals and Household Pets.
7-14-10. Apiaries
7-14-1. Residential Zoning Districts.
In accordance with the requirement of the Utah Code
that zoning within municipalities be by districts, Tooele
City has established and identified on the Tooele City
Zoning District Map the following residential zoning
districts which govern the use, intensity, area and other
requirements for the use of residential land as required by
this Ordinance. The map accompanying this Ordinance,
and incorporated herein by reference, identifies the
location and extent of each residential zoning district
within the City. All development, use, activity, and
authorized permits and licenses shall adhere to all the
provisions, standards, and requirements of the applicable
zoning district.
To meet the purposes of this Ordinance, Tooele City
is divided into the following residential and special
purpose zoning districts:
Multi-Family Residential (MR-25)
Multi-Family Residential (MR-16)
Multi-Family Residential (MR-8)
Medium Density Residential (R1-7)
Medium Density Residential (R1-8)
Medium Density Residential (R1-10)
Low Density Residential (R1-12)
Low Density Residential (R1-14)
Low Density Residential (R1-30)
Low Density Residential (RR-1)
Low Density Residential (RR-5)
Low Density Residential (RR-20)
Multiple Use (MU-160)
In-Fill Overlay (IFO)
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2015-25, 12-16-2015)
(Ord.1997-21, 06-04-1997)
7-14-1.1. In-Fill Overlay District.
The In-Fill Overlay special purpose zoning district is
formulated to appropriately encourage residential
development and redevelopment on lots and parcels of
record that may be nonconforming or surrounded by
developed land in order to more efficiently utilize
residential land, existing public infrastructure, and public
services. Table 5 to this Chapter establishes development
standards designed to fulfill the purpose of the In-Fill
Overlay district.
(Ord. 2015-25, 12-16-2015)
7-14-1.2. In-Fill Overlay District Streets.
(1) Intermediate Local Class Streets within the In-
Fill Overlay District shall be identified as Garden Street
north of 100 South.
(2) Secondary Local Class Streets within the In-Fill
Overlay District shall be identified as 50 West and 150
West and Garden Street south of 100 South.
(Ord. 2017-27, 11-01-2017)
7-14-2. Residential Zoning Districts Purpose.
The residential zoning districts of Tooele City, and as
presented in Table 1 and Table 2 are formulated and
provided and achieve the following purposes:
(1) The purpose of the MR-25 Multi-Family
Residential district is to provide an environment and
opportunities for high-density residential uses, primarily,
apartments, condominiums and townhouses. The purpose
of the MR-16 Multi-Family Residential district is to
provide an environment and opportunities for high density
residential uses, including primarily attached residential
units, apartments, condominiums and townhouses with
limited attached single-family dwellings. The purpose of
the MR-8 Multi-Family Residential district is to provide
an environment and opportunities for high-density
residential uses, including attached single-family
residential units, apartments, condominiums and
townhouses. This zoning district is intended to serve as a
transitional district between principally single-family
residential zoning districts and higher density multi-family
zoning districts..
(2) The Medium Density Residential Districts (R1-
7, R1-8, and R1-10) are designed to provide a range of
housing choices to meet the needs of Tooele City
residents, to offer a balance of housing types and
densities, and to preserve and maintain the City’s
residential areas as safe and convenient places to live.
These districts are intended for well-designed residential
areas free from any activity that may weaken the
residential strength and integrity of these areas. Typical
uses include single-family dwellings and two-family
dwellings in appropriate locations within the City. Also
allowed are parks, open space areas, pedestrian pathways,
trails and walkways, utility facilities and public service
uses required to meet the needs of the citizens of the City.
(3) The Low Density Residential Districts (R1-12,
R1-14, R1-30, RR-1, RR-5, RR-20) provide for single
family residential areas and single family dwelling units
on larger individual lots. Additionally these districts are
intended to allow and make available Rural Residential
opportunities and agricultural uses protected from the
encroachment of incompatible uses.
(4) The purpose of the Multiple Use District (MU-
160) is to provide areas in mountain, hillside, canyon,
valley, desert and other open and generally undeveloped
lands where residential uses should be limited in order to
7-46 (November 19, 2020)
protect the land resource, to limited demands for public
facilities and services, to provide opportunities for
forestry, agriculture, mining, wildlife habitat, and
recreation, to avoid damage to water resources and water
shed areas, and to protect the health and safety of the
residents of the City and adjoining areas.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 1997-21, 06-04-1997)
7-14-3. Uses Allowed within the Residential Zoning
Districts.
The Table of Uses (Table 1) identifies the uses
allowed within each Residential Zoning District of the
City. The Table of Uses identifies uses allowed as a
Permitted Use (identified as “P” in the Table of Uses) and
uses allowed as a Conditional Use (identified as “C” in
the Table of Uses). Uses not identified as either a
Permitted or Conditional Use are deemed to be
prohibited.
(Ord. 1997-21, 06-04-1997)
7-14-4. Table of Allowed Density and Table of Site
Planning and Development Standards.
The table of Allowed Density (Table 2) and the table
of Site Planning and Development Standards (Table 3)
identifies the residential intensity, lot area requirements,
site development standards, site coverage standards, and
other requirements for the uses allowed within each
Residential Zoning District provided by Tooele City.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 1997-21, 06-04-1997)
7-14-5. Table of Minimum Dwelling Unit Size.
Table 4 establishes the minimum dwelling unit size
allowed within the Residential Zoning Districts of the
City. Multi-family dwelling projects are encouraged to
provide a variety of unit sizes and layouts. Multi-family
dwelling projects may be permitted to include
one-bedroom units for up to one-third of the total units
within any one project. For projects that are approved or
constructed in phases, each phase approved or constructed
shall maintain compliance with the terms of this section
regarding the allowance for one-bedroom units as if each
phase is an independent project.
(Ord. 2020-39, 09-16-2020) (Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019)
(Ord. 1997-21, 06-04-1997)
7-14-6. Accessory Structure Requirements.
To facilitate the placement of accessory buildings and
structures on a residential lot that already has a principal
residential structure established the following
requirements are identified:
(1) All accessory buildings and structures shall be
required to comply with the minimum front yard setback
and shall be set back a minimum of at least six feet from
the principal structure.
(2) All accessory buildings and structures shall be
setback a minimum of five feet from the rear and side
property lines. This five feet setback may be reduced to
one foot provided the following requirements are met:
(a) accessory buildings are constructed in
such a manner that the roof does not infringe onto
adjoining property;
(b) all accessory buildings are constructed
of fire resistant materials which provide a one-hour or
greater fire rating; and,
(c) no accessory structure may encroach
upon a public utility and drainage easement.
(3) No accessory building or structure or group of
accessory buildings or structures shall cover more than
8% of the total lot area, except as may be allowed by the
provisions of 7-14-6(8).
(4) No accessory building or structures shall
encroach upon any easement or right-of-way.
(5) Detached garages and all other accessory
buildings and structures shall be located at least ten feet
from any dwelling or main building located on an
adjoining lot.
(6) All accessory buildings accessed by vehicle (for
example: detached garage) shall be set back a minimum of
25 feet from the public right-of-way from which the
accessory building is vehicle accessed.
(7) Accessory buildings and structures located in
the side yard of an interior lot or the street side yard of a
corner lot shall not exceed 15 feet in height. Views of
accessory buildings and structures from adjoining streets
and properties shall be screened with a visual screening
treatment. On corner lots all accessory buildings and
structures shall be located to the rear of the main building.
(8) Separate meter connections for water, sewer,
gas, or other utilities are not permitted for any accessory
building or structure.
(9) All detached garages and other accessory
structures greater than 2,500 square feet in size or greater
than 15 feet in height require a hearing before the
Planning Commission and will be considered a
Conditional Use in all residential zoning districts. The
Planning Commission will determine and consider any
adverse impacts the proposed building or structure may
have on adjoining properties. Notice of the Planning
Commission hearing shall be sent by regular mail to all
adjoining property owners, the applicant being required to
pay all the costs incurred by the City to provide the
required notice. The Planning Commission shall approve
or deny the conditional use application pursuant to Tooele
City Code Chapter 7-5.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2012-09, 04-18-2012)
(Ord. 2009-15, 12-02-2009) (Ord. 1997-21, 06-04-1997)
7-14-7. Porches.
Porches are allowed provided the following minimum
requirements are met:
(a) The porch shall be no closer than 20 feet to the
front property line; and,
(b) Any roof overhang shall not be greater than two
feet and,
(c) The porch may not be deeper (front to back)
than seven feet; and,
(d) The porch area shall be included in determining
lot coverage; and,
7-47 (November 19, 2020)
(e) The porch shall not be closed in; and,
(f) A building permit for the porch must be
obtained prior to construction.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2003-24, 11-05-2003)
7-14-8. Requirements.
The standards and requirements applicable to the
Residential Zoning Districts provided by Tooele City shall
be as identified in Chapter 7-4.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2003-24, 11-05-2003)
(Ord. 1997-21, 06-04-1997)
7-14-9. Keeping of Farm Animals and Pets.
(1) Except as modified in subparagraph (2)
applicable to pets, the following requirements apply to the
keeping of farm animals within the residential zoning
districts of the City:
(a) No farm animal(s) shall be kept on any
lot in the MR-25, MR-16, MR-8, R1-7, R1-8, R1-10, R1-
12, or R1-14 Districts or on any lot smaller than 30,000
square feet.
(b) The number of farm animals kept on
any lot or parcel in the R1-30 District shall not exceed one
farm animal unit, as defined herein, for each 10,000
square feet of lot or parcel size.
(c) Farm animals may be kept on any lot or
parcel in the RR-1, RR-5, RR-20 and MU-160 districts
without restriction to the number of farm animals,
provided the keeping of farm animals in these districts
does not constitute a nuisance as defined in the laws of
the City.
(d) No farm animal(s) shall be kept on any
lot or parcel where less than 20,000 square feet of the lot
or parcel is used as livestock management, nor shall
fractional animal units be permitted. Livestock
management areas shall include all portions of the lot or
parcel used as sheds, barns, coops, corrals, pastures,
stables, gardens or cultivated grounds, where animal
waste can be spread, but shall not include any area of the
lot or parcel devoted to dwellings, sidewalks, driveways
or lawns.
(e) One animal unit shall be any one (1) of
the following: One cow, one horse, one donkey, four adult
sheep, eight feeder lambs, four goats, or 12 fowl, together
with the suckling offspring thereof.
(f) Structures shall be provided and maintained
for all animals. Such structures shall be enclosed (fully or
partially), roofed, and sited at the rear of the main
building, and shall comply with all other setback and yard
requirements for the district.
(g) The following additional requirements
shall apply to the location of all pens, corrals, barns,
stables, coops, and other structures for the confinement
and keeping of animals:
(i) All such structures shall be setback at
least 100 feet from all streets.
(ii) All such structures and buildings shall
be located at least 50 feet from all dwellings located on
adjoining lots or parcels, or if any adjoining lot or parcel
does not have a dwelling located thereon, at least 30 feet
from the property lines of the adjacent lot or parcel.
(2) Pet rabbits, ducks, and chicken hens are
permitted in the MR-25, MR-16, MR-8, R1-7, R1-8, R1-
10, R1-12, and R1-14 Districts. No more than a total of
six animals in any combination of rabbits, ducks, and
chicken hens are allowed on any lot in these districts.
Houses, cages, pens, coops, etc. shall be provided for all
animals kept outdoors. As of January 1, 2017, a legal
nonconforming rooster that dies or is removed from a
property located in the above-enumerated zoning districts
shall not be replaced.
(3) Nuisance. In all zoning districts of the City,
persons owning or harboring farm animals may not keep
their animals in any manner that constitutes a nuisance as
defined by City ordinance.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2016-17, 11-02-2016)
(Ord. 2008-11, 11-05-2008) (Ord. 2003-24, 11-05-2003)
7-14-10: Apiaries.
(1) Definitions. The following words, terms, and
phrases, when used in this Section, shall have the
following meanings:
(a) Apiary: a place where bee colonies are kept.
(b) Bee: any stage of the common domestic
honey bee species, Apis Mellifera.
(c) Beekeeper: a person who owns or has charge
of one or more colonies of bees.
(d) Beekeeping Equipment: anything used in
the operation of an apiary, such as hive bodies, supers,
frames, top and bottom boards, and extractors.
(e) Colony: a hive and its equipment and
appurtenances, including bees, comb, honey, pollen and
brood.
(f) Hive: a structure intended for the housing of
a bee colony.
(g) Parcel: a continuous parcel of land under
common ownership.
(2) Hives. All bee colonies shall be kept in
inspectable type hives with removable combs. Hives shall
be kept in a sound and usable condition.
(3) Setback. All hives shall be located at least five
(5) feet from any adjoining property with the back of the
hive facing the nearest adjoining property.
(4) Fencing of flyways. In each instance in which
any colony is situated within 25 feet of a developed public
or private property line of the parcel upon which the
apiary is situated, as measured from the nearest point on
the hive to the property line, the beekeeper shall establish
and maintain a flyway barrier at least six feet in height
consisting of a solid wall or fence parallel to the property
line and extending ten feet beyond the colony in each
direction so that all bees are forced to fly at an elevation
of a least six feet above ground level over the property
lines in the vicinity of the apiary.
(5) Water. Each beekeeper shall ensure that a
convenient source of water is available at all times to the
bees so that the bees will not congregate at swimming
pools, pet water bowls, birdbaths, or other water sources
where they may cause human, bird, or domestic pet
7-48 (November 19, 2020)
contact. The water shall be maintained so as not to
become stagnant.
(6) Maintenance. Each beekeeper shall ensure that
no bee comb or other materials are left upon the grounds
of the apiary site. Upon their removal from the hive, all
such materials shall promptly be disposed of in a sealed
container or placed within a building or other bee-proof
enclosure.
(7) Queens. In any instance in which a colony
exhibits unusually aggressive characteristics by stinging
or attempting to sting without due provocation, or exhibits
an unusual disposition towards swarming, it shall be the
duty of the beekeeper to re-queen the colony. Queens
shall be selected from stock bred for gentleness and nonswarming
characteristics.
(8) Colony Densities. Up to four colonies may be
kept on a parcel of property one acre or less in size. Each
additional colony over four shall require one-quarter acre
of land in addition to the base one acre. Examples: six
colonies requires at least 1.5 acres; ten colonies requires
at least 2.5 acres. No more than 20 colonies may be kept
on any parcel or group of contiguous parcels under
common ownership. The keeping of more than four
colonies requires a business license.
(9) State Registration. Each beekeeper shall be
registered with the Utah Department of Agriculture and
Food as provided in the Utah Bee Inspection Act set forth
in Title 4, Chapter 11 of the Utah Code, as amended.
(10) Prohibited. The keeping by any person of bee
colonies in the City not in strict compliance with this
section is prohibited. Any bee colony residing in a
standard or homemade hive which, by virtue of its
condition, appears to have been abandoned, is unlawful
and may be summarily destroyed or removed from the
City by the Community Development Director or
designee.
(11) Notwithstanding compliance with the various
requirements of this Chapter, it shall be unlawful for any
person to maintain an apiary or to keep any colony on any
property in a manner that threatens public health or safety,
or creates a nuisance.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2011-09, 05-04-2011)
(See Tables on Following Pages)
RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
7-49 (November 19, 2020)
TABLE 1
TABLE OF USES
USE DISTRICT
MR-25 MR-16 MR-8 R1-7 R1-8 R1-10 R1-12 R1-14 R1-30 RR-1 RR-5 RR-20 MU-160
Accessory Buildings and Uses C P P P P P P P P P P P P
Accessory Dwelling Units P P P P P P P P P P
Agriculture (Forestry/Horticultural
Production
P P P P P P P P P P P P
Agriculture (Livestock Production) C C C C C
Agriculture Business C C C
Apiary P P P P P P P P P P
Bed and Breakfast Inn C C C C C C C C C C C C
Campgrounds C C P
Churches and Religious Facilities C C C C C C C C C C C C C
Commercial Day-Care / Pre-School C C C
Commercial Kennel/Animal Hospital C C C
Concrete and Asphalt Plant C
Day Treatment Facility and Program C C C C C C C C C C C C
Dwelling; Single-Family P P P P P P P P P P
Dwelling; Two-family P P P C
Dwelling; Multi-family P P P
RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
USE DISTRICT
7-50 (November 19, 2020)
MR-25 MR-16 MR-8 R1-7 R1-8 R1-10 R1-12 R1-14 R1-30 RR-1 RR-5 RR-20 MU-160
Dwelling; Cabin / Seasonal Home C C
Dwelling; Condominium P P P
Dwelling; Farm and Ranch Employee
Housing
C C
Dwelling; Manufactured Housing Unit P P P P P P P P P P P P
Dwelling; Townhouse P P P
Gardening P P P P P P P P P P P P
Golf Course / Country Club C C C C C C C C C C C C C
Home Occupation P** P P P P P P P P P P P P
Home Occupation - Day Care / Preschool C C C C C C C C C C C C
Hospital C C C C
Outpatient Treatment Facility and Program C C C C C C C C C C C C
Medical and Dental Clinic Accessory to a
Hospital and Located on the Same Premises
C C C
Mine, Quarry, Gravel Pit, Rock Crusher C
Mobile Home Parks
Mobile Home Subdivision
Nursery / Greenhouse (wholesale and retail) C C C C
Open Space Areas, Trails P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Outpatient Treatment Facility and Program C C C C C C C C C C C C
Park and Ride Facilities Located on Arterial
Streets
C C C C C C C C C C C C C
RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
USE DISTRICT
7-51 (November 19, 2020)
MR-25 MR-16 MR-8 R1-7 R1-8 R1-10 R1-12 R1-14 R1-30 RR-1 RR-5 RR-20 MU-160
Private and Public Schools C C C C C C C C C C C C C
Private Parks C C C C C C C C C C C C C
Residential Support Facility and Programs P P P P P P P P P P P P
Private Recreational Facilities C C C C C C C C C C C C
Professional Offices C C C
Public Buildings, Facilities and Parks C C C C C C C C C C C C C
Public and Private Utility Transmission
Lines and Facilities
C C C C C C C C C C C C C
Residential Facilities for Persons with a
Disability
P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Residential Facilities for Elderly Persons P C C C C C C C C C C C C
Residential Support Facility and Programs P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P*
Residential Treatment Facilities and
Program
C C C
Retirement Center C C C C C C C
Sports Fields C C C C C C C C C C C C C
Temporary Concessions Located in Public
Parks
P P P C P P P P P P P P P
Temporary Construction Buildings and
Storage
P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Temporary Sales Office P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Temporary Seasonal Use P P P
MR-25 MR-16 MR-8 R1-7 R1-8 R1-10 R1-12 R1-14 R1-30 RR-1 RR-5 RR-20 MU-160
RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
USE DISTRICT
7-52 (November 19, 2020)
Vacation Resort / Vacation Ranch C C
* Permitted Use with Conditions
** Home Office with No Customers Only
(Ord. 2020-37, 10-07-2020) (Ord. 2019-13, 08-21-2019) (Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019)
RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
7-53 (November 19, 2020)
TABLE 2
ALLOWED DENSITY
Residential Zoning Districts
High Density Medium Density Low Density
MR-25 MR-16 MR-8 R1-7 R1-8 R1-10 R1-12 R1-14
Zones being replaced
by inclusion
HDR, RM-16
(and proposed
RM12)
MDR, R2-8
(and proposed
RM-10,
RM-8)
R1-7 R1-8, R1-9
(and
proposed
RM-6)
R1-10
(and
proposed
RM-4)
R1-12 R1-14
Single Family
Dwelling / Minimum
Lot Size (square feet)
Not Permitted Not Permitted Not Permitted P / 7,000 P / 8,000 P / 10,000 P / 12,000 P / 14,000
Two-family
Dwelling / Minimum
Lot Size (square feet)
Not Permitted P / 10,000 P / 12,000 P / 14,000 C / 16,000
Multi-family
Dwelling
P
maximum 25
units per acre
P
maximum 163
units per acre2
P
maximum 8
units per acre
Multi-Family
Dwelling Minimum
Lot Size
No Minimum4 No Minimum4 No Minimum4
Maximum Dwelling
Units Per Acre for
PUD
25.0 16.0 8.0 5.0 4.0 3.5 3.0 2.5
Other Allowed Uses
(Minimum Square
Feet Required)
8,000 8,000 8,000 10,000 10,000 12,000 12,000 14,000
TABLE 2 (Continued)
RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
7-54 (November 19, 2020)
Residential Zoning Districts
Low Density
R1-30 RR-1 RR-5 RR-20 MU-160
Zones Being Replaced by
Inclusion
RA1-30 RR-1 RR-5 RR-20 MU-160
Single Family
Dwelling / Minimum
Lot Size (sq. ft.)
P / 30,000 P / 1 acre P / 5 acres P / 20 acres P / 160 acres
Two-family Dwelling
Multi-family Dwelling
Maximum Dwelling
Units Per Acre for PUD
1.2 1.0 0.2 0.05 0.0063
Other Allowed Uses
(Minimum Square Feet
Required)
30,000 43,560 5 acres 20 acres 160 acres
Note 1. Repealed. (Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2018-13, 08-15-2018)
Note 2. Multi-family residential projects in the MU-B zoning district proposed as a redevelopment of a registered historical building shall have no maximum density requirement
as a permitted use subject to Note 1 of Table 4 of this Chapter. (Ord. 2018-13, 08-15-2018)
Note 3. Multi-family residential projects in the MU-B zoning district shall be a maximum of 25 dwelling units per acre. (Ord. 2018-13, 08-15-2018)
Note 4. See Table 4 of Chapter 7-14.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019)
RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
7-55 (November 19, 2020)
TABLE 3
SITE PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR PRIMARY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
Residential Zoning District
MR-25 MR-16 MR-8 R1-7 R1-8 R1-10 R1-12 R1-14 R1-30 RR-1 RR-5 RR-20 MU-160
Minimum Lot Width
(at front property line)
35 feet 35 feet 35 feet 35 feet 35 feet 35 feet 35 feet 35 feet 35 feet 100 feet 200 feet 250 feet 1320 feet
Minimum Lot Width (interior
lots at front setback,
single-family)
60 feet 75 feet 85 feet 85 feet 90 feet 100 feet 100 feet 200 feet 250 feet 1320 feet
Minimum Lot Width3 (corner
lots at front setback on each
frontage, single-family)
80 feet 90 feet 100 feet 110 feet 120 feet 120 feet 120 feet 200 feet 250 feet 1320 feet
Minimum Lot Width (at front
setback, two-family)
60 feet 60 feet 60 feet 60 feet 75 feet 85 feet 85 feet 90 feet 100 feet 100 feet 200 feet 250 feet 1320 feet
Minimum Lot Width (at front
setback, all other residential
uses)
70 feet 70 feet 75 feet 60 feet 75 feet 85 feet 85 feet 90 feet 100 feet 100 feet 200 feet 250 feet 1320 feet
Minimum Lot Width (at front
setback, all other uses)
80 feet 80 feet 80 feet 80 feet 80 feet 100 feet 100 feet 100 feet 100 feet 100 feet 200 feet 250 feet 1320 feet
Minimum Front Yard Setback 25 feet2 25 feet2 25 feet2 20 feet 20 feet 25 feet 25 feet 25 feet 30 feet 30 feet 30 feet 30 feet 30 feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
(interior lot)
20 feet2 25 feet2 25 feet2 20 feet 20 feet 25 feet1 25 feet1 30 feet1 30 feet 30 feet 60 feet 60 feet 60 feet
RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
7-55.1 (November 19, 2020)
TABLE 3 (Continued)
Residential Zoning District
MR-25 MR-16 MR-8 R1-7 R1-8 R1-10 R1-12 R1-14 R1-30 RR-1 RR-5 RR-20 MU-
160
Minimum Rear Yard
Setback (Corner Lot)
20 feet2 20 feet 20 feet 20 feet 20 feet 30 feet1 30 feet1 30 feet1 30 feet 30 feet 60 feet 60 feet 60 feet
Minimum Side Yard
Setback (Interior Lot)
10 feet2 6 feet2 6 feet2 6 feet 8 feet 10 feet 10 feet 10 feet 12 feet 20 feet 20 feet 60 feet 60 feet
Minimum Side Yard
Setback (Corner Lot)
15 feet2 15 feet2 15 feet2 20 feet 20 feet 20 feet 20 feet 20 feet 20 feet 30 feet 60 feet 60 feet 60 feet
Maximum/Minimum
Building Height
45 feet /
1 story
35 feet /
1 story
35 feet /
1 story
35 feet /
1 story
35 feet /
1 story
35 feet /
1 story
35 feet /
1 story
35 feet /
1 story
35 feet /
1 story
35 feet /
1 story
35 feet /
1 story
35 feet /
1 story
35 feet /
1 story
Total Lot Coverage (all
buildings)
40% 40% 40% 35% 35% 35% 35% 35% 25% 20% 10% 10% 10%
(Ord. 2020-45, 11-18-2020)
1 The minimum rear yard setback may be reduced by up to 25% for not more than 20% of the width of the rear yard, measured at the rear yard property line
(Ord. 2020-45, 11-18-2020) (Ord. 2005-15, 06-15-2005) (Ord. 2003-24, 11-05-2003) (Ord. 2000-08, 06-07-2000)
2 Multi-family developments subject to Chapter 7-11a of this Title shall follow setback requirements in Section 7-11a-6.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019)
3 Minimum lot width for corner lots may be reduced to the minimum lot width requirement of interior lots when proper notation on the approved plat determines and restricts
the orientation of the primary residential structure on the lot to that frontage only.
(Ord. 2020-45, 11-18-2020)
RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
7-55.2 (November 19, 2020)
TABLE 4
MINIMUM DWELLING UNIT SIZE (Finished Square Feet)1
ONE STORY (includes Split Level and Split Entry) TWO STORY (Total Both Levels)
ZONING DISTRICT With Single Covered
Parking
With Single Garage With Double +
Garage
With Single
Covered
Parking
With Single
Garage
With Double
Garage
1
bedroom
units2
2+
bedroom
units
1
bedroom
units2
2+
bedroom
units
1
bedroom
units2
2+
bedroom
units
MR-25 700 850 700 800 700 800 1000 1000 1000
MR-16 700 8501 700 8001 700 8001 1250 1165 1100
MR-8 700 850 700 800 700 800 1350 1250 1125
R1-7 900 850 800 1350 1250 1125
R1-8 1000 950 800 1500 1375 1250
R1-10 Not Permitted Not Permitted 1300 Not Permitted Not Permitted 1625
R1-12 Not Permitted Not Permitted 1350 Not Permitted Not Permitted 1685
R1-14 Not Permitted Not Permitted 1350 Not Permitted Not Permitted 1685
R1-30 Not Permitted Not Permitted 1350 Not Permitted Not Permitted 1685
RR-1 Not Permitted Not Permitted 1350 Not Permitted Not Permitted 1685
RR-5 Not Permitted Not Permitted 1350 Not Permitted Not Permitted 1685
RR-20 Not Permitted Not Permitted 1350 Not Permitted Not Permitted 1685
MU-160 Not Permitted Not Permitted 1350 Not Permitted Not Permitted 1685
Note 1. The minimum dwelling unit size for a multi-family residential project proposed as a redevelopment of a registered historical building shall be 400 square feet when
approved by the Planning Commission through design review in compliance with Title 7 Chapter 11 of the Tooele City Code.
(Ord. 2020-39, 09-16-2020) (Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2018-13, 08-15-2018) (Ord. 2008-10, 07-02-2008) (Ord. 1999-07, 04-06-1999) (Ord. 2020-20, 05-06-2020)
RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
7-55.3 (November 19, 2020)
Note 2. See Section 7-14-5.
(Ord. 2020-39, 09-016-2020)
RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
7-55.4 (November 19, 2020)
TABLE 5
IN-FILL OVERLAY DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Development Standard Geographic Area A Geographic Area B Nonconforming Lot/Parcel
Minimum Front Yard Setback May reduce to 65% of underlying
zoning district
May reduce to 80% of underlying
zoning district
May reduce to 90% of underlying
zoning district, or to historic
foundation line, whichever is less
Minimum Lot Width at Front
Setback (all residential uses in
residential zones)
May reduce to 80% of underlying
zoning district
May reduce to 90% of underlying
zoning district
Per underlying zoning district
Minimum Garage Setback 25 feet 25 feet 25 feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
(interior lot)
May reduce to 65% of underlying
zoning district
May reduce to 80% of underlying
zoning district
May reduce to 90% of underlying
zoning district, or to historic
foundation line, whichever is less
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
(corner lot)
May reduce to 65% of underlying
zoning district
May reduce to 80% of underlying
zoning district
May reduce to 90% of underlying
zoning district, or to historic
foundation line, whichever is less
Minimum Side Yard Setback
(interior lot)
May reduce to 65% of underlying
zoning district, or to 5 feet,
whichever is greater
May reduce to 80% of underlying
zoning district, or to 5 feet,
whichever is greater
May reduce to 90% of underlying
zoning district, or to 5 feet,
whichever is greater, or to historic
foundation line
Minimum Side Yard Setback
(corner lot)
May reduce to 65% of underlying
zoning district, or to 5 feet,
whichever is greater
May reduce to 80% of underlying
zoning district, or to 5 feet,
whichever is greater
May reduce to 90% of underlying
zoning district, or to 5 feet,
whichever is greater, or to historic
foundation line
Total Lot Coverage
(all buildings)
May increase to 135% of underlying
zoning district
May increase to 120% of underlying
zoning district
May increase to 110% of underlying
zoning district
Roadway Improvements Required As required by Tooele City Code As required by Tooele City Code As required by Tooele City Code
Water Rights (payment of fee in lieu
of conveyance - for single-lot
developments only)
Pay 50% of the fee-in-lieu
established by the City
Pay 75% of the fee-in-lieu
established by the City
Pay 100% of the fee-in-lieu
established by the City
(Ord. 2020-38, 10-07-2020) (Ord. 2019-24, 10-02-2019) (Ord. 2019-08, 03-2019) (Ord 2015-25, 12-16-2020)
RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
7-55.5 (November 19, 2020)
Figure 1: Geographic Area A
Figure 2: Geographic Area B
(Ord. 2015-25, 12-16-2015)
RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
7-55.6 (November 19, 2020)
(Reserved for page 7-55.6)
(August 22, 2019)
CHAPTER 14a. ACCESSORY DWELLING
UNITS
Definitions.
Purposes.
Primary Dwelling Requirement.
Owner occupancy requirement.
Permitted use.
Types of ADUs.
Number of ADUs per Lot.
Planned Unit Developments.
Resident Limit.
7-14a-1.
7-14a-2.
7-14a-3.
7-14a-4.
7-14a-5.
7-14a-6.
7-14a-7.
7-14a-8.
7-14a-9.
7-14a-10.
.
Minimum Lot Size.
7-14a-11. Size.
7-14a-12. Height.
7-14a-13. Setbacks.
7-14a-14. Separation.
7-14a-15. Lot coverage.
7-14a-16. Utilities - Water and Sewer Laterals.
7-14a-17. Addressing.
7-14a-18. Mailbox.
7-14a-19. Subdivision.
7-14a-20. Design.
7-14a-21. Site plan.
7-14a-22. Parking.
7-14a-23. Entrances.
7-14a-24. Site Location.
7-14a-25. Impact Fee Reductions.
7-14a-26. Water Rights.
7-14a-27. Fee Exemptions.
7-14a-28. Building Permits - Building Codes -
Foundations.
7-14a-29. Variance.
7-14a-30. Conversion.
7-14a-31. Business License.
7-14a-32. Home Occupation.
7-14a-33. Registration.
7-14a-34. Violation - Notice - Civil Penalties.
7-14a-35. Zoning Administrator - Appeals.
7-14a-1. Definitions.
The terms “Accessory Dwelling Unit,” “ADU,”
“Base Zoning District,” and “Primary Dwelling” shall
have the meanings given in Section 7-1-5.
(Ord. 2019-13, 08-21-2019)
7-14a-2. Purposes.
The purposes of this Chapter are as enumerated in
Ordinance 2019-13.
(Ord. 2019-13, 08-21-2019)
7-14a-3. Primary Dwelling Requirement.
No ADU in a single-family residential or mixeduse
zoning district shall be permitted or constructed
except as an accessory dwelling to a habitable primary
dwelling.
(Ord. 2019-13, 08-21-2019)
7-14a-4. Owner occupancy requirement.
Either the primary dwelling or the ADU must be
occupied by the primary dwelling owner.
(Ord. 2019-13, 08-21-2019)
7-14a-5. Permitted use.
(1) ADUs shall be a permitted use in all singlefamily
residential zoning districts, namely, R1-7, R1-8,
R1-10, R1-12, R1-14, R1-30, RR-1, RR-5, and RR-20.
(2) ADUs shall be permitted uses in the Mixed
Use-Broadway (MU-B), Mixed Use-General (MU-G),
and Neighborhood Commercial (NC) zoning districts.
(3) ADUs shall be prohibited in the multi-family
(MR) zoning districts.
(4) Internal and attached ADUs shall be
conditional uses in the General Commercial (GC) and
Regional Commercial (RC) zoning districts. Detached
ADUs shall be prohibited in those districts.
(5) An Accessory Dwelling Unit for Caretaker
shall be a conditional use in all the mixed use,
commercial, and industrial zoning districts.
(6) All ADUs shall be subject to the regulations of
this Chapter and Title.
(Ord. 2019-13, 08-21-2019)
7-14a-6. Types of ADUs.
An ADU may be internal, attached, or detached.
See Figure 1.
(Ord. 2019-13, 08-21-2019)
7-14a-7. Number of ADUs per Lot.
No residential lot shall have more than one ADU.
(Ord. 2019-13, 08-21-2019)
7-14a-8. Planned Unit Developments.
ADUs shall not be included in the density
calculations for a planned unit development (PUD).
(Ord. 2019-13, 08-21-2019)
7-14a-9. Resident Limit.
ADU occupancy shall be limited to one family, as
defined in Section 7-1-5.
(Ord. 2019-13, 08-21-2019)
7-14-10. Minimum Lot Size.
Notwithstanding Section 5 herein, the minimum lot
(August 22, 2019)
size required for ADUs is as follows:
(1) 8,500 square feet for a detached ADU;
(2) 8,500 square feet for an attached ADU;
(3) 7,000 square feet for an internal ADU.
(Ord. 2019-13, 08-21-2019)
7-14a-11. Size.
(1) Internal ADUs shall be no smaller than 400
square-feet and no larger than the square footage of the
foundation of the primary dwelling.
(2) Attached ADUs shall be no smaller than 400
square-feet, no larger than 800 square feet on one story,
and no larger than 1,200 square feet.
(3) Detached ADUs shall be no smaller than 800
square-feet and no larger than 1,200 square feet.
(4) An ADU may have no more than two
bedrooms.
(Ord. 2019-13, 08-21-2019)
7-14a-12. Height.
ADU height shall be limited by both the
regulations of the base zoning district and by the height
of the primary dwelling unit, and shall be the lesser
height of the two.
(Ord. 2019-13, 08-21-2019)
7-14a-13. Setbacks.
Front, rear, and side setbacks for ADUs shall be as
required by the regulations of the base zoning district.
(Ord. 2019-13, 08-21-2019)
7-14a-14. Separation.
A detached ADU shall be separated from the
primary dwelling by a distance of at least ten feet.
(Ord. 2019-13, 08-21-2019)
7-14a-15. Lot coverage.
Lot coverage limitations applicable to ADUs shall
be those established by the regulations of the base
zoning district.
(Ord. 2019-13, 08-21-2019)
7-14a-16. Utilities - Water and Sewer Laterals.
(1) ADUs are required to connect to the City
water and sewer main lines for culinary water and
sanitary sewer service.
(2) ADUs are required to share utility meters,
accounts, and water and sewer laterals with the primary
dwelling.
(Ord. 2019-13, 08-21-2019)
7-14a-17. Addressing.
An ADU shall have the same street and mailing
address as the primary dwelling, but shall add the letter
“B” to the ADU address.
(Ord. 2019-13, 08-21-2019)
7-14a-18. Mailbox.
An ADU is allowed, but not required, to have a
separate mailbox from the primary dwelling.
(Ord. 2019-13, 08-21-2019)
7-14a-19. Subdivision.
(1) An ADU may not be sold or divided from the
primary dwelling through deed, condominium,
subdivision, plat, boundary line agreement, or
otherwise.
(2) If a lot on which an ADU sits is subdivided,
the ADU must remain on the lot containing the primary
dwelling with which the ADU was associated upon its
construction.
(3) An ADU shall not be considered or become
the primary dwelling on any lot.
(Ord. 2019-13, 08-21-2019)
7-14a-20. Design.
An ADU shall have the same or substantially
similar architectural features, materials, and colors as
the primary dwelling.
(Ord. 2019-13, 08-21-2019)
7-14a-21. Site plan.
An ADU building permit application shall include
a scaled site plan. The site plan must indicate the
locations and dimensions of property lines and existing
and proposed buildings, building entrances, building
additions, setbacks, parking spaces, driveways, utility
meters, and utility laterals and conduits. The site plan
need not be engineered.
(Ord. 2019-13, 08-21-2019)
7-14a-22. Parking.
(1) An ADU shall provide one additional on-site
parking stall per ADU bedroom.
(2) No ADU parking spaces may be located within
the front or side yard setbacks adjacent to a street
except for within an approved driveway. See Figure 1.
(Ord. 2019-13, 08-21-2019)
7-14a-23. Entrances.
Entrances to internal and attached ADUs shall be
to the side or rear of the primary dwelling or ADU. See
Figure 1.
(Ord. 2019-13, 08-21-2019)
7-14a-24. Site Location.
(August 22, 2019)
Detached ADUs shall be located to the rear of the
primary dwelling, except that on a corner lot a detached
ADU may be located to the side of the primary dwelling
but flush with or set back from the primary dwelling
side facade facing the street. See Figure 1.
(Ord. 2019-13, 08-21-2019)
7-14a-25. Impact Fee Reductions.
(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 4-
15, attached and detached ADUs shall pay the
following impact fees:
(a) Culinary water: 50% of the single-family
culinary water impact fee for interior water use only,
and no impact fee for exterior water use.
(b) Sanitary sewer: 50% of the single-family
sanitary sewer impact fee.
(c) Public safety: 50% of the single-family
public safety impact fee.
(d) Parks and recreation: 50% of the singlefamily
parks and recreation impact fee.
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 4-
15, internal ADUs shall not be required to pay impact
fees.
(Ord. 2019-13, 08-21-2019)
7-14a-26. Water Rights.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 7-26, an
ADU shall not be required to convey water rights to the
City.
(Ord. 2019-13, 08-21-2019)
7-14a-27. Fee Exemptions.
An ADU shall not be required to pay the street
light utility fee or the storm water utility fee.
(Ord. 2019-13, 08-21-2019)
7-14a-28. Building Permits - Building Codes -
Foundations.
(1) The installation and/or construction of an
ADU shall require the application for and issuance of a
building permit. An ADU building permit shall clearly
identify that it is for an ADU.
(2) Unless otherwise required by applicable
building and fire codes, an internal ADU shall not be
required to construct one-hour fire rated separations
between the area of the primary dwelling used by the
primary dwelling occupants and the ADU portion of the
primary dwelling.
(3) ADUs must comply with all uniform building
codes applicable to dwellings.
(4) ADUs shall be constructed on site-built
permanent foundations, which may include slabs-ongrade.
(5) All running gear, tongues, axles, wheels, and
similar or related appurtenances must be removed at the
time of ADU installation.
(Ord. 2019-13, 08-21-2019)
7-14a-29. Variance.
An ADU located on a legal nonconforming lot may
apply to the Zoning Administrator for a variance from
the setbacks of the base zoning district to match the
setbacks of the primary dwelling, but must comply with
applicable building and fire code setback requirements.
(Ord. 2019-13, 08-21-2019)
7-14a-30. Conversion.
Non-dwelling accessory structures may be
converted into detached ADUs upon compliance with
this Chapter and with applicable building and fire
codes.
(Ord. 2019-13, 08-21-2019)
7-14a-31. Business License.
The owner of an ADU shall not be required to
obtain a city business license to own or rent the ADU.
(Ord. 2019-13, 08-21-2019)
7-14a-32. Home Occupation.
Subject to the primary dwelling owner’s written
consent, an ADU may contain a home occupation,
which must be conducted entirely within the ADU.
(Ord. 2019-13, 08-21-2019)
7-14a-33. Registration.
No ADU registration shall be required in addition
to the building permit.
(Ord. 2019-13, 08-21-2019)
7-14a-34. Violation - Notice - Civil Penalties.
(1) A violation of any provision of this Chapter
shall be a civil offence.
(2) Notice of the violation and associated civil
penalties shall be delivered by first-class regular U.S.
mail to both:
(A) the address of record with the County
Recorder’s Office; and,
(B) to the street address.
(3) A violation of this Chapter shall be punishable
by a civil penalty of $100 per occurrence. Following a
cure period of 30 days from the date of the notice of
violation, every week the violation continues shall be
considered an additional occurrence of the same
violation and shall result in the imposition of an
additional $100 civil penalty per week of the continuing
(August 22, 2019)
violation.
(Ord. 2019-13, 08-21-2019)
7-41a-35. Zoning Administrator - Appeals.
(1) Interpretations and decisions applying this
Chapter shall be made by the Zoning Administrator.
(2) Administrative appeals of Zoning
Administrator interpretations and decision, notices of
violation, and the imposition of civil penalties shall be
made pursuant to Chapters 1-27 and 1-28.
(Ord. 2019-13, 08-21-2019)
(May 23, 2019) 7-56
CHAPTER 15. RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES
FOR PERSONS WITH A DISABILITY
7-15-1. Applicability.
7-15-2. Purpose.
7-15-3. Permitted Use; Requirements.
7-15-4. State Certification or Licensure.
7-15-5. Revocation of Occupancy Permit.
7-15-6. Violations.
7-15-7. Reasonable Accommodation.
7-15-8. Appeals.
7-15-1. Applicability.
Any structure or dwelling encompassed within
the definition of “Residential Facility for Persons
with a Disability” shall comply with the requirements
of this Chapter notwithstanding other provisions of
this Code to the contrary.
(Ord. 2012-17, 09-05-2012)
7-15-2. Purpose.
The purposes of this Chapter include:
(1) to comply with the Federal Fair Housing Act
(42 U.S.C. §3601 et seq.);
(2) to comply with the Utah Fair Housing Act
(U.C.A. Chapter 57-12);
(3) to comply with U.C.A. §10-9a-520
(Residences for persons with a disability);
(4) to permit housing for persons with
disabilities in a non-discriminatory manner; and,
(5) to allow for reasonable accommodations to
afford persons with disabilities equal housing
opportunities.
(Ord. 2012-17, 09-05-2012)
7-15-3. Permitted Use; Requirements.
A residential facility for persons with a disability
(for purposes of this Chapter, a “facility”) shall be a
permitted use in any zoning district in which a
dwelling is a permitted primary use. Each facility
shall comply with the following requirements.
(1) The facility shall comply with all building,
safety, and health regulations applicable to the
construction and habitation of dwellings.
(2) The facility shall comply with all of the
provisions of this Title applicable to dwellings, unless
otherwise specified in this Chapter.
(3) Each facility located in a single-family
zoning district (R1-7 through RR-5) shall comply
with the single-family design standards contained in
Chapter 7-11b of this Title.
(4) Each facility located in a multi-family
zoning district (MR-25, MR-16, and MR-8) shall
comply with the multi-family design standards
contained in Chapter 7-11a of this Title.
(5) The minimum number of parking spaces
required for a facility shall be as required in Chapter
7-4 of this Title.
(6) No more than four persons may be housed in
a single bedroom.
(7) A minimum of 60 square-feet per resident
shall be provided in a multiple-occupant bedroom. A
minimum of 100 square-feet per resident shall be
provided in a single-occupant bedroom.
(8) Bathrooms shall have a minimum ratio of
one toilet, one lavatory, and one tub or shower to
each six residents.
(9) The facility must be a structure type that is
permitted in the zoning district in which the facility is
proposed to be located.
(10) No facility may be located within 660
feet of another facility, measured in a straight line
between the nearest property lines of the lots upon
which the respective facilities are located.
(Ord. 2019-12, 05-15-2019) (Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-
2019) (Ord. 2012-17, 09-05-2012)
7-15-4. State Certification or Licensure.
(1) Prior to the City issuing a certificate of
occupancy for a facility, and prior to actual
occupancy of a facility, the person or entity licensed
or certified by the State of Utah to establish and
operate the facility shall:
(a) provide a copy of the required State of
Utah licenses and/or certificates for the facility and
for any State-regulated programs provided at the
facility; and,
(b) certify by affidavit to the City that no
person will reside or remain in the facility whose
tenancy likely would constitute a direct threat to the
health or safety of others or would result in
substantial physical damage to the property of others.
(2) For purposes of this Chapter, State of Utah
licenses and certificates for facilities and programs
are applicant-specific, facility-specific, and programspecific,
and shall not be transferrable to any other
owner, operator, facility, or program.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2012-17, 09-05-
2012)
7-15-5. Revocation of Occupancy Permit.
The City may revoke the occupancy permit of
any facility upon the occurrence of any of the
following:
(1) the facility is devoted to a use other than a
residential facility for persons with a disability;
(2) any license or certificate required and issued
by the State of Utah for the facility or a program
provided at the facility terminates for any reason
(including expiration, revocation, suspension for five
years or more, denial of renewal);
(3) the facility fails to comply with all of the
requirements of this Chapter; or,
(4) the facility allows a person to reside or
remain in the facility whose tenancy constitutes or has
constituted a direct threat to the health or safety of
others or has resulted in substantial physical damage
(May 23, 2019) 7-56.1
to the property of others.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2012-17, 09-05-
2012)
7-15-6. Violations.
(1) The following shall constitute a violation of
this Chapter:
(a) continued occupation of a facility upon
the revocation of the occupancy permit;
(b) continued occupation of a facility upon
the termination of the State of Utah license or
certificate for the facility;
(c) continued providing of a program upon
the termination of the State of Utah license or
certificate for that program;
(d) noncompliance with any provision of
Title 4 or Title 7 of this Code applicable to the
facility;
(e) allowing a person to reside or remain in
the facility whose tenancy constitutes or has
constituted a direct threat to the health or safety of
others or has resulted in substantial physical damage
to the property of others; and,
(f) allowing the facility to be devoted to a
use other than a residential facility for persons with a
disability.
(2) Any violation of this Chapter is a class B
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2012-17, 09-05-2012)
7-15-7. Reasonable Accommodation.
None of the foregoing conditions shall be
interpreted to limit any reasonable accommodation
necessary to allow the establishment or occupancy of
a facility. Any person or entity who wishes to request
a reasonable accommodation shall make application
to the Director of the Community Development
Department and shall articulate in writing the basis
for the requested accommodation. Each application
for a reasonable accommodation shall be decided by
the Director within 30 days. Failure of the Director
to issue a decision within 30 days shall be deemed a
denial of the application.
(Ord. 2012-17, 09-05-2012)
7-15-8. Appeals.
(1) The denial of a request for reasonable
accommodation may be appealed to the Zoning
Administrator by filing with the Community
Development Department a written appeal within ten
days of the date of denial. The Zoning Administrator
shall issue a written decision with 15 days of the date
of the appeal. Failure of the Zoning Administrator to
issue a written decision within the 15 days shall be
considered a denial of the appeal.
(2) The decision of the Zoning Administrator
may be appealed to the Administrative Hearing
Officer by filing with the Community Development
Department a written appeal within ten days of the
date of denial. The Administrative Hearing Officer
shall schedule and conduct an informal hearing, shall
notify the appellant and the Zoning Administrator of
the date and time of the hearing, and shall issue a
written decision within 15 days of the hearing. The
decision shall be mailed by first-class mail to the
appellant.
(3) The revocation of an occupancy permit
pursuant to this Chapter may be appealed to the
Administrative Hearing Officer by filing with the
Community Development Department a written
appeal within ten days of the date of the revocation
notice. The Administrative Hearing Officer shall
schedule and conduct an informal hearing, shall
notify the appellant and the Director of the
Community Development Department of the date and
time of the hearing, and shall issue a written decision
within 15 days of the hearing. The decision shall be
mailed by first-class mail to the appellant.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2012-17, 09-05-
2012)
(May 23, 2019) 7-56.2
CHAPTER 15a. RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES FOR
ELDERLY PERSONS
7-15a-1. Applicability.
7-15a-2. Purpose.
7-15a-3. Permitted or Conditional Use; Requirements.
7-15a-4. Revocation of Permit.
7-15a-5. Violations.
7-15a-6. Reasonable Accommodation.
7-15a-7. Appeals.
7-15a-1. Applicability.
Any structure or dwelling encompassed within the
definition of “Residential Facility for Elderly Persons”
shall comply with the requirements of this Chapter
notwithstanding other provisions of this Code to the
contrary.
(Ord. 2012-17, 09-05-2012)
7-15a-2. Purpose.
The purposes of this Chapter include:
(1) to comply with the Federal Fair Housing Act (42
U.S.C. §3601 et seq.);
(2) to comply with the Utah Fair Housing Act
(U.C.A. Chapter 57-12);
(3) to comply with U.C.A. §§10-9a-516 through -
519 (Residential facilities for elderly persons, etc.);
(4) to permit housing for elderly persons in a nondiscriminatory
manner; and,
(5) to allow for reasonable accommodations to
afford elderly persons equal housing opportunities.
(Ord. 2012-17, 09-05-2012)
7-15a-3. Permitted or Conditional Use; Requirements.
(1) A residential facility for elderly persons (for
purposes of this Chapter, a “facility”) housing eight or
fewer residents shall be a permitted use in any residential
zoning district in which a single-family dwelling is a
permitted primary use.
(2) A facility housing more than eight residents shall
be a conditional use in any residential zoning district.
(3) Each facility shall comply with the following
requirements.
(a) The facility shall comply with all building,
safety, and health regulations applicable to the
construction and habitation of dwellings.
(b) The facility shall comply with all of the
provisions of this Title applicable to single-family
dwellings, unless otherwise specified in this Chapter.
(c) Each facility located in a single-family
zoning district (R1-7 through RR-5) shall comply with the
single-family design standards contained in Chapter 7-11b
of this Title.
(d) Each facility located in a multi-family
zoning district (MR-25, MR-16 and MR-8) shall comply
with the multi-family design standards contained in
Chapter 7-11a of this Title.
(e) The minimum number of parking spaces
required for a facility shall be as required in Chapter 7-4
of this Title.
(f) No more than four persons may be housed in
a single bedroom.
(g) A minimum of 60 square-feet per resident
shall be provided in a multiple-occupant bedroom. A
minimum of 100 square-feet per resident shall be provided
in a single-occupant bedroom.
(h) Bathrooms shall have a minimum ratio of
one toilet, one lavatory, and one tub or shower to each six
residents.
(i) The facility must be a structure type that is
permitted in the zoning district in which the facility is
proposed to be located.
(j) No facility with more than 8 occupants may
be located within 660 feet of another facility, measured in
a straight line between the nearest property lines of the
lots upon which the respective facilities are located.
(k) Placement in a facility shall not be a part of,
or in lieu of, confinement, rehabilitation, or treatment in
a correctional facility.
(Ord. 2019-12, 05-15-2019) (Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019)
(Ord. 2012-17, 09-05-2012)
7-15a-4. Revocation of Permit.
The City may revoke the Conditional Use Permit and
occupancy permit of any facility upon the occurrence of
any of the following:
(1) the facility is devoted to a use other than a
residential facility for elderly persons;
(2) any license or certificate required by the State of
Utah for the facility or a program provided at the facility
terminates for any reason (including expiration,
revocation, suspension for five years or more, denial of
renewal);
(3) the facility fails to comply with all of the
requirements of this Chapter; or,
(4) the facility allows a person to reside or remain in
the facility whose tenancy constitutes or has constituted a
direct threat to the health or safety of others or has
resulted in substantial physical damage to the property of
others.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2012-17, 09-05-2012)
7-15a-5. Violations.
(1) The following shall constitute a violation of this
Chapter:
(a) continued occupation of a facility upon the
revocation of the conditional use permit or occupancy
permit;
(b) continued occupation of a facility upon the
termination of a required State of Utah license or
certificate for the facility;
(c) continued providing of a program upon the
termination of a required State of Utah license or
certificate for that program;
(d) noncompliance with any provision of Title
4 or Title 7 of this Code applicable to the facility;
(e) allowing a person to reside or remain in the
facility whose tenancy constitutes or has constituted a
(May 23, 2019) 7-56.3
direct threat to the health or safety of others or has
resulted in substantial physical damage to the property of
others; and,
(f) allowing the facility to be devoted to a use
other than a residential facility for elderly persons.
(2) Any violation of this Chapter is a class B
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2012-17, 09-05-2012)
7-15a-6. Reasonable Accommodation.
None of the foregoing conditions shall be interpreted
to limit any reasonable accommodation necessary to allow
the establishment or occupancy of a facility. Any person
or entity who wishes to request a reasonable
accommodation shall make application to the Director of
the Community Development Department and shall
articulate in writing the basis for the requested
accommodation. Each application for a reasonable
accommodation shall be decided by the Director within 30
days. Failure of the Director to issue a decision within 30
days shall be deemed a denial of the application.
(Ord. 2012-17, 09-05-2012)
7-15a-7. Appeals.
(1) The denial of a request for reasonable
accommodation may be appealed to the Zoning
Administrator by filing with the Community Development
Department a written appeal within ten days of the date of
denial. The Zoning Administrator shall issue a written
decision with 15 days of the date of the appeal. Failure of
the Zoning Administrator to issue a written decision
within the 15 days shall be considered a denial of the
appeal.
(2) The decision of the Zoning Administrator may be
appealed to the Administrative Hearing Officer by filing
with the Community Development Department a written
appeal within ten days of the date of denial. The
Administrative Hearing Officer shall schedule and
conduct an informal hearing, shall notify the appellant and
the Zoning Administrator of the date and time of the
hearing, and shall issue a written decision within 15 days
of the hearing. The decision shall be mailed by first-class
mail to the appellant.
(3) The revocation of an occupancy permit pursuant
to this Chapter may be appealed to the Administrative
Hearing Officer by filing with the Community
Development Department a written appeal within ten days
of the date of the revocation notice. The Administrative
Hearing Officer shall schedule and conduct an informal
hearing, shall notify the appellant and the Director of the
Community Development Department of the date and time
of the hearing, and shall issue a written decision within 15
days of the hearing. The decision shall be mailed by firstclass
mail to the appellant.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2012-17, 09-05-2012)
(May 23, 2019) 7-56.4
(Page 7-56.4 Reserved)
(October 14, 2020) 7-57
CHAPTER 16. ZONING DISTRICT PURPOSE AND
INTENT. MIXED USE, COMMERCIAL,
INDUSTRIAL AND SPECIAL PURPOSE
DISTRICTS
7-16-1. Mixed Use, Commercial, Industrial and
Special Purpose Zoning Districts.
7-16-2. Purposes and Intent.
7-16-2.1.Gateway Overlay Districts-Location.
7-16-1. Mixed Use, Commercial, Industrial and
Special Purpose Zoning Districts.
(1) The Mixed Use, Commercial, Industrial and
Special Purpose Zoning Districts of Tooele City are
established and provided to implement the Tooele City
General Plan. These Districts are:
(a) Mixed Use - General District (MU-G)
(b) Mixed Use - Broadway District (MU-B)
(c) Neighborhood Commercial District (NC)
(d) General Commercial District (GC)
(e) Regional Commercial District (RC)
(f) Light Industrial District (LI)
(g) Industrial Service District (IS)
(h) Industrial District (I)
(i) Research and Development District (RD)
(2) Also provided are the following Special Purpose
Overlay Districts, formulated to establish special design,
use requirements and general site planning provisions for
specific areas of the City. These Districts are:
(a) Downtown Overlay District (DO)
(b) Gateway Overlay District (GO)
(3) The Commercial Districts of Tooele City are
intended to reflect the diversity of the City’s commercial
areas and to provide a wide range of commercial services
for Tooele City and surrounding areas. Each Zoning
District is distinguished by the uses and intensity of
development allowed. The Mixed Use District (MU) and
Neighborhood Commercial District (NC) encourage a mix
of residential and commercial uses that are supportive of
adjoining residential areas. The Industrial Districts of
Tooele City are provided to encourage economic diversity
and vitality for the City and provide a range of
employment opportunities for City residents, and
residents of surrounding areas.
(Ord. 2020-42, 10-07-2020) (Ord. 1998-40, 12-16-1998)
7-16-2. Purposes and Intent.
The purposes and intent of the Tooele City Mixed
Use, Commercial, Industrial and Special Purpose Districts
are:
(1) Mixed Use (MU-B and MU-G)Districts. The
purpose of the Mixed Use Districts is to provide and area
for an appropriate mix of compatible residential, limited
commercial and compatible business and professional
offices. A goal of this district is to preserve existing
residential buildings and structures while allowing some
opportunities for their use for limited commercial and
business activity. This district also encourages the
establishment of residential and limited nonresidential
uses within the same structure or located on the same lot.
(2) Neighborhood Commercial (NC) Dstrict. The
Neighborhood Commercial District (NC) is designed and
intended for small areas for limited commercial uses
providing goods and services to residents in the
surrounding neighborhood area. The District encourages
the provision of small-scale retail and service uses for
nearby residents. Uses are restricted in type and size to
promote a local orientation and to limit possible adverse
impacts on nearby residential areas. The Neighborhood
Commercial District is to be located in areas of the City so
as to facilitate pedestrian access and to encourage the
continued viability of the uses allowed in the District. The
location and design of all buildings and accessory
activities and uses should respect the neighborhood and
residential activities that adjoin this District and all
activities should be conducted in a manner that adds to
neighborhood amenity and the residential setting.
(3) General Commercial (GC) District. The General
Commercial (GC) District is intended and provided to
encourage the establishment of a wide variety of retail
commercial uses, service commercial activities,
entertainment and other services and activities meeting the
needs of the residents of the City. The General
Commercial District (GC) allows and encourages that
retail and service businesses and related uses be grouped
together into commercial centers. The uses and activities
allowed in this District should enhance employment
opportunities, provide for commercial activities and
services required by residents of the city and surrounding
areas, encourage the efficient use of land, enhance
property values and add to the overall strength of the
city’s tax base.
(4) Regional Commercial District (RC). The
Regional Commercial District is established to provide for
large scale commercial and other uses that have a regional
influence and that may be areas of high traffic generation,
because of the nature of the use, the diversity of uses, or
the size of the activity. The Regional Commercial (RC)
District is designed to provide areas for intensive retail
commercial uses, such as retail shopping centers, large
retail outlets, large office buildings, entertainment uses,
public uses and quasi-public uses and related activities.
This District shall be located so as to be able to provide
the services and infrastructure available to meet the
demands of intensive commercial uses. This District will
(October 14, 2020) 7-58
be located in proximity to major roads and transportation
corridors to facilitate access by the private automobile and
public transportation. This District encourages creative
site planning and design for activities and uses that will
provide commercial and other services to residents of the
Tooele Valley and adjoining areas. All buildings and
structures within this District will be attractively designed
and incorporate a design theme through architectural
design elements. These areas should also provide
amenities for the use of city residents and patrons
including open space and trail features, mass transit
terminals and other amenities.
(5) Light Industrial (LI) District. The purpose of the
Light Industrial (LI) District is to provide locations for
light industrial assembly and manufacturing uses that
produce no appreciable negative impact to adjacent
properties. This District encourages clean, light industrial
(April 5, 2019) 7-58 and manufacturing uses which
provide employment opportunities for city residents,
strengthen the city’s tax base and diversify the local
economy.
(6) Industrial Service (IS) District. The purpose of
the Industrial Service (IS) District is to provide locations
for more intensive service type uses for the benefit of the
community and regional area. Despite the more intensive
nature, this District still encourages clean uses which
provide employment opportunities for city residents,
strengthen the city's tax base, and diversify the local
economy.
(7) Industrial (I) District. The Industrial (I) District
is formulated to recognize existing industrial sites and
uses within the city and to allow for the establishment of
additional industrial uses which add to employment
opportunities and economic diversity within the city.
(8) Research and Development (RD) District. The
Research and Development (RD) District is intended to
combine certain elements of the General Commercial and
Light Industrial zoning districts while excluding other
elements. The intent of the RD zone is to allow for a
professional business park within the City where
businesses may locate in an environment that allows a mix
of certain small commercial and light industrial uses. It is
not intended for large commercial or industrial uses or for
intensive retail or manufacturing activities.
(9) Downtown Overlay (DO) District. The Tooele
City Downtown Overlay District (DO) is formulated to
encourage and provide opportunities for various retail,
service and other uses within the existing Main Street
“downtown” area of the City. This area is generally
characterized and recognized by two story buildings
constructed to the front property line. It is the goal of the
Downtown Overlay to recognize the existing development
pattern of the area and allow for the strengthening of the
character, vitality and amenities of the Downtown area
through specific downtown site planning and building
standards and requirements. The Downtown Overlay
District (DO) allows and requires the establishment of
uses that work to reinforce the existing Main Street
through special standards for building location, parking,
uses, signage and other considerations.
(10) Gateway Overlay (GO) Districts. The Gateway
Overlay Districts (GO) are provided to encourage unified
and consistent design elements and site planning to
promote an attractive and desirable streetscape for areas
that are visually prominent and located at the key entry
points, or “gateways” to Tooele City. The streetscape is a
combination of buildings and structures, signage,
landscaping, off-street parking areas, street improvements
and other elements that dominate the view of the driver or
pedestrian at the identified gateway areas of the City. The
design and overall attractiveness and quality of the city’s
gateway areas is indicative of the values and character of
the City. An attractive and functional streetscape is one
that promotes cohesiveness and establishes a design theme
for signage, building design, landscaping and street trees
and other street amenities. The Tooele City Gateway
Overlay Districts (GO) require site planning and design
for all buildings and structures within the District to be
reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission with
requirements for landscaping, signage and the location of
required off-street parking areas.
(Ord. 2020-42, 10-07-2020) (Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019)
(Ord. 2010-16, 10-06-2010) (Ord. 2003-15, 06-04-2003)
(Ord. 1998-40, 12-16-1998)
7-16-2.1. Gateway Overlay Districts–Location.
Tooele City Gateway Overlay Districts shall be the
following:
(1) Northern Gateway
(a) Length: from approximately 925 North Main
Street (“SR-36 North") to the northern city boundary, on
either and/or both sides of SR-36 North.
(b) Depth: the greater of
(i) the depth of any lot adjoining
SR-36 North, or
(ii) 300 feet perpendicular to the
nearest SR-36 North right-of-way line, and, if an interior
public or private right-of-way (“interior road”) crosses any
portion of a lot within said 300 feet, then the greater of
(A) the depth of any lot
adjoining the interior road, or
(B) 300 feet beyond the outer
boundary of the interior road, perpendicular to the nearest
SR-36 North right-of-way line, and measured from the
point on the interior road farthest from the nearest SR-36
North right-of-way line.
(October 14, 2020) 7.58.1
(2) Western Gateway A
(a) Length: on State Road 112
(“SR-112") from the intersection of Rogers Road
and SR-112 to the western city boundary, on either
and/or both sides of SR-112.
(b) Depth: the greater of
(i) the depth of any lot adjoining
SR-112, or
(ii) 300 feet perpendicular to the
nearest SR-112 right-of-way line, and, if an interior
public or private right-of-way (“interior road”)
crosses any portion of a lot within said 300 feet,
then the greater of
(A) the depth of any lot
adjoining the interior road, or
(B) 300 feet beyond the
outer of the interior road, perpendicular to the
nearest SR-112 right-ofway line, and measured
from the point on the interior road farthest from the
nearest SR-112 right-of-way line.
(3) Western Gateway B.
(a) Length: on SR-112 from the City’s
western boundary to the intersection of SR-112
and 1000 North, thence east on 1000 North to the
intersection of 1000 North and SR-36;
(b) Depth: the greater of
(i) the depth of any lot adjoining
SR-112 or 1000 North, or
(ii) 300 feet perpendicular to the
nearest SR-112 or 1000 North right-of-way line,
and, if an interior public or private right-of-way
(“interior road”) crosses any portion of a lot within
said 300 feet, then the greater of
(A) the depth of any lot
adjoining the interior road, or
(B) 300 feet beyond the
outer boundary of the interior road, perpendicular
to the nearest SR-112 or 1000 North right-of-way
line, and measured from the point on the interior
road farthest from the nearest SR-112 or 1000
North right-of-way line.
(4) Southern Gateway
(a) Length: from approximately
Settlement Canyon Road (approximately 800
South) to the southern city boundary, on either
and/or both sides of SR-36 (“SR36 South").
(b) Depth: the greater of
(i) the depth of any lot adjoining
SR-36 South, or
(ii) 300 feet perpendicular to the
nearest SR-36 South right-of-way line, and, if an
interior public or private right-of-way (“interior
road”) crosses any portion of a lot within said 300
feet, then the greater of
(A) the depth of any lot
adjoining the interior road, or
(B) 300 feet beyond the
outer boundary of the interior road, perpendicular
to the nearest SR-36 South right-of-way line, and
measured from the point on the interior road
farthest from the nearest SR-36 South right-of-way
line. (Ordinance 2003-15, 06-04-2003)
(October 14, 2020) 7.58.2
(PAGE 7-58.2 RESERVED)
(October 14, 2020) 7-59
TABLE 1
TABLE OF USES
USE
DISTRICT
MU-B
Mixed
Use-
Broadway
MU-G
Mixed
Use-
General
NC
Neighbor
hood
Commercial
(Maximum
individual
lot Size
15,000
square
feet)
GC
General
Commercial
RC
Regional
Commercial
LI
Light
Industrial
IS
Industrial
Service
I
Industrial
RD
Research
& Development
Accessory Building P P P P P P P P P
Accessory Drive
Through Facility
(considered as a
Conditional Use for a
Use allowed in the
District, see Note #3 and
Table 2)
C C C C C C C
Accessory Dwelling
Unit for Caretaker
Only (must be located
within primary structure.
See Table 2)
C C C C C C C C
Accessory Dwelling
Unit (internal and
attached: located above
ground floor. See Table
2)
P P P C C
Accessory Dwelling
Unit (detached: located
on the same lot as
primary structure. See
Table 2)
P P P
Accessory Outdoor
Sales and Display
Incidental to an
Allowed Use
(considered as a
Conditional Use for a
Use allowed in the
District, see Note #4 and
Table 2)
C C C C C
Accessory Outside
Storage (considered as
a Conditional Use for a
Use allowed in the
District, see Note #2 and
Table 2)
C C C C
USE
DISTRICT
MU-B
Mixed
Use-
Broadway
MU-G
Mixed
Use-
General
NC
Neighbor
hood
Commercial
(Maximum
individual
lot Size
15,000
square
feet)
GC
General
Commercial
RC
Regional
Commercial
LI
Light
Industrial
IS
Industrial
Service
I
Industrial
RD
Research
& Development
(October 14, 2020) 7-60
Accessory Outside
Storage of
Flammable or
Hazardous
Materials (considered
as a Conditional Use for
a Use allowed in the
District, see Note #2 and
Table 2)
C
Agriculture
(horticulture)
P P P C
Airport C C
Auto Impound Yard C C
Automobile Sales
and Rental
C C
Minimum
Lot size
30,000
square
feet with
access
from
arterial
road only
C C P P P
Automobile Service
and Repair
C C P P P
Automobile Service
and Repair
Accessory to a
Principal Use
C P
Automobile Body
and Fender Service
and Repair
C C P
Bed and Breakfast
Inn (located in an
existing structure)
C C C P
Boarding House C C C
Building
Maintenance
Services
C P P P
Business Office P P P P P P
Business Office
(located within an
existing structure)
C C C P P P P P P
USE
DISTRICT
MU-B
Mixed
Use-
Broadway
MU-G
Mixed
Use-
General
NC
Neighbor
hood
Commercial
(Maximum
individual
lot Size
15,000
square
feet)
GC
General
Commercial
RC
Regional
Commercial
LI
Light
Industrial
IS
Industrial
Service
I
Industrial
RD
Research
& Development
(October 14, 2020) 7-61
Campground,
Travel Trailer Park
C C
Car Wash C P P P C
Chemical
Manufacture and
Storage
C
Church C C C C P
Conference Center P P P P P
Contractor’s
Display/Office
C P P P P
Contractor's Storage
Yard
C C P
Convenience Store,
without Gasoline
Sales
P P P P P P P P P
Convenience Store,
with Gasoline Sales
C C C P C P P P P
Cultural activities
and uses
C C P C P P P
Day-Care/Pre-
School (Home
Occupation)
P P
Day Care/
Pre-School Center
C C C P C C C
Distribution Center C C P
Dwelling; Single
Family (Detached )
P P
Dwelling; Two
family
P C
Dwelling; Multi-
Family
C
See Note 6
C
See Note 6
Extractive Industry
Fast Food
Restaurant
C C P P P P P
Financial Services C C C P P P P P
USE
DISTRICT
MU-B
Mixed
Use-
Broadway
MU-G
Mixed
Use-
General
NC
Neighbor
hood
Commercial
(Maximum
individual
lot Size
15,000
square
feet)
GC
General
Commercial
RC
Regional
Commercial
LI
Light
Industrial
IS
Industrial
Service
I
Industrial
RD
Research
& Development
(October 14, 2020) 7-62
Food and Beverage
Processing
C
Funeral
Home/Mortuary
C C P P P P
Garden Center C C P P P P
General Industrial
Activity
P P P P
Group Home C C C
Hardware and
Garden Supply
Store
C P P P P
Hazardous Material
Storage
Hazardous Waste
In-Transit Facility
C
Health Care Facility C C P P P C
Health Care
Provider
C C C P P P P P
Health Care
Provider (located
within an existing
structure)
C C P P P P P P
Health Club C C P P P P P P
Heavy Equipment
Sales and Rental
C C P
Heavy Industrial
Manufacturing and
Assembly
C
Heliport C C C C C C
Home Occupation
(must comply with all
requirements of a Home
Occupation)
P P
Hotel C C P P P P P
Junkyard/Salvage
Yard
C
Kennel C C P
USE
DISTRICT
MU-B
Mixed
Use-
Broadway
MU-G
Mixed
Use-
General
NC
Neighbor
hood
Commercial
(Maximum
individual
lot Size
15,000
square
feet)
GC
General
Commercial
RC
Regional
Commercial
LI
Light
Industrial
IS
Industrial
Service
I
Industrial
RD
Research
& Development
(October 14, 2020) 7-63
Laundromat C C C P P P P
Light
Manufacturing and
Assembly
P P
Liquor Store C C C
Medical Cannabis
Pharmacy
P P P P P P P
Medical Cannabis
Production
Establishment
P
Membership Club C C C C
Military Surplus
Yard
C
Motel C C P P P P P
Nursery C C P P P C
Nursing Home,
Convalescent Care
Facility
C C C P P
Open Space Areas,
Trails
P P P P P P P P P
Park and Ride
Facilities
C C C P C C
Personal Services C C P P P P P
Pet Shop / Pet
Grooming
C C C
Public or Private
Educational Facility
C C C C C C C C
Personal Storage
Facility (Mini-
Storage)
C C P
Private Club/Bar C C C C C C C
Professional Office C C C P P P P P P
Professional Office
(located within an
existing structure)
C C C P P P P P P
USE
DISTRICT
MU-B
Mixed
Use-
Broadway
MU-G
Mixed
Use-
General
NC
Neighbor
hood
Commercial
(Maximum
individual
lot Size
15,000
square
feet)
GC
General
Commercial
RC
Regional
Commercial
LI
Light
Industrial
IS
Industrial
Service
I
Industrial
RD
Research
& Development
(October 14, 2020) 7-64
Public Use C C C C C C C C C
Reception Center C C P P P P P
Reception Center
(located within an
existing structure)
C C P P P P
Recreational
Facility (Indoor)
P P P P C
Recreational
Facility (Outdoor)
C C C C
Recycling
Collection Site
C C C P
Recycling
Processing Center
C
Repair Shop
(household and personal
goods with no outside
storage)
C C P P P P P
Research Facility P P P P P
Restaurant C C P P P P P P
Restaurant (located
within an existing
structure)
C C P P P P P
Retail Sales
Accessory to an
Allowed Yse
P P P P P P
Retail Store (located
within an existing
structure)
C C C P P
Retail Store (Total
maximum 3,000 square
footage)
C C C P P P P
Retail Store or
Commercial Center
P P
Retail Store or
Commercial Center
(Minimum 120,000
building square foot and
planned and phased by
approval of a Master
Development Site Plan)
P P
USE
DISTRICT
MU-B
Mixed
Use-
Broadway
MU-G
Mixed
Use-
General
NC
Neighbor
hood
Commercial
(Maximum
individual
lot Size
15,000
square
feet)
GC
General
Commercial
RC
Regional
Commercial
LI
Light
Industrial
IS
Industrial
Service
I
Industrial
RD
Research
& Development
(October 14, 2020) 7-64.1
Retirement Center C C
Rock, Sand and
Gravel Storage and
Distribution
P
Sexually Oriented
Business
P
Shooting Range,
Indoor
C C C C C
Telecommunication
s Site/Facility
C C C C
Temporary
Construction Office
C C C P P P P P P
Temporary Seasonal
Use
C C P P P P P P
Temporary Use C C C C C P P P
Theater (Indoor ) C C P P P
Theater (Outdoor) C P P P
Tobacco Specialty
Store (see Note #5)
C C C C C C
Utility Service
Facility (major)
C C C C C C
Utility Service
Facility (minor)
C C C C C C
Vehicle Storage
Yard
C
Veterinary Clinic /
Animal Hospital
P P P
Veterinary Clinic/
Animal Hospital
Operating Entirely
Within an Enclosed
Building
C C P P P P P
Warehouse C C P
P = PERMITTED USE
C = CONDITIONAL USE
(October 14, 2020) 7-64.2
ANY USE NOT IDENTIFIED AS EITHER A PERMITTED (P) OR CONDITIONAL (C) USE IS USE THAT IS A
PROHIBITED USE WITHIN THE ZONING DISTRICT
ANY USE NOT IDENTIFIED IN THE TABLE OF USES IS A PROHIBITED USE IN TOOELE CITY.
NOTES:
1. With the exception of detached single family dwellings, all dwellings in the MU (Mixed Use) zoning district must comply
with the regulations and requirements, as amended, of the MR-16 (Multi-Family Residential) zoning district, or its
equivalent replacement, contained in Chapter 7-14 and 7-11a unless otherwise specified in this Chapter.
(Ord. 2018-13, 08-15-2018)
2. For any Use allowed in a zoning district and proposing or requiring any area for Accessory Outside Storage, for any
purpose, such use and outside storage area shall be considered as a Conditional Use. All Accessory Outside Storage is
prohibited in the Mixed Use (MU) District and the Neighborhood Commercial (NC) District.
3. For any Use allowed in a zoning district and proposing or requiring a “Accessory Drive Through Facility”, such Drive
Through Facility shall be considered as a Conditional Use. All Accessory Drive Through Facilities are prohibited in the
Mixed Use (MU) District and the Neighborhood Commercial (NC) District.
4. For any Use allowed in a zoning district and proposing any Accessory Outside display and sales area, such Accessory
Outside Display and Sales use and area, shall be considered as a Conditional Use for any Uses allowed in the District,
except that it shall be a permitted use in the Downtown Overlay District. Accessory Outside Display and Storage is
prohibited in the Mixed Use (MU) District, Neighborhood Commercial (NC) District, and the Research and Development
(RD) District. Accessory Outdoor sales and display in the Downtown Overlay District shall be subject to the following
requirements:
A. A 6-foot-wide unobstructed pedestrian pathway shall be maintained at all times on all sidewalks.
B. All sales and display items shall be removed from the sidewalk and brought indoors into the business at the end of
the business’ hours of daily operation.
C. No sales or display items may extend more than 24 inches from the building facade of the selling or displaying
business.
D. No sales or display items may be located within the landscaped park strip, on the curb, in the gutter, or in the
vehicular travel lanes.
E. All sales and display items shall be located directly in front of the business selling or displaying the items and may
not be located in front of other businesses or properties. (Ord. 2012-22, 12-05-12)
5. This use is not permitted if any part of the proposed or existing building containing the use is located within 1,500 feet
from (a) any school (public or private kindergarten, elementary, middle, charter, junior high, high school), public park,
public recreational facility, youth center, library, or church, (b) any other Tobacco Specialty Store, (c) any residential
use or residential zoning boundary, including mixed-use zones, or (d) on Vine Street. Distances shall be measured in
a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or zoning districts, from a Tobacco Specialty Store structure to
the property line of a school, public park, library, church, youth center, cultural activity, residential use, zoning district
boundary, or other Tobacco Specialty Store. (Ord. 2011-19, 01-18-12)
6. This use shall be a permitted use with no maximum density when proposed within and as a part of the redevelopment
of an existing registered historical building. (2020-20, 05-06-2020) (Ord. 2018-13, 08-15-2018)
(2020-42, 10-07-2020) (Ord. 2019-29, 12-04-2019) (Ord. 2019-13, 08-21-2019) (Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2018-24, 12-
05-2018) (Ord. 2018-13, 08-15-2018) (Ord 2012-22, 12-15-2012) (Ord. 2012-24, 11-21-2012) (Ord. 2012-17, 09-05-2012) (Ord.
2011-19, 01-18-2012) (Ord. 2010-16, 10-06-2010) (Ord. 2008-09, 11-05-2008) (Ord. 2006-18, 09-13-2006) (Ord. 2006-16, 07-
19-2006) (Ord. 2006-10, 06-21-2006) (Ord. 2003-08, 03-19-2003) (Ord. 2003-02, 01-08-2003) (Ord. 2003-01, 01-08-2003) (Ord.
2002-21, 09-18-2002) (Ord. 1999-08, 04-06-1999) (Ord. 1999-06, 04-06-1999) (Ord. 1999-05, 04-06-1999) (Ord. 1998-40, 12-
16-1998)
(October 14, 2020) 7-64.3
(Page 7-64.3 Reserved)
(October 14, 2020) 7-65
TABLE 2
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
DEVELOPMENT
REQUIREMENT
DISTRICT
Mixed Use
(MU-G)
(MU-B)
Neighborhood
Commercial
(NC)
General
Commercial
(GC)
Regional
Commercial
(RC)
Light
Industrial
(LI)
Industrial
Service (IS)
Industrial
(I)
Research &
Development
(RD)
Downtown
Overlay
(DO)
Gateway
Overlay
(GO)
Maximum Lot Area No
maximum
25,000
square feet
No
maximum
No
maximum
No
maximum
No
Maximum
No
maximum
No
maximum
No
maximum
No
maximum
Minimum Area for
District
No
minimum
No
minimum
3 acres.
Smaller
areas may
be added to
an existing
GC area.
See Note C
60 acres.
Smaller
areas may
be added to
an existing
RC area. See
Note C
No
minimum
No
Minimum
No
minimum
No
minimum
No
minimum
No
minimum
Minimum Lot
Width (Frontage)
80 Feet at
Front
setback line
80 Feet at
Front
setback line
80 Feet at
Front
setback line
100 Feet at
Front
setback line
60 Feet at
Front
Setback line
60 Feet
at Front
Setback line
80 Feet at
Front
setback line
60 Feet at
Front
setback line
No
Minimum
Requirement
80 Feet at
Front
setback line
Minimum Front
Yard Setback
20 Feet.
May be
reduced to 0
Feet
following
approval by
the Planning
Commission
for
compliance
with
Chapter 7-
11 Tooele
City Code
20 Feet.
May be
reduced to 0
Feet
following
approval by
the Planning
Commission
for
compliance
with
Chapter 7-
11 Tooele
City Code
30 Feet.
May be
reduced to
20 Feet
following
approval by
the Planning
Commission
for
compliance
with
Chapter 7-
11 Tooele
City Code
40 Feet 30 Feet 30 Feet 30 Feet 20 Feet 10 Feet.
May be
reduced to 0
Feet
following
approval by
the Planning
Commission
for
compliance
with
Chapter 7-
11 Tooele
City Code
30 Feet.
May be
reduced to
20 Feet
following
approval by
the Planning
Commission
for
compliance
with
Chapter
7-11 Tooele
City Code
DEVELOPMENT
REQUIREMENT
DISTRICT
Mixed Use
(MU-G)
(MU-B)
Neighborhood
Commercial
(NC)
General
Commercial
(GC)
Regional
Commercial
(RC)
Light
Industrial
(LI)
Industrial
Service (IS)
Industrial
(I)
Research &
Development
(RD)
Downtown
Overlay
(DO)
Gateway
Overlay
(GO)
(October 14, 2020) 7-65.1
Maximum Front
Yard Setback
No
requirement
No
requirement
No
requirement
No
requirement
No
requirement
No
requirement
No
requirement
No
Requirement
20 Feet.
May be
increased
following
approval by
the Planning
Commission
for
compliance
with
Chapter 7-
11 Tooele
City Code
As required
by the
Planning
Commission
for
compliance
with
Chapter 7-
11 Tooele
City Code
DEVELOPMENT
REQUIREMENT
DISTRICT
Mixed Use
(MU-G)
(MU-B)
Neighborhood
Commercial
(NC)
General
Commercial
(GC)
Regional
Commercial
(RC)
Light
Industrial
(LI)
Industrial
Service (IS)
Industrial
(I)
Research &
Development
(RD)
Downtown
Overlay
(DO)
Gateway
Overlay
(GO)
(October 14, 2020) 7-65.2
Minimum Required
Front Yard
Landscape Area
(measured from
front property line)
See Note F1
20 Feet.
May be
reduced to 0
Feet
following
approval by
the Planning
Commission
for
compliance
with
Chapter 7-
11 Tooele
City Code
See Note F1
20 Feet.
May be
reduced to 0
Feet
following
approval by
the Planning
Commission
for
compliance
with
Chapter 7-
11 Tooele
City Code
See Note F1
15 Feet
See Note F1
40 Feet
See Note F1
15 Feet
See Note F1
15 Feet
See Note F1
15 Feet
No
landscaping
required for
auto
impound
yard,
military
surplus
yards, or
vehicle
storage
yards. See
Note H
(Ord. 99-28,
11-4-99)
See
“Minimum
Required
Landscape
Area”,
below)
(Ord. 02-24,
12-04-02)
15 Feet
See Note F1
10 Feet.
May be
reduced to 0
Feet
following
approval by
the Planning
Commission
for
compliance
with
Chapter 7-
11 Tooele
City Code
See Note F1
20 Feet
See Note F1
Minimum Side
Yard Setback
Note B
when
adjoining a
Residential
Zone.
Otherwise
See Note A
Note B
when
adjoining a
Residential
Zone.
Otherwise
See Note A
Note B
when
adjoining a
Residential
Zone.
Otherwise
See Note A
30 Feet Note B
when
adjoining a
Residential
Zone
Otherwise
See Note A
Note B
when
adjoining a
Residential
Zone
Otherwise
See Note A
30 Feet Note B
when
adjoining a
Residential
Zone.
Otherwise
See Note A
Note A Note B
when
adjoining a
Residential
Zone
Otherwise
See Note A
DEVELOPMENT
REQUIREMENT
DISTRICT
Mixed Use
(MU-G)
(MU-B)
Neighborhood
Commercial
(NC)
General
Commercial
(GC)
Regional
Commercial
(RC)
Light
Industrial
(LI)
Industrial
Service (IS)
Industrial
(I)
Research &
Development
(RD)
Downtown
Overlay
(DO)
Gateway
Overlay
(GO)
(October 14, 2020) 7-65.3
Minimum Rear
Yard Setback
Note B
when
adjoining a
Residential
Zone.
Otherwise
See Note A
Note B
when
adjoining a
Residential
Zone.
Otherwise
See Note A
Note B
when
adjoining a
Residential
Zone.
Otherwise
See Note A
30 Feet Note B
when
adjoining a
Residential
Zone.
Otherwise
See Note A
Note B
when
adjoining a
Residential
Zone.
Otherwise
See Note A
30 Feet Note B
when
adjoining a
Residential
Zone.
Otherwise
See Note A
See Note A Note B
when
adjoining a
Residential
Zone.
Otherwise
See Note A
Minimum Rear
Yard Setback
(Corner Lot)
Note B
when
adjoining a
Residential
Zone.
Otherwise
See Note A
Note B
when
adjoining a
Residential
Zone.
Otherwise
See Note A
Note B
when
adjoining a
Residential
Zone.
Otherwise
See Note A
30 Feet Note B
when
adjoining a
Residential
Zone.
Otherwise
See Note A
Note B
when
adjoining a
Residential
Zone.
Otherwise
See Note A
30 Feet Note B
when
adjoining a
Residential
Zone.
Otherwise
See Note A
See Note A Note B
when
adjoining a
Residential
Zone.
Otherwise
See Note A
Minimum Required
Landscape Area
(percentage of total
site area which may
include required
landscaping within
parking areas)
No
Requirement
but must
comply with
requirement
s of the
Planning
Commission
for
compliance
with
Chapter 7-
11 Tooele
City Code
See Note F1
No
Requirement
but must
comply with
requirement
s of the
Planning
Commission
for
compliance
with
Chapter 7-
11 Tooele
City Code
See Note F1
10%
See Note F1
15%
See Note F1
See Note F2 See Note F2 See Note F2 10%
See Note F1
No
Requirement
but must
comply with
requirement
s of the
Planning
Commission
for
compliance
with
Chapter 7-
11 Tooele
City Code
See Note F1
15%,
provided a
greater
percentage
may be
required by
the Planning
Commission
for
compliance
with
Chapter 7-
11 Tooele
City Code
See Note F1
DEVELOPMENT
REQUIREMENT
DISTRICT
Mixed Use
(MU-G)
(MU-B)
Neighborhood
Commercial
(NC)
General
Commercial
(GC)
Regional
Commercial
(RC)
Light
Industrial
(LI)
Industrial
Service (IS)
Industrial
(I)
Research &
Development
(RD)
Downtown
Overlay
(DO)
Gateway
Overlay
(GO)
(October 14, 2020) 7-65.4
Maximum/Minimum
Building Height
35 Feet or
Two Stories
for new
construction
/1 story
35 Feet or
Two
stories/1
story
50 Feet or 4
stories/1
story
70 Feet or 6
stories/1
story
50 Feet or 4
stories/1
story
50 Feet or 4
stories/1
story
70 Feet or 6
stories/1
story
50 Feet or 4
stories/1stor
y
45 Feet or 3
stories/1
story
As required
by the
Planning
Commission
for
compliance
with
Chapter 7-
11 Tooele
City Code
Site Planning and
Building Design
Review Compliance
Must
comply with
Design
Review
requirement
s of Chapter
7-11 Tooele
City Code
Must
comply with
Design
Review
requirement
s of Chapter
7-11 Tooele
City Code
Must
comply with
Design
Review
requirement
s of Chapter
7-11 Tooele
City Code
Master
Developmen
t Site Plan
required for
approval by
the Planning
Commission
. See Note D
Must
comply with
Design
Review
requirement
s of Chapter
7-11Tooele
City Code
Must
comply with
Design
Review
requirement
s of Chapter
7-11Tooele
City Code
Must
comply with
Design
Review
requirement
s of Chapter
7-11Tooele
City Code
*To be
written
Must
comply with
Design
Review
requirement
s of Chapter
7-11Tooele
City Code
Master
Developmen
t Site Plan
required for
approval by
the Planning
Commission
. See Note D
Accessory Dwelling
Units for caretaker.
Allowed as a
Conditional Use
only
One
Accessory
Dwelling
Unit for
Caretaker
(must be
located
within
primary
structure).
One
Accessory
Dwelling
Unit for
Caretaker
(must be
located
within
primary
structure).
One
Accessory
Dwelling
Unit for
Caretaker
(must be
located
within
primary
structure)
Not allowed One
Accessory
Dwelling
Unit for
Caretaker
(must be
located
within
primary
structure)
One
Accessory
Dwelling
Unit for
Caretaker
(must be
located
within
primary
structure)
One
Accessory
Dwelling
Unit for
Caretaker
(must be
located
within
primary
structure)
One
Accessory
Dwelling
Unit for
Caretaker
(must be
located
within
primary
structure)
Requirement
of
underlying
zone applies
Requirement
of
underlying
zone applies
DEVELOPMENT
REQUIREMENT
DISTRICT
Mixed Use
(MU-G)
(MU-B)
Neighborhood
Commercial
(NC)
General
Commercial
(GC)
Regional
Commercial
(RC)
Light
Industrial
(LI)
Industrial
Service (IS)
Industrial
(I)
Research &
Development
(RD)
Downtown
Overlay
(DO)
Gateway
Overlay
(GO)
(October 14, 2020) 7-65.5
Accessory Dwelling
Unit(s) (located
above ground floor)
One
Accessory
Dwelling
Unit for
each 6,000
square feet
Site Area
One
Accessory
Dwelling
Unit for
each 6,000
square feet
Site Area
As a
Conditional
Use Only.
One
Accessory
Dwelling
Unit for
each 6,000
square feet
Site Area
As a
Conditional
Use Only.
One
Accessory
Dwelling
Unit for
each 6,000
square feet
Site Area
Not allowed Not allowed Not allowed Not allowed One
Accessory
Dwelling
Unit for
each 2,000
square feet
Site Area
Requirement
of
underlying
zone applies
Accessory Dwelling
Unit (located on the
same lot as primary
structure)
One
Accessory
Dwelling
Unit for
each 10,000
square feet
Site Area
One
Accessory
Dwelling
Unit for
each 10,000
square feet
Site Area
Not allowed Not allowed Not allowed Not allowed Not allowed Not allowed Requirement
of
underlying
zone applies
Requirement
of
underlying
zone applies
Accessory Drive
through Facilities
Not allowed Not allowed Conditional
Use
Approval
Required
Conditional
Use
Approval
Required
Conditional
Use
Approval
Required
Conditional
Use
Approval
Required
Conditional
Use
Approval
Required
Conditional
Use
Approval
Required
Conditional
Use
Approval
Required
Conditional
Use
Approval
Required
Accessory Outdoor
Sales and Display
Not allowed Not allowed Conditional
Use
Approval
Required
Conditional
Use
Approval
Required
Conditional
Use
Approval
Required
Conditional
Use
Approval
Required
Conditional
Use
Approval
Required
Not allowed Conditional
Use
Approval
Required
Conditional
Use
Approval
Required
Accessory Outside
Storage
Not allowed Not allowed Conditional
Use
Approval
Required
Not
Allowed
Conditional
Use
Approval
Required
Conditional
Use
Approval
Required
Conditional
Use
Approval
Required
Not allowed Conditional
Use
Approval
Required
Conditional
Use
Approval
Required
DEVELOPMENT
REQUIREMENT
DISTRICT
Mixed Use
(MU-G)
(MU-B)
Neighborhood
Commercial
(NC)
General
Commercial
(GC)
Regional
Commercial
(RC)
Light
Industrial
(LI)
Industrial
Service (IS)
Industrial
(I)
Research &
Development
(RD)
Downtown
Overlay
(DO)
Gateway
Overlay
(GO)
(October 14, 2020) 7-65.6
Accessory Outside
Storage of
Flammable or
Hazardous
Materials
Not allowed Not allowed Not allowed Not allowed Not allowed Not allowed Conditional
Use
Approval
Required
Not allowed Not allowed Not allowed
Issuance of
Demolition Permit
for Existing
Buildings and
Structures
Building
permit
required
Building
permit
required
Building
permit
required
Building
permit
required
Building
permit
required
Building
permit
required
Building
permit
required
Building
permit
required
Building
permit
required
Building
permit
required
Off-Street Parking
Requirements
As Required
by Title 7
Chapter 4
See Note E
As Required
by Title 7
Chapter 4
As Required
by Title 7
Chapter 4
As Required
by Title 7
Chapter 4
As Required
by Title 7
Chapter 4
As Required
by Title 7
Chapter 4
As Required
by Title 7
Chapter 4
As Required
by Title 7
Chapter 4
As Required
by Title 7
Chapter 4
See Note E
As Required
by Title 7
Chapter 4
Location of
required Off-Street
Parking Spaces
As practical
to be located
to the rear
and
screened
behind
building(s)
As practical
to be located
to the rear
and
screened
behind
building(s)
As practical
to be located
to the rear
and
screened
behind
building(s)
As practical
to be located
to the rear
and
screened
behind
building(s)
Landscaping
Requirements
See Note F1 See Note F1 See Note F1 See Note F1 See Note F2 See Note F2 Critical
Areas plus
1% of site
acreage or
mitigation
(Ord. 02-24,
12-04-02)
See Note F2
See Note F1 See Note F1 See Note F1
WHERE TABLE 2 DOES NOT IDENTIFY A DEVELOPMENT STANDARD (THE TABLE CELL IS BLANK) THE REQUIREMENTS OF THE UNDERLYING
ZONING DISTRICT SHALL APPLY
(October 14, 2020) 7-65.7
NOTE:
A. As allowed by the International Building Code and any required or existing easements. Side yard setbacks measured from a street right-of-way for corner lots in the MU-B
zoning district may be reduced to 0 feet upon approval of the Planning Commission as a part of design review in compliance with Title7 Chapter 11 of the Tooele City Code.
(2018-13, 08-15-2018)
B. The minimum set back requirements of the Residential Zoning District shall apply for all adjoining lots, buildings, parking areas, mechanical equipment, solid waste
containers, and all other structures. Side yard setbacks measured from a street right-of-way for corner lots in the MU-B zoning district may be reduced to 0 feet upon
approval of the Planning Commission as a part of design review in compliance with Title 7 Chapter 11 of the Tooele City Code. (Ord. 2018-13, 08-15-2018)
C. Smaller areas may be added to an existing and adjoining District provided such parcels become integrated within the existing development area and comply with all
applicable development requirements.
D. The Master Development Site Plan is required to generally identify for the total development site existing and reasonable projected development on the site, providing
locations, design and proposed architecture of all buildings, a proposed signage theme and sign locations, open space areas with proposed landscape treatments, location of all
parking areas, identifying total parking spaces, mass transit facilities, loading and unloading areas, access points, etc. The Master Development Site Plan must comply with all
requirements of Chapter 7-11 of the Tooele City Code and as required by the Planning Commission.
E. No minimum off-street parking requirements are established. It is the policy of the City to maintain existing uses which do not meet the Off-Street Parking requirements of the
City and to encourage additional uses and activities within the District. The number of required off-street parking shall be as determined and approved by the Planning
Commission, following a recommendation from the City Staff, and recognizing the nature and location of the proposed use or activity. Joint use of parking areas will be
encouraged.
F1. No plans for any primary building or structure shall be approved by the Planning Commission or Community Development Department unless a Landscaping Plan is
submitted and approved by the Planning Commission or Community Development Department, consistent with the considerations of Tooele City Code §7-11-8.
Landscaping in accordance with the approved Landscaping Plan shall be installed prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy unless a bond is posted pursuant to Tooele
City Code §7-22-4. The Landscaping Plan shall include at a minimum:
1. A 50/50 mix of evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs;
2. 60% of trees and shrubs with a minimum caliper of 2 inches and a minimum height of 5 feet;
3. park strip trees, at least one for every 30 feet of right-of-way frontage, in compliance with Tooele City Code §4-11-22
F2. 1. Critical Areas. “Critical Areas” shall mean those areas of a development site which have a particular sensitivity to environmental considerations, aesthetics, and
employee and public convenience, health, and well being. Critical areas shall be determined administratively during discussions/negotiations between Tooele City
staff and the developer, and shall address at least the following areas: principle vehicle entrances for employees and customers; principle pedestrian building
entrances for employees and customers; employee gathering and rest areas; storm water drainage, detention, and retention facilities; and, screening of exterior
building equipment.
2. Minimum Acreage. The 1% site acreage requirement is in addition to, not inclusive of, Critical Area landscaping.
3. Minimum Acreage Requirement Mitigation. In lieu of the 1% acreage landscaping requirement, the developer may pay to Tooele City a mitigation sum equal to the
requirement, multiplied by $20,000 per acre, a reasonable average landscaping budget based upon the most current Tooele City Parks and Recreation master
planning documents. For example, the optional mitigation sum for a 200-acre site would be $40,000; for a five-acre site, $1,000. Tooele City will apply mitigation
funds to landscaping improvements in Tooele City Parks.
4. Critical Area Requirement Mitigation. In the event that Tooele city staff and the developer conclude that landscaping of a given Critical Area is not possible or
practicable due to feasibility or engineering difficulties, the developer shall pay a mitigation sum equal to the area of the Critical Area not landscaped, multiplied by
$20,000 per acre, in lieu of installing the subject Critical Area landscaping. Financial or budgetary difficulties shall not be considered grounds for a determination of
impossibility or impracticability or for payment of a Critical Area requirement mitigation sum.
5. Administrative Appeal. Development applicants affected by the administrative determination referenced above may appeal in writing to the Planning Commission,
which shall uphold, modify, or reject the determination. No further administrative appeal shall exist.
(October 14, 2020) 7-65.8
G. 1. Fencing. Auto impound yards, military surplus yards, and vehicle storage yards shall be fenced with a view-obscuring fence, hedge, or landscaped berm at a height
at least equal to the height of the materials stored within but not higher than eight feet. Fencing for Auto impound yards shall comply with all requirements of the
Utah State Code for such uses.
2. Location. Auto impound yards, military surplus yards, and vehicle storage yards may not be located closer than 300 feet to a State highway, 500 feet to a zoning
district boundary, or 1000 feet to a school.
(Ord. 2020-42, 10-07-2020) (Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2018-13, 08-15-2018) (Ord. 2010-16, 10-06-2010) (Ord. 2008-09, 11-05-2008) (Ord 2008-08, 07-02-2008) (Ord.
2004-15, 10-20-2004) (Ord. 02-24, 12-04-2002) (Ord. 1999-28, 11-04-1999)
7-16-5. Off-Street Parking Standards.
All parking requirements shall be as outlined in Chapter 7-4 of this Title.
(Ord. 2019-12, 05-15-2019) (Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2014-08, 08-06-2014); (Ord. 2012-17, 09-05-12; Ord. 2011-17, 09-21-11; (Ord.2010-16, 10-06-10; Ord. 98-40, 12-16-
98.)
7-16-6. Use Definitions.
(Repealed. Ord. 2012-17, 09-05-2012)
CHAPTER 17. Repealed.
(Ord. 1998-40, 12-16-1998.)
(October 14, 2020) 7-65.9
(PAGE 7-65.9 RESERVED)
(August 14, 2014) 7-65.10
CHAPTER 17. Repealed. Ord. 98-40, 12-16-98.
(August 14, 2014) 7-65.11
(Page 7-65.11 Reserved)
(May 20, 2003) 7-66
CHAPTER 18. PLANNED DISTRICT, P
Repealed.
(Ord. 2003-10, 03-19-03 and Section 7-18–8).
Refer to Ord. 83-05, 04-20-83 for old language.
7-18-8. Repeal of Planned District, P.
Pursuant to Tooele City Ordinance 2003-10, this
Chapter shall be repealed and shall be of no further
force or effect for purposes of all development
applications filed after the date of the public notice of
the public hearing of this Ordinance. This repeal shall
have no effect upon the status of the P (Overlake)
Planned District.
(Ord. 2003-10, 03-19-03 and Section 7-18–8).
(May 20, 2003) 7-67
(Page 7-67 Reserved)
(January 22, 2021)
CHAPTER 19. SUBDIVISIONS
7-19-1. Application of chapter.
7-19-2. General provisions.
7-19-3. Interpretation.
7-19-4. Severability.
7-19-5. Rules of interpretation.
7-19-6. Property line adjustments.
7-19-6.1. Property Combinations.
7-19-7. Applicability of this Chapter.
7-19-8. Procedure for approval of preliminary plan.
7-19-9. Plats and data for approval of preliminary
plan.
7-19-10. Procedure for approval of the final plat.
7-19-11. Plats, plans, and data for final approval.
7-19-12. Public Improvements; bonds and bond
agreements.
7-19-13. Applications for Reimbursement.
7-19-14. Failure to act, effect.
7-19-15. Phased development.
7-19-16. Design standards.
7-19-17. Streets.
7-19-17.1Double-frontage lots - definitions - design -
maintenance.
7-19-18. Easements.
7-19-19. Blocks.
7-19-20. Lots.
7-19-20.1.Flag Lots.
7-19-21. Required land improvements.
7-19-22. Street signs.
7-19-23. Monuments and markers.
7-19-24. Public utilities.
7-19-25. Sidewalks required - specifications.
7-19-26. Park Strip Landscaping in Commercial and
Industrial Subdivisions.
7-19-27. Sanitary sewers.
7-19-28. Engineering specifications.
7-19-29. Water service.
7-19-30. Trench backfill.
7-19-31. Filing of engineering plans.
7-19-32. Acceptance of required land improvements
by the city.
7-19-33. Building permits.
7-19-34. Final Plat execution, delivery, and
recordation.
7-19-35. Minor Subdivision - Exemptions from
preliminary plan process.
7-19-36. Effect of revocation and voiding.
7-19-1. Application of chapter.
No person shall subdivide any tract of land which is
located within the City of Tooele, except in conformity
with the provisions of this ordinance. The subdivision
plans and plats, proposed improvements to be installed
and all procedures relating thereto, shall in all respects be
in full compliance with the regulations of this Chapter.
(Ord. 1977-18, 10-19-1977)
7-19-2. General provisions.
(1) Wherever any subdivision of land shall hereafter
be laid out within the incorporated limits of the City, the
subdivider thereof or his agent shall submit both a
preliminary plan and final subdivision plat to the City for
its approval. The subdivision plats and all procedures
relating thereto shall in all respects be in full compliance
with these regulations.
(2) Until preliminary plans for the subdivision are
approved:
(a) No land shall be subdivided, nor any street
laid out, nor any improvements made to the natural land.
(b) No lot, tract or parcel of land within any
subdivision shall be offered for sale, nor shall any sale,
contract for sale or option be made or given.
(c) No improvements - such as sidewalks,
water supply, storm water drainage, sanitary sewage
facilities, gas service, electric service, lighting, grading,
paving or surfacing of streets - shall hereafter be made by
any owner or owners or his or their agent or by any public
service corporation at the request of such owner or owners
or his or their agent.
(d) Land subject to flooding or within any area
designated as subject to a 100-year flood by the Federal
Flood Insurance Program Administrator, and areas
subject to poor drainage will not be permitted to be
subdivided unless the flooding or drainage problems are
properly dealt with in the subdivision plan to the
satisfaction of the City.
(3) Where a trace of land proposed for subdivision
is part of a larger, logical subdivision unit in relation to the
City as a whole, the Planning Commission may, before
approval, cause to be prepared a plan for the entire unit,
such plan to be used by the Planning Commission as an
aid in judging the merits of the proposed plat.
(4) Amendments to the City Code enacted by the
City Council after the approval of a preliminary plan but
prior to the approval of a final subdivision plat shall apply
to that plat to the extent that they do not alter the plat’s use,
density, or configuration. For purposes of this Chapter,
the words use, density, and configuration shall refer to the
following:
(a) use: the uses allowed by the Tooele City
General Plan Land Use Element and the Tooele City
zoning ordinance at the time of complete preliminary plan
submission;
(b) density: the number of lots contained in a
preliminary plan approved by the City Council;
(c) configuration: the general manner in which
the density is laid out in a preliminary plan approved by
the City Council.
(5) Amendments to the City Code enacted by the
City Council shall apply to the use, density, and
(January 22, 2021)
configuration of an approved preliminary plan and/or final
subdivision plat if the City Council, on the record, finds
that a compelling, countervailing public interest would be
jeopardized by the plan’s or plat’s use, density, and/or
configuration.
(Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-2015) (Ord. 2010-05, 06-02-
2010) (Ord. 1977-18, 10-19-1977)
7-19-3. Interpretation.
(1) In interpretation and applications, the provisions
of this Chapter shall be held to be the minimum
requirements.
(2) Where the conditions imposed by any provision
of this Chapter upon the use of land are either more
restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions
imposed by any other provisions of this ordinance or of
any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of
any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive or
which impose higher standards or requirements shall
govern.
(3) This Chapter shall not abrogate any easement,
covenant or any other private agreement, provided that
where the regulations of this ordinance are more
restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements
than such easements, covenants or other private
agreements than this Chapter shall govern.
(Ord. 1977-18, 10-19-1977)
7-19-4. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or
portion of this ordinance is for any reason held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction,
such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions thereof.
(Ord. 1977-18, 10-19-1977)
7-19-5. Rules or interpretation.
(1) Words used in the present tense shall include the
future; and words used in the singular shall include the
plural number, and the plural the singular.
(2) "Shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
(3) "May" is permissive.
(4) "Lot" shall include the words "plot, piece, and
parcel" when referencing a parcel of land within a
subdivision.
(5) "Used for" shall include the phrases "arranged
for, designated for, intended for, maintained for and
occupied for".
(6) For purposes of this Chapter, “remnant” shall
mean a parcel of land that does not comply with the
regulations of the applicable zoning district.
(Ord. 2013-16, 11-06-2013) (Ord. 1977-18, 10-19-
1977)
7-19-6. Property line adjustments.
(1) Staff Authority. The Zoning Administrator or
designee shall have the authority to approve or deny a
property line adjustment in accordance with the
regulations outlined in this Section. Alternatively, the
Zoning Administrator may direct that the application
follow the standard procedures for subdivision approval,
as provided elsewhere in this Chapter. The applicant may
appeal the decision of the Zoning Administrator to deny a
property line adjustment, as outlined in Chapter 1-27 of
the Tooele City Code.
(2) Property Line Adjustments. Applications to
adjust property lines between adjacent properties:
(a) where one or more of the affected
properties is included within a prior recorded subdivision
plat, may only be accomplished upon the recordation of
an amended plat that conforms to the standards outlined
in this Section and following approval of an amended plat
according to the standard plat approval process outlined
elsewhere within this Chapter; or,
(b) where all of the affected properties are
parcels of record, may be accomplished upon approval,
execution, and recordation of appropriate deeds
describing the resulting properties, upon compliance with
the standards outlined in this Section, and following
approval according to the terms of this Section prior to
recordation.
(3) Standards. Owners of adjacent properties
desiring to adjust common property lines between those
properties shall comply with the following standards:
(a) no new lot, parcel, or property results from
the property line adjustment;
(b) the adjoining property owners consent to
the property line adjustment;
(c) the property line adjustment does not result
in remnant land that did not previously exist;
(d) the property line adjustment does not result
in a land-locked property and all properties affected by the
adjustment have access to a public or private street or
right-of-way;
(e) the adjustment does not result in, create, or
perpetuate any violation of applicable dimensional zoning
requirements for any parcel involved in the adjustment;
and,
(f) the adjustment does not adversely affect
any easement or right-of-way on, through, within, or
adjacent to the properties involved in the adjustment.
(4) Application. The owners shall file an
application requesting a property line adjustment together
with all required documents.
(a) Application procedures and required
documents for property line adjustments involving one or
more subdivision lots shall be as outlined elsewhere in this
Chapter for plat approval.
(b) An application for a property line
adjustment involving parcels of record shall include at
(January 22, 2021)
least the following forms and documentation:
(i) a completed application form for a
property line adjustment;
(ii) a copy of all deeds and recorded
documents establishing each parcel of record in its current
state including property descriptions for each parcel;
(iii) a scaled drawing showing the current
state of all parcels involved in the proposed property line
adjustment graphically with their respective property
descriptions;
(iv) a proposed and recordable deed
document, including a legal description, for each parcel
involved in the proposed property line adjustment
detailing the proposed layout for the parcel, including its
proposed property description, which has been signed by
all involved property owners, and notarized; and,
(v) a scaled drawing showing the
proposed layout of all parcels involved in the proposed
property line adjustment graphically with their respective
property legal descriptions.
(5) Zoning Administrator Review for Property Line
Adjustments Involving Only Parcels of Record. The
Zoning Administrator shall review all documents to
determine if they are complete, accurate, and that they
comply with the requirements set forth in this Section. If
the Zoning Administrator determines that the documents
are complete and the proposed property line adjustment
complies with the standards set forth in this Section, the
Zoning Administrator shall approve the property line
adjustment. If the Zoning Administrator determines that
the documents are not complete or the proposed property
line adjustment does not comply with all of the standards
set forth in this Section, the Zoning Administrator shall
not approve the property line adjustment.
(6) Notice of Approval and Conveyance of Title.
After approval by the Zoning Administrator, the applicant
shall:
(a) record the appropriate deeds which convey
title as approved by the Zoning Administrator; and,
(b) record a Notice of Approval with the deed
for each parcel within the property line adjustment
application that:
(i) is prepared, signed, and executed by
the Zoning Administrator;
(ii) contains the notarized signature of
each property owner involved in the property line
adjusmtent; and,
(iii) recites the lrgal description and parcel
number of both of the original parcels and of the parcels
created by the property line adjustment.
(7) Inclusion of a property in a property line
adjustment shall not grant entitlements or vesting of any
kind that did not already exist for the property.
(Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-2015) (Ord. 2013-16, 11-06-
2013)
7-19-6.1. Property combinations.
Property combinations or consolidations may be
reviewed and approved in the same manner, by the same
standards, and by the same process outlined for property
line adjustments in Section 7-19-6 of the Tooele City
Code. Property combinations or consolidations shall only
be approved for a reduction in the number of properties
through inclusion of one or more properties into another
property and shall be applied for, reviewed, and approved
separately from any other land use application.
(Ord. 2013-16, 11-06-2013)
7-19-7. Applicability of this chapter.
The procedures and requirements of this Chapter
must be followed:
(1) By every person creating a subdivision as
defined herein.
(2) By every person who desires to dedicate any
street, alley, or other land for public use, even though said
dedication is not a subdivision as defined herein, except
that a right-of-way may be conveyed by deed of
dedication acceptable to the City.
(Ord. 2010-05, 06-02-2010) (Ord. 1981-24, 06-11-
1981)
7-19-8. Procedure for approval of preliminary plan.
(1) Pre-Development Review. Prior to the
submission of any land use application, the applicant may
and is strongly encouraged to attend a pre-development
meeting to review the proposed land development activity
and its use, the site, area of potential conformity or conflict
with the City's development policy, and the process by
which the proponent may proceed to seek a permit for the
proposed land development activity sought by the
applicant. The pre-development meeting shall concern all
aspects of the application proposal as it relates to
applicable ordinances and laws, policy considerations,
land uses proposed, neighboring properties and uses,
community aesthetics and standards, and any other issue
that may affect the approvability of the application or the
implementation of the proposal. Applications to be
reviewed during a pre-development meeting shall be
scheduled for the next reasonably available meeting
according to the Community Development Departments
regular meeting schedule.
(2) Preliminary Plan Preparation. The applicant
shall cause to be prepared the preliminary plan which shall
include all of the property to be subdivided or developed
by the applicant as well as all other property owned or
controlled by the applicant which is adjacent to or
considered contiguous to the portion to be subdivided or
developed. The applicant shall also prepare such other
supplementary material as was specified by the City in the
pre-development meeting, as well as a written application
for approval of the land use proposed. The applicant shall
deliver copies of the proposed preliminary plan for review
(January 22, 2021)
to the Community Development Department and to the
Tooele Post Office, Tooele County School District, the
Tooele County Health Department, County Surveyor, and
each non-City utility company involved in the subdivision
or development.
(3) Planning Commission Review. Prior to
Planning Commission review, the applicant shall deliver
copies of the proposed preliminary plan to the Community
Development Department that demonstrates a signed
review by, and any comments from, the Tooele Post
Office, Tooele County School District, County Surveyor,
County Recorder, and Health Department.
(a) The Planning Commission shall approve,
approve with conditions, or disapprove the proposed
preliminary plan and submit its recommendation to the
City Council. An application shall not be approved until
receiving all the signatures listed in subsection (2) above.
(b) If the Planning Commission finds that
changes, additions, or corrections are required on the
preliminary plan, the Commission shall so advise the
applicant on the record in a public meeting or in writing.
The applicant may resubmit the preliminary plan to the
Commission without paying an additional fee. The
Commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or
disapprove the revised preliminary plan and submit its
recommendations in writing to the City Council.
(4) City Council Review. The City Council shall
accept, accept with conditions, or reject said plan within a
reasonable time following the action of the Planning
Commission.
(5) Preliminary Plan Approval. The following
qualifications shall govern approval of the preliminary
plan:
(a) Approval of the preliminary plan by the
Planning Commission is tentative only, involving merely
the general acceptability of the layout as submitted.
(b) Approval of the preliminary plan shall be
effective for a maximum period of one year unless, prior
to the one-year period lapsing, the Council grants an
extension in a public meeting, not to exceed six months,
upon written request of the developer. The request for
said extension shall not require an additional fee, or the
submittal of additional copies of the preliminary plan of
the subdivision. If the application for final plat approval
is not submitted to the Community Development
Department prior to the expiration of said one-year period
which begins to run from the date that the preliminary plan
is approved by the Council, the approval of the said
preliminary plan automatically lapses and is void and of
no further force or effect. Thereafter, the developer must
recommence the application process then in effect.
(c) Where a preliminary plan contemplates
more than one final subdivision plat or phase, the failure
of a subdivider to submit a completed final plat
application for a second or subsequent phase within the
scope of the same subdivision preliminary plan within one
year of acceptance of public improvements from the
previous subdivision phase shall cause the approval for all
un-platted portions of the preliminary plan to
automatically lapse and expire and become of no further
force or effect. Thereafter, the subdivider must
recommence the land use application process then in
effect.
(Ord. 2020-05, 04-01-2020) (Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-
2015) (Ord. 2010-05, 06-02-2010) (Ord. 2005-06, 05-
18-2005) (Ord. 1998-35, 10-07-1998) (Ord. 1998-17,
07-01-1998) (Ord. 1977-18, 10-19-1977)
7-19-9. Plats and data for approval of preliminary
plan.
The following data and plats are required for
approval of the preliminary plan:
(1) Topographic data required as a basis for the
preliminary plan, in subsection (B) below, shall include
existing conditions as follows, except when otherwise
specified by the Planning Commission:
(a) Boundary line: Bearing and distances of all
boundary lines of the subdivision as proposed.
(b) Easements: The location, width and
purpose of all easements of the subdivision.
(c) Streets on and adjacent to the tract: Name
and right-of-way width and location of all streets of the
proposed subdivision; type, width and elevation of
surfacing in compliance with Chapter 4-8 of the Tooele
City Code; any legally established centerline elevations,
walks, curbs, gutters, culverts, etc.
(d) Utilities on and adjacent to the tract:
Location, size of sanitary sewers on or adjacent to the
tract; location and size of all water mains on or adjacent to
the tract; if water mains and sewers are not on or adjacent
to the tract, indicate the direction and distance to, and the
size of nearest facilities.
(e) The preliminary plan of the subdivision
shall be accompanied by:
(i) a preliminary plan for sewer and water
lines setting forth the general plans for such improvements
and indicating the method to be used to overcome
particular problems that may be encountered with the
development of the proposed system.
(ii) an exact copy of a preliminary report
of a title insurance company, a title insurance policy or an
attorney's opinion brought to date of the application,
setting forth the names of all property owners of property
included in the subdivision as shown on the preliminary
plan, as well as all mortgages, judgments, liens,
easements, contracts and other clouds affecting title to
said premises. The City may require all persons having
an interest in the premises, as disclosed by the report,
policy or opinion, to join in and approve of the subdivision
application.
(iii) when a proposed street will intersect a
state or county highway or a railroad, written consent of
(January 22, 2021)
the appropriate authorities having jurisdiction over said
highway or railroad shall be submitted.
(iv) all information required by the FHA
when the subdivision will be submitted to that agency for
feasibility and approval under a federal program.
(v) a written statement outlining any
existing public improvements which are anticipated to
benefit the proposed use or land development activity, and
which, pursuant to Section 7-19-13, below, subject the
applicant to a reimbursement requirement.
(vi) an AutoCAD copy of the development
plans, including contours, lot layout, roadways, utilities,
etc.
(f) Other conditions on the tract: Water
courses, marshes, rock outcropping, wooded areas,
isolated preservable trees one foot or more in caliper at
one foot above ground level, houses, barns, shacks and
other significant features.
(g) Other conditions on adjacent land:
Approximate direction and gradient of ground slope,
including any embankments or retaining walls, character
and location of buildings, railroads, power lines, towers
and other nearby nonresidential land uses or adverse
influences and ownership of adjacent unplatted land (for
adjacent platted land, refer to the subdivision plats by
name, recording data, and show approximate percent of
build-up, typical lot size and dwelling type, if any).
(h) Photographs, if required by the Planning
Commission: Camera locations, directions of views and
key numbers.
(i) Zoning on and adjacent to the tract.
(j) Proposed public improvements: Highway
or other major improvements planned by public
authorities for future construction on or near the tract.
(k) Key plan showing location of the tract.
(l) Ground elevations on the tract, based upon
the U.S.G.S. Datum Plane. For land that slopes less than
0.5%, show not less than one-foot contours; for land that
slopes one-half to 2%, show not less than two foot
contours; and for land that slopes more than 2%, show not
less than four foot contours.
(2) The preliminary plan shall be to a scale of 100
feet to the inch or if the area of the subdivision is more
than 200 acres, 200 feet to the inch. It shall show all
existing conditions required in paragraph (A) above,
topographic data, and shall show all proposals including
the following:
(a) Streets: Names, right-of-way and road
widths, approximate grades and gradients, similar data for
alleys, if any.
(b) Other rights-of-way or easements:
location, width and purpose.
(c) Location of utilities, if not shown on other
exhibits.
(d) Lot lines, lot dimensions, lot numbers and
block numbers.
(e) Sufficient information to show the intent of
surface drainage.
(f) Sites, if any, to be reserved or dedicated for
schools, parks, playgrounds or other public uses.
(g) Sites, if any, for multi-family dwellings,
shopping centers, churches, industry or other nonpublic
uses exclusive of single-family dwellings.
(h) Proposed building set-back lines.
(i) Site data, including number of residential
lots, typical lot size, acres in parks, etc.
(j) Proposed name of subdivision.
(k) Location by section, township and range.
(l) Name and address of the developer.
(m) Name and address of the planner or
engineer.
(n) Title, scale, north point and date.
(3) Other preliminary plans: When required by the
Planning Commission, the preliminary plan shall be
accompanied by profiles showing existing ground surface
and proposed street grades, including extensions for a
reasonable distance beyond the limits of the proposed
subdivision; typical and preliminary plan of proposed
sanitary and storm sewers with grades and sizes indicated.
All elevations shall be based on the U.S.G.S. Datum
Plane.
(4) Draft of protective covenants, whereby the
subdivider proposes to regulate land use in the subdivision
and otherwise protect the proposed development.
(Ord. 2021-03, 01-20-2021) (Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-
2015) (Ord. 2010-05, 06-02-2010) (Ord. 2005-06, 05-
18-2005) (Ord. 1998-35, 10-07-1998)
7-19-10. Procedure for approval of the final plat.
(1) The final plat shall conform substantially to the
preliminary plan as approved, and, if desired by the
subdivider, may constitute only that portion of the
approved preliminary plan which he proposes to record
and develop at the time, provided, however, that such
portion conforms to all requirements of these regulations
and the approval of the preliminary plan.
(2) Application for approval of the final plat,
including all engineering drawings, shall be submitted in
writing to the Community Development Department and
shall be accompanied by the fee and engineering review
fee as required by the City Code. The application must be
completed, including all corrections and required
documentation, before the application can be accepted
and reviewed by the City.
(3) The final engineering plans and specifications,
consistent with the approved preliminary plan, as well as
an AutoCAD copy of the development plans, shall be
submitted to the Community Development Department
within one year after approval of the preliminary plan and
before the review of the final plat application; unless, prior
to the one-year period lapsing, the City Council grants an
extension, not to exceed six months, upon written request
(January 22, 2021)
of the developer. Such extension will not require an
additional fee or filing or additional copies of the plat. If
the final plat is not submitted to the Community
Development Department prior to the expiration of said
one-year period, which begins to run from the date that the
preliminary plan is first approved by the Council, the
approval of the said preliminary plan automatically lapses
and is void and is of no further force or effect. Thereafter,
the developer must recommence the application process
as then in effect. The subdivider shall make all revisions
required by the City promptly and with reasonable
diligence.
(4) An application for approval of a final
subdivision plat shall be reviewed and, upon findings by
the Community Development and Public Works
Departments and the City Engineer that all applicable
requirements of this Title and conditions of the
preliminary plan approval have been met, approval of the
application issued in writing by the Community
Development Department. Upon approval of the final
plat and submission of the final plat mylar, the
Community Development Department shall secure the
final plat mylar signatures of the Planning Commission
Chairperson and the City Council Chairperson.
(5) Filing. Prior to approval of the final plat, and the
fulfillment of the requirements of these regulations, one
mylar of the final plat of the subdivision, not to exceed 36
inches by 48 inches in size, shall be submitted to the
Community Development Department.
(6) Recordation. Tooele City will record the final
plat with the Tooele County Recorder pursuant to Section
7-19-39, below.
(Ord. 2020-05, 04-01-2020) (Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-
2015) (Ord. 2010-05, 06-02-2010) (Ord. 2005-06, 05-
18-2005) (Ord. 2004-02, 01-07-04) (Ord. 1998-35, 10-
07-1998) (Ord. 1998-16, 07-01-1998) (Ord. 1978-28,
11-21-1978) (Ord. 1977-18, 10-19-1977)
7-19-11. Plats, plans, and data for final approval.
(1) The final plat shall be drawn in ink on tracing
cloth on sheets not to exceed 36 inches by 48 inches and a
scale of 100 feet to one inch. Where necessary, the plat
may be on several sheets accompanied by an index sheet
showing the entire subdivision. For large subdivisions,
the final plat may be submitted for approval progressively
in contiguous sections compliant with City requirements.
The final plat shall show the following:
(a) Primary control points, approved by the
City Engineer, or descriptions and "ties" to such control
points, to which all dimensions, angles, bearings and
similar data on the plat shall be referred.
(b) Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of
streets, easements and other rights-of-way and property
lines of residential lots and other sites, with accurate
dimensions, bearings and deflection angles and radii, arcs
and central angles of all curves.
(c) Name and right-of-way width of each street
or other right-of-way.
(d) Location, dimensions and purpose of any
easements.
(e) Number to identify each lot or site and
block.
(f) Purpose for which sites, other than
residential lots, are dedicated or reserved.
(g) Proposed building set-back lines on all lots
and other sites.
(h) Location and description of monuments.
(i) Certification by a registered land surveyor
licensed by the State of Utah certifying to the accuracy of
the survey and plat.
(j) Certification of the County Treasurer
showing that all taxes and special assessments due on the
property to be subdivided have been paid in full.
(k) Dedication by the owners of the tract of all
streets, easements and rights-of-way to the public, and
other proposed public way or space shown on the plat.
(l) Certification of title showing that the
applicant is the owner of the agent of the owner.
(m) Proper form for the approval of the
Council, with space for the signature of the Council
Chairperson.
(n) Approval by signatures of those persons or
departments with signature lines on the final plat.
(o) Name of the subdivision.
(p) Location by section, township and range.
(q) Title, scale, north arrow and date.
(r) Other items or information reasonably
required by the City.
(2) Cross sections and profiles of streets showing
grades. The scales and elevations shall be based on the
U.S.G.S. Datum Plane.
(3) Protective covenants in form for recording.
(Ord. 2020-05, 04-01-2020) (Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-
2015) (Ord. 2010-05, 06-02-2010) (Ord. 2005-06, 05-
18-2005) (Ord. 1998-35, 10-07-1998) (Formerly
Repealed by Ord. 1993-04, 05-04-1993)
7-19-12. Public Improvements; bonds and bond
agreements.
Public improvements shall be completed pursuant to
the following procedure:
(1) After approval of the preliminary plan, the
subdivider shall present plans and specifications for all
public improvements to the city Engineer for review and
approval.
(a) If engineering plans require substantial
changes from the approved preliminary plan, the
subdivider shall revise and re-submit the public
improvements plans and specifications.
(b) Re-submissions shall not require the
payment of additional fees to the City. The City, however,
shall not be responsible for the cost of any revisions or for
(January 22, 2021)
any costs incurred due to delays caused by requiring the
revisions.
(c) No public improvements may be
constructed prior to final plat approval.
(2) Upon approval of the final plat, plans, and
specifications, the Community Development Department
shall provide written notice to the applicant of final plat
approval.
(3) All public improvements shall be completed
within one year from the date of written final plat
approval. The City Council may grant a maximum of two
6-month extensions upon receipt of a written petition and
upon a finding of unusual circumstances. Petitions for
extension must be filed with the City Recorder prior to
expiration of the applicable 1-year period or 6-month
extension. If the public improvements are not completed
with the time allowed under this Section, no further
approvals of any land use application shall be issued to the
subdivider responsible for completing the public
improvements, and no further plats shall be approved
within the preliminary plan or project area in which the
public improvements are incomplete.
(4) (a) Except as provided below, all public
improvements associated with a subdivision final plat
must be completed, inspected, and accepted pursuant to
Section 7-19-32, below, prior to the recordation of that
plat.
(b) A subdivision final plat may be recorded
prior to the completion, inspection, and acceptance of the
plat’s public improvements where the subdivider submits
a bond and executes a bond agreement compliant with this
Section. The purpose of the bond and bond agreement is
to insure completion of all public improvements required
to be installed in the subdivision and to warrant the quality
of their construction.
(c) Where public improvements are
constructed without a bond and bond agreement, under no
circumstances shall such public improvements be
connected to the City’s water distribution, sewer
collection, storm drain collection, and road right-of-way
systems prior to recordation of the associated final
subdivision plat or without bonding for the public
improvements located within City rights-of-way pursuant
to this Section.
(5) Bond agreements shall be in the form and
contain the provisions approved by the City Attorney.
The agreement shall be signed by the Mayor, the City
Attorney, and the City Engineer. The agreement shall
include, without limitation, the following:
(a) Incorporation by reference of the final plat,
final plat documents, public improvements plans and
specifications, and all data required by this Chapter which
is used by the City Engineer to estimate the cost of the
specific public improvements.
(b) Incorporation by exhibit of the City
Engineer’s estimate of the cost of the specific public
improvements.
(c) Completion of the public improvements
within the period of time described in subsection (3),
above.
(d) Completion of the public improvements to
the satisfaction of City inspectors and according to City
standards, as established by the Tooele City Code and City
policies.
(e) Establishment of the bond amount. The
bond amount shall include the following:
(i) the subdivider’s estimated cost of the
public improvements to be installed, as reviewed and
approved by the City Engineer or designee; and,
(ii) a reasonable contingency of 20% of
the estimated cost, intended to cover the cost of inflation
and unforeseen conditions or other circumstances.
(f) The City shall have exclusive control over
the bond proceeds, which may be released to the
subdivider only upon written approval of the City
Attorney.
(g) The bond proceeds may be reduced upon
written request of the subdivider as the improvements are
installed and upon approval by City inspectors on a City
inspection report form. The amount of the reduction shall
be determined by reference to the City Engineer’s
estimate attached to the bond agreement, with assistance
from the City Engineer, as necessary. Such requests may
be made only once every 30 days. All reductions shall be
by the written authorization of the City Attorney.
(h) Bond proceeds may be reduced by no more
than 90% of the total bond amount, the remaining 10%
being retained to guarantee the warranty and maintenance
of the improvements as provided in Sections 7-19-12(7)
and 7-19-32, herein. Any bond amount reduction shall not
be deemed as an indication of public improvement
completion or acceptance.
(i) If the bond proceeds are inadequate to pay
the cost of the completion of the improvements according
to City standards for whatever reason, including previous
reductions, then the subdivider shall be responsible for the
deficiency. Until the improvements are completed or,
with City Council approval, a new bond and bond
agreement have been executed to insure completion of the
remaining improvements:
(i) no further plats shall be approved
within the preliminary plan or project area in which the
improvements are to be located; and,
(ii) no further building permits shall be
issued in the subdivision.
(j) If, after expiration of the bond agreement
time period, the bond proceeds are not transferred to the
City within 30 days of the City’s written demand, then the
City’s costs of obtaining the proceeds, including the City
(January 22, 2021)
Attorney’s Office costs and any outside attorney’s fees
and costs, shall be deducted from the bond proceeds.
(k) The subdivider agrees to indemnify and
hold the City harmless from any and all liability and
defense costs which may arise as a result of those public
improvements which are installed until such time as the
City accepts the public improvements as provided in this
Chapter.
(6) Bond agreements shall be one of the following
types:
(a) An irrevocable letter of credit with a
financial institution federally or state insured, upon a
current standard letter of credit form, or including all
information contained in the current standard letter of
credit form..
(b) A cashier’s check or a money market
certificate made payable only to Tooele City Corporation.
(c) A guaranteed escrow account from a
federally or state insured financial institution, containing
an institution guarantee.
(7) Warranty. The Subdivider shall warrant and be
responsible for the maintenance of all improvements for
one year following their acceptance by Resolution of the
City Council, and shall guarantee such warranty and
maintenance in the above-described bond agreements.
The City may extend the warranty period upon a
determination of good cause that the one-year period is
inadequate to protect the public health and safety.
(8) The final plat applications for two or more
subdivision phases may be approved and the entirety of
the property within those phases developed simultaneously
where all public improvements associated with the plats
are bonded for and constructed as if they were one phase.
An application for final plat approval of multiple phases
shown on the approved preliminary plan may also be
approved under a single application when the final plat
reflects all requested phases as a single phase in the overall
configuration of the approved preliminary plan.
(9) The subdivider’s bond in no way excuses or
replaces the obligation to complete public improvement
construction, as required in this Section. Nothing in this
Section shall require the City to liquidate bonds, spend
bond proceeds, or complete public improvements. Any
undertaking on the part of the City to liquidate a bond,
spend bond proceeds, or complete public improvements
shall not relieve the subdivider of the consequences of
non-completion of public improvements.
(Ord. 2020-05, 04-01-2020) (Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-
2015) (Ord. 2014-10, 01-07-2015) (Ord. 2013-10, 06-
05-2013) (Ord. 2010-05, 06-02-2010) (Ord. 2004-02,
01-07-2004) (Ord. 2000-24, 12-06-2000) (Ord. 1998-
21, 07-01-1998) (Ord. 1996-26, 12-04-1996) (Ord.
1977-18, 10-19-1977)
7-19-13. Applications for Reimbursement.
(1) Definitions. All words and phrases in this
Section beginning in capital letters shall have the
meanings given them in Tooele City Code Section 7-1-5.
(2) Application for Reimbursement. Developers
required to install Eligible Public Improvements may be
entitled to reimbursement pursuant to this Section,
provided that:
(a) the Construction Costs of the Eligible
Public Improvements required by the City as a condition
of development approval exceeds the Construction Cost
of the City’s required minimum standards and
specifications for the Eligible Public Improvements by
10% or more; and,
(b) the Cost Differential exceeds $5,000; and
(c) the Eligible Public Improvements are
constructed within the Tooele City Corporate Limit; and
(d) the Subsequent Developer’s development
receives City approval within eight years from the date of
City approval of the development for which the Eligible
Public Improvements were required; and,
(e) the Prior Developer files an Application for
Reimbursement in the office of the Director of Public
Works or City Engineer.
(3) Application for Reimbursement.
(a) Developers satisfying the above criteria
may apply for reimbursement for recovery of a pro-rata
share of the Cost Differential, minus the Depreciation
Value, from a Subsequent Developer to the extent that the
Subsequent Developer did not share in the Construction
Cost of the Eligible Public Improvements.
(b) Notwithstanding other provisions of this
Section to the contrary, subdivisions of ten lots or less, or
single-lot developments, that are required by the City to
fully improve a road right-of-way (i.e. road base, road
surface, curb, gutter) are eligible to apply for and receive
reimbursement for the Construction Cost of that portion
of the road improvements that directly benefit subsequent
development located adjacent to the road improvements,
minus the Depreciation Value.
(4) The Application for Reimbursement shall be
made on a form approved by the City Attorney, and shall
include the following information:
(a) a brief description of the Eligible Public
Improvements which may directly benefit future
development; and,
(b) an engineer’s written estimate of the
Construction Cost of the Eligible Public Improvements, or
an affidavit of the actual Construction Cost of the Eligible
Public Improvements plus copies of receipts and paid
invoices. Both the estimated and /or actual Construction
Cost must be approved by the Director of Public Works
or City Engineer.
(5) An Application for Reimbursement is not
retroactive and may not seek reimbursement for uses or
land development activities which exist as of, or have
been approved by the City Council prior to, the effective
date of the Application for Reimbursement.
(January 22, 2021)
(6) After an Application for Reimbursement is filed,
the Prior Developer shall be under an affirmative duty to
deliver to the City written notice of the identity of any
development which the Prior Developer has knowledge or
reason to believe will benefit from Public Improvements
installed by the Prior Developer, and whether and to what
extent the Subsequent Developer should share in the Cost
Differential. The notice must be delivered to the Public
Works Director or City Engineer prior to or with the
benefitting development’s final subdivision plat
application or, in the case of a site plan, prior to the
issuance of a building permit.
(7) When the Prior Developer has complied with
the provisions of this Section, the City will make a
reasonable effort to collect the Subsequent Developer’s
pro-rata share of the Cost Differential, minus the
Depreciation Value, on behalf of the Prior Developer.
(8) Before making any payments to the Prior
Developer pursuant to this Section, the City shall retain
from amounts collected from a Subsequent Developer an
administrative fee in the amount of 10% of said amounts
collected, with a minimum administrative fee of $100.
(9) Before making any payments to the Prior
Developer pursuant to this Section, the City shall make a
determination whether the Prior Developer has any
outstanding financial obligations towards, or debts owing
to, the City. Any such obligations or debts, adequately
documented, shall be satisfied prior to making payment to
the Prior Developer, and may be satisfied utilizing
amounts collected by the City on behalf of the Prior
Developer pursuant to a Reimbursement Application.
(10) The City reserves the right to refuse any
incomplete Application for Reimbursement. All
completed Applications for Reimbursement shall be made
on the basis that the Prior Developer releases and waives
any claims against the City in connection with
establishing and enforcing reimbursement procedures and
collections.
(11) The City shall not be responsible for locating
any beneficiary, survivor, assign, or other successor in
interest entitled to reimbursement. Any collected funds
unclaimed after one year from the expiration of the
Application for Reimbursement shall be returned to the
Subsequent Developer from which the funds were
collected minus the City administration fee. Any funds
undeliverable to a Prior Developer, or to a Subsequent
Developer from which the funds were collected,
whichever the case, shall be credited to the City enterprise
fund corresponding to the Eligible Public Improvements
for which the funds were collected, as determined by the
Finance Director.
(12) Political subdivisions of the state of Utah (e.g.
Tooele City Corporation) that construct Eligible Public
Improvements shall be considered Prior Developers for
purposes of this title, and may file Reimbursement
Applications and receive reimbursement under the
provisions of this Chapter.
(13) Public Improvements required as a condition of
annexation are not eligible for reimbursement pursuant to
this Section.
(14) All City development approvals, including, but
not limited to, subdivisions and site plans, shall be
conditioned upon and subject to the payment of
appropriate reimbursement amounts as determined in
accordance with this Section.
(15) A Subsequent Developer may protest in writing
the assertion of a Prior Developer that the Subsequent
Developer will benefit from Eligible Public
Improvements constructed by the Prior Developer.
Protests should be delivered to the Public Works Director
or City Engineer, and must include documentation
sufficient to demonstrate that the Subsequent Developer’s
development will derive no benefit, or a lesser benefit than
asserted, from the Prior Developer’s Eligible Public
Improvements. The Public Works Director or City
Engineer will decide the matter, whose decision shall be
final.
(Ord. 2020-05, 04-01-2020) (Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-
2015) (Ord. 2005-06, 05-18-2005) (Ord. 1999-35, 12-
01-1999) (Ord. 1998-35, 10-07-1998) (Ord. 1997-13,
04-02-1997)
7-19-14. Failure to act, effect.
(1) City. Should the Planning Commission or the
City Council fail to act upon any submitted preliminary
plan application within the time period allotted by this
Chapter, said failure shall be considered a denial of the
said submission.
(2) Application. Should the applicant for any
submitted preliminary plan or final plat application fail to
resubmit corrected plans or application materials from any
City review of the application within 180 calendar days
from the return of that City review, the application shall
be considered abandoned. Prior to an application being
deemed abandoned, the Community Development
Department shall provide to the applicant a notice of
potential abandonment at least 30 calendar days prior to
abandonment. Following abandonment, the City shall
determine the expended portion of fees paid through all
efforts involved with the application up to and including
the process of abandonment and all unexpended
application fees refunded to the applicant. For the purpose
of entitlements by this Chapter, abandoned applications
shall be considered as if having never been submitted for
review. An abandoned application may be resubmitted as
a new application at any time following abandonment,
including the payment of new application fees and a
complete package of application materials, and shall be
subject to all requirements applicable at the time of the
new submission.
(Ord. 2021-02, 01-20-2021) (Ord. 2020-05, 04-01-2020)
(Ord. 2010-05, 06-02-2010) (Ord. 1977-18, 10-19-
(January 22, 2021)
1977)
7-19-15. Phased development.
(1) When the public improvements have been
100% completed and accepted within the subdivision
final plat, a final plat for a subsequent phase within the
same preliminary plan or project area may be requested.
(2) Each subdivision final plat in a preliminary plan
or project area shall be considered a phase of the
preliminary plan and shall be developed in a logical and
orderly manner. All phases shall be contiguous, so that all
public improvements shall be contiguous and continuous
from their point of beginning in the development
throughout the balance of the development.
(Ord. 2020-05, 04-01-2020) (Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-
2015) (Ord. 2010-05, 06-02-2010) (Ord. 1998-33-B,
10-07-1998) (Ord. 1977-18, 10-19-1977)
7-19-16. Design standards.
The subdivision of land, including the arrangements,
character, extent, width, grade and location of all
highways, streets, alleys, crosswalks, easements, sites for
parks, playgrounds and schools, or other land to be
dedicated to the public or for public use shall conform to
the terms of the Tooele City Code, land use policies, and
master plans of the City.
(Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-2015) (Ord. 1977-18, 10-19-
1977)
7-19-17. Streets.
The arrangement of streets in a new development
shall provide for the continuation of existing streets in
adjoining areas at the same or greater widths, unless
altered by the Planning Commission and City Council
upon the positive recommendation of the Director of the
Community Development and Public Works Department.
All streets shall comply with the provisions of Title 4
Chapter 8 of the Tooele City Code and the current Tooele
City Transportation Master Plan, including the Tooele
City Transportation Right-of-Way Master Plan. An
exception to the general rule for road cross sections or
right-of-way improvements required by Title 4 Chapter 8
of the Tooele City Code may be granted by the City
Council for major collector or arterial class roads adjacent
to the proposed subdivision. Roads interior to a
subdivision or between phases of a subdivision may not
be excepted. Exception requests must be submitted in
writing to the Directors of the Community Development
and Public Works Departments prior to the Planning
Commission’s review of the preliminary plan. The
Directors shall provide a written recommendation on the
exception request to the Planning Commission for their
review with the preliminary plan. In reviewing an
exception request, the City Council shall consider and
approve or deny the request following recommendation
from the Planning Commission based on the following
factors:
(1) the overall safety of the area for transit,
vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian traffic including
crossings of the road or right-of-way;
(2) existing transit, vehicular, bicycle, and
pedestrian traffic in the area;
(3) anticipated transit, vehicular, bicycle, and
pedestrian traffic impacts from the proposed subdivision
on the existing traffic loads of the area;
(4) the ability for existing right-of-way
improvements to accommodate anticipated transit,
vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian traffic loads;
(5) the degree to which the exception would prevent
completion or connection to other right-of-way
improvements in the area;
(6) existing right-of-way improvements in the area;
(7) the degree to which the right-of-way leading to
and from the area requested for exception has been
developed and completed;
(8) the mechanisms, proposals submitted, and
timing by which the excepted improvements will be
completed in the future;
(9) the degree to which the entirety of the right-ofway
has been dedicated and improved outside of the area
requested for an exception;
(10) land uses in the area, including but not limited to
schools, recreational opportunities, and public facilities,
that may have the potential to affect the existing
improvements’ ability to accommodate all anticipated
transit, vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian traffic loads;
(11) phasing and a phasing schedule for the proposed
subdivision;
(12) any development agreement with terms
affecting right-of-way improvements duly executed by
the Mayor for the exception-requesting subdivision or
other developments in the area; and
(13) documented history of vehicle-vehicle, vehiclebicycle,
and vehicle-pedestrian conflicts and accidents.
(Ord. 2020-05, 04-01-2020) (Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-
2015) (Ord. 2010-05, 06-02-2010) (Ord. 2008-13, 11-
05-08) (Am. Ord. 1998-32, 10-07-1998) (Ord. 1998-
25, 08-05-1998) (Ord. 1987-24, 01-02-1988) (Ord.
1977-18, 10-19-1977)
7-19-17.1. Double-frontage lots – definitions –
design – maintenance.
(1) Definitions. For purposes of this Section, the
following terms shall be defined as follows.
(a) Double-frontage lot: a residential lot that
abuts more than one public right-of-way or private road
on opposite sides of the lot. “Double-frontage lot”
includes corner lots adjacent to other double-frontage lots.
“Double-frontage lot” does not include lots whose
secondary frontages are on roads that are designated as
alleys that do not require sidewalk access and that serve
primarily as private access to the rear of lots.
(January 22, 2021)
(b) Primary frontage: the portion of a
residential lot abutting a public right-of-way or private
road that contains the main pedestrian entry to a residence.
(c) Secondary frontage: the portion of a
residential lot abutting a public right-of-way or private
street that is not the principle frontage.
(2) Design Standards. The secondary frontage of
any double-frontage lot shall include the following design
elements located within the public right-of-way or private
street.
(a) Park strip. The park strip located between
the curb and the sidewalk shall be of colored, texturestamped
concrete, which shall differ in color and texture
from the adjacent sidewalk.
(i) The concrete color shall be of earthtones,
to include tan, light brown, beige, and similar
colors, but shall not include yellow, pink, blue, green, and
similar bright colors.
(ii) The concrete texture shall simulate
cobblestone, variegated slate squares and rectangles,
brick, or similar pattern.
(iii) The park strip thickness shall be a
minimum of five and one-half inches.
(iv) The park strip shall contain a
decorative metal grate around each park strip tree. The
grate shall be chosen from a list of City-approved grate
types, the list being on file with the Public Works
Department.
(b) Park strip trees. Trees shall be planted in
the park strip as follows.
(i) Park strip trees shall be chosen from a
list of City-approved trees, the list being on file with the
Public Works Department.
(ii) Park strip trees shall be spaced not
more than 35 feet apart.
(iii) Park strip tree size, bonding, and other
details not address in this Section shall be as provided in
Tooele City Code Section 7-19-29, as amended.
(iv) The park strip shall include an
irrigation system for park strip tree irrigation. The
underground piping shall be placed within conduit located
beneath the park strip. The irrigation system shall include
meters, meter vaults, power, valve boxes, irrigation heads,
and other necessary components to provide a fully
functioning irrigation system.
(c) Sidewalk. Sidewalk shall be as required by
Tooele City Code and Policy.
(d) Fencing wall. The secondary frontage shall
be fenced and screened with a masonry wall possessing
the following design elements.
(i) The wall shall be six feet in height
except as required under Tooele City Code Section 7-2-
11 Clear vision area at intersecting streets.
(ii) The wall materials shall be masonry
block or prefabricated decorative masonry panels chosen
from a list of City-approved wall material types, the list
being on file with the Public Works Department. The wall
shall be uniform within each subdivision phase.
(iii) The wall shall include capped pillars
spaced at even intervals, not to exceed 20 feet. The pillar
materials shall be similar to those comprising the wall.
(iv) No portion of the wall shall contain
cinderblock, smooth-faced block, or cast-in-place
concrete.
(v) All fencing walls shall receive a Cityapproved
anti-graffiti seal coat upon their construction
and prior to acceptance by the City.
(e) Gates. Gates in the fencing wall or
otherwise accessing the secondary frontage shall not be
allowed.
(f) Special Service District Standards. Where
a double-frontage lot is included in an existing special
service district that imposes its own design standards for
double frontage lots, the district design standards shall
apply.
(g) The final determination of whether an
application complies with the design standards of this
Section shall be made by the City Planner. Such
determinations are not subject to appeal.
(3) Bonding. Park strips, park strip trees, park strip
irrigation systems, and fencing walls discussed in this
Section shall be included in the definition of public
improvements. As such, they shall be bonded for in the
manner provided in Tooele City Code Section 7-19-12, as
amended, except that park strip trees shall be bonded for
in the manner provided in Tooele City Code Section 7-19-
29, as amended.
(4) Maintenance. Because of the added burdens
upon the City caused by double-frontage lots, and because
residents are disinclined to maintain the secondary
frontage, the portions of the public right-of-way located
behind the curb and gutter and abutting the secondary
frontage shall be maintained as follows.
(a) Home Owners Association. As a condition
of final subdivision plat approval, every subdivision with
double-frontage lots shall be required to form and fund a
home owners association (HOA). At a minimum, the
HOA shall maintain and perform at its cost, for the life of
the HOA, the following items: park strip, park strip trees
and grates, park strip irrigation system, park strip water
bill, fencing wall, sidewalk, and sidewalk snow removal.
The HOA articles shall provide for a minimum HOA
existence of 30 years.
(b) Covenants, Conditions, and Restrictions.
As a condition of final subdivision plat approval, every
subdivision with double-frontage lots shall be required to
record against all lots within the subdivision covenants,
conditions, and restriction (CCRs). A copy of the
recorded CCRs will be provided to the City. At a
minimum, the CCRs shall provide for the perpetual
maintenance and maintenance funding of the following
items: park strip, park strip trees and grates, park strip
(January 22, 2021)
irrigation system, park strip water bill, fencing wall,
sidewalk, and sidewalk snow removal.
(c) If the HOA fails to enforce the CCRs
pertaining to maintenance and maintenance funding for a
period of three months or more, the City may bring an
action in court to compel the HOA to fund and perform its
maintenance obligations.
(d) Special Service District Maintenance.
Where a double-frontage lot is included in an existing
special service district that maintains some or all of the
public improvements adjacent to a secondary frontage, the
portions of the public right-of-way located behind the curb
and gutter and abutting the secondary frontage shall be
maintained in perpetuity by the district.
(Ord. 2020-05, 04-01-2020) (Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-
2015) (Ord. 2008-04, 11-05-2008)
7-19-18. Easements.
(1) Easements across lots or centered on rear or side
lot lines shall be provided for utilities where necessary and
shall be at least ten feet wide.
(2) Easements shall be designed to provide
continuity from block to block.
(3) Where subdivisions and/or parcels abut a
watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, storm
water easements or drainage rights-of-way conforming
substantially with the line of such watercourse shall be
provided.
(Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-2015) (Ord. 1977-18, 10-19-
1977)
7-19-19. Blocks.
Subdividers shall adhere to the provisions of Title 4
Chapter 8 of the Tooele City Code regarding blocks.
(Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-2015) (Ord. 1987-24, 01-02-
1988) (Ord. 1977-18, 10-19-1977)
7-19-20. Lots.
(1) The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation
shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and
for the type of development and use contemplated.
(2) The lot dimensions and areas shall conform to
the requirements of the zoning ordinance.
(3) Lots abutting a watercourse, drainage way,
channel or stream shall have a minimum width or depth
as required to provide an adequate building site and to
afford the minimum usable area required by ordinance for
front, side and rear yards.
(4) All corner lots shall be sufficiently larger than
others so as to allow for building set-back lines on both
streets as provided in Section 7-6-6 of the Tooele City
Code.
(5) All lots shall abut on an adequate public or
private access, as approved by the City Engineer, Public
Works Department, or Community Development
Director.
(6) Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall
be avoided except where essential to provide separation or
residential development from highways or primary
thoroughfares or to overcome specific disadvantages of
topography and orientation. A planting screen easement
of at least ten feet, and across which there shall be no right
of vehicular access, which easement shall be specifically
set forth in the deed to each lot, shall be provided along
the real lot lines of lots abutting such highways and major
thoroughfares.
(7) Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles
or radial to street lines.
(Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-2015) (Ord. 2010-05, 06-02-
2010) (Ord. 2003-05, 06-04-2003) (Ord. 1987-24, 01-
02-1988) (Ord. 1977-18, 10-19-1977)
7-19-20.1. Flag Lots.
(1) Flag or L-shaped lots (hereinafter “flag lots”)
may be allowed in certain locations to accommodate the
development of property that otherwise could not
reasonably be developed under the regulations contained
in this Title or other ordinances adopted by the City. The
primary purpose of this Chapter is not to make
development of property easier. Rather, it is to serve as a
“last resort” for property for which there is no other
reasonable way to develop.
(2) Flag or L-shaped lots will only be considered as
a last resort for infill development. Except for in-fill
subdivisions, and except as provided in the Sensitive Area
Overlay Zone (Tooele City Code Chapter 7-12) creation
of flag lots shall not be considered for new subdivisions.
(3) Flag Lots. In order to encourage the more
efficient use of land, flag lots are allowed subject to the
following conditions:
(a) A flag lot shall be comprised of a staff
portion contiguous with the flag portion thereof
(hereinafter the “staff” and “flag”, respectively).
(b) The staff shall intersect with and be
contiguous to a dedicated public street. The minimum
width of the staff portion of flag lots shall be 24 feet and
the maximum length shall be 220 feet, unless otherwise
approved by the Planning Commission and fire
department upon a showing of unusual circumstances.
(c) The staff shall be improved with concrete
or asphalt surface.
(d) No structure, except for driveways and no
parking, shall be allowed to obstruct or narrow the staff,
and the staff shall be marked with a “No Parking” sign.
(e) The front side of the flag shall be deemed
to be that side nearest to the dedicated public street upon
which the staff portion intersects.
(f) The staff shall be deemed to end and the
flag shall be deemed to commence at the extension of the
front lot line across the staff.
(g) The flag square footage shall be the same or
greater than the minimum square footage as required in
(January 22, 2021)
the underlying zone, exclusive of the staff.
(h) The minimum front setback for all building
shall be 30 feet, excluding the staff, from the front lot line
of the flag. All other setbacks shall be those of the
underlying zone.
(i) No more than two flag lots may be served
by one staff.
(j) Figure 1 is an example of a “flag lot” and is
included herein for illustration purposes.
Figure 1
(k) A fire hydrant shall be installed at the
public ROW portion of the staff, unless otherwise
approved by the Fire Department.
(l) A turn-around must be provided at the flag
portion of the lot. Hammerheads or Y’s are acceptable
with a minimum width of 12 feet, without parking within
30 feet of the staff. The turning radius on any
hammerhead or Y shall not be less than 28 feet. Figure 2
is included to illustrate the hammerhead or Y
requirements.
Figure 2
(m) All provisions of the currently applicable
fire code shall be met, particularly those regarding the
distance a primary structure can be located from a fire
hydrant, and fire apparatus access ways and turnarounds.
(Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-2015) (Ord. 2009-07, 04-01-
2009)
7-19-21. Required land improvements.
No subdivision of land shall be approved by the
Planning Commission unless:
(1) the public improvements described in the
subdivider's plans and specifications, together with
agreements, meet the minimum requirements of all
engineering ordinances and specifications of the City, and
(2) the subdivider’s project engineer so certifies in a
signed statement.
(Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-2015) (Ord. 2010-05, 06-02-
2010) (Ord. 1998-33-B, 10-07-1998) (Ord. 1977-18,
10-19-1977)
7-19-22. Street signs.
The placement and installation of all street signs shall
be governed by Title 4 Chapter 8 of the Tooele City Code.
The cost of all such signs and their installation shall be
borne by the subdivider.
(Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-2015) (Ord. 1987-24, 01-02-
1988) (Ord. 1977-18, 10-19-1977)
12 ft
20 ft 20 ft
12 ft
20 ft
12 ft 12 ft
20 ft 20 ft
20 ft
(January 22, 2021)
7-19-23. Monuments and markers.
Monuments shall be placed at all corners and angle
points of the outside boundary but not farther than onequarter
mile apart. The monuments shall be of concrete,
not copper dowel, three inches long cast in place. Iron
pipe or steel bars not less than one-half inch in diameter
and 24 inches long shall be set at the intersection of street
center lines and at all corners of lots not marked by
monuments. The monuments and markers shall be set
level with the finished grade.
(Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-2015) (Ord. 1977-18, 10-19-
1977)
7-19-24. Public utilities.
All utility lines for telephone, electricity, cable
television, natural gas service and street lights shall be
place underground entirely throughout a subdivided area.
Said lines shall be placed within the other underground
services. Further, all transformer boxes and pumping
facilities shall be located so as not to be hazardous to the
public. The utility lines shall be parallel to and not less
than 12 inches from the property lines.
(Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-2015) (Ord. 1977-18, 10-19-
1977)
7-19-25. Sidewalks required - Specifications.
The provisions of Chapters 4-8 and 4-11 of the
Tooele City Code shall apply to sidewalks in all
subdivisions.
(Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-2015) (Ord. 2006-05, 01-18-
2006) (Ord. 1987-24, 01-02-1988) (Ord. 1977-18, 10-
19-1977)
7-19-26. Park Strip Landscaping in Commercial and
Industrial Subdivisions.
(1) All park strip areas in commercial and industrial
subdivisions, with the exception of paved drive
approaches and sidewalks as approved in the site plan,
shall be seeded or sodded with lawn grasses and
perpetually maintained by the owner of the appurtenant
property. The commercial or industrial subdivision
developer shall prepare park strip areas to receive seed or
sod.
(2) (a) The commercial or industrial subdivision
developer shall be responsible for the cost of purchasing
and planting trees on both sides of all proposed
subdivision streets within all park strip areas, except
where there are existing trees acceptable to the Director of
Parks and Recreation. Newly planted trees shall not be
farther apart than 35 feet. Trees planted in park strip areas
shall be of a type listed in Section 4-11-22 of the Tooele
City Code. Newly planted trees shall not be less than two
inches in caliper, measured one foot from the ground, and
shall not be shorter than eight feet in height. Trees shall
be planted during a season of the year when it reasonably
can be expected that they will survive. In no case shall
trees be planted sooner than seven days prior to the
issuance of an occupancy permit for any structure on the
property appurtenant to the park strip.
(b) Commercial or industrial subdivision
developers shall do one of the following to ensure
compliance with the park strip tree requirement:
(i) post a bond in accordance with the
provisions of Section 7-19-12 of the Tooele City Code, in
the amount of $200 per required park strip tree; or
(ii) make a non-refundable payment to
Tooele City in the amount of $200 per required tree,
which shall be used by the Director of Parks and
Recreation to plant trees within the park strips of the
subdivision.
(3) Protective screen planting may be required to
secure a reasonably effective physical barrier between
residential properties and adjoining uses which minimizes
adverse visual, auditory, and other conditions. The screen
planting plan shall be approved by the Planning
Commission and the City Council upon the
recommendation of the Community Development and
Parks and Recreation Departments.
(Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-2015) (Ord. 2010-05, 06-02-10)
(Ord. 2005-03, 02-02-05) (Ord. 2000-10, 06-21-2000)
(Ord. 1998-26, 08-05-1998) (Ord. 1987-24, 01-02-
1988) (Ord. 1977-18, 10-19-1977) (Ord. 1987-24, 01-
02-1988) (Ord. 1977-18, 10-19-1977)
7-19-27. Sanitary sewers.
Sanitary sewers and service laterals shall be installed
to serve all properties and lots in the subdivision,
including properties reserved for public use or purchase.
The provisions of Title 8 Chapter 9 of the Tooele City
Code, shall apply to the installation design and
construction of all sanitary sewers and service laterals in
subdivisions.
(Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-2015) (Ord. 1987-24, 01-02-
1988) (Ord. 1977-18, 10-19-1977)
7-19-28. Engineering specifications.
The owner or subdivider shall install sanitary sewers,
water supply system, right-of-way improvements,
crosswalks, public utilities and street lighting in
accordance with applicable ordinances, standards, and
specifications for construction in the City.
(Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-2015) (Ord. 1977-18, 10-19-
1977)
7-19-29. Water service.
(1) The provisions of Title 9 Chapter 4 of the Tooele
City Code, shall apply regarding all pipes, service laterals
and appurtenances provided in a subdivision.
(2) All lots and properties including property
reserved for public use or purchase shall be supplied with
water service sufficient to meet the future anticipated uses
of said property.
(January 22, 2021)
(Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-2015) (Ord. 1987-24, 01-01-
1988) (Ord. 1977-18, 10-19-1977)
7-19-30. Trench backfill.
All trench work shall conform to the provisions of
Title 4 Chapter 9 of the Tooele City Code.
(Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-2015) (Ord. 1987-24, 01-02-
1988) (Ord. 1977-19, 10-19-1977)
7-19-31. Filing of engineering plans.
One complete set of engineering plans and
specifications, as well as an AutoCAD copy, for required
land improvements together with an estimate of the cost
of the improvements, said plans and specifications to bear
the seal of a Utah registered professional engineer along
with a signed statement to the effect that such plans and
specifications have been prepared in compliance with this
Chapter and pursuant to good engineering practices shall
be submitted to the Community Development
Department prior to the approval of the final plat. Said
plans shall be drawn to a minimum horizontal scale of five
feet to the inch. Plans shall show profiles of all utility and
street improvements with elevations referring to the
U.S.G.S. Datum.
(Ord. 2020-05, 04-01-2020) (Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-
2015) (Ord. 2010-05, 06-02-2010) (Ord. 1977-18, 10-
19-1977)
7-19-32. Acceptance of required land improvements
by the city.
Public improvements shall be deemed completed and
accepted only upon the occurrence of all of the following:
(1) the completion of the construction of all required
public improvements, in conformance with City standards
and the approved engineering plans and specifications;
(2) the submission to the City Engineer or Public
Works Director by the design engineer engaged by the
subdivider, builder, or land developer of three certified
sets of as-built plans, as well as an AutoCAD copy of such
as-built plants;
(3) verification by the City Engineer or Public
Works Director that all public improvements have been
satisfactorily completed in accordance with the approved
engineering plans and specifications; and,
(4) the City Council’s approval of a resolution
accepting the public improvements. Public improvements
shall not be deemed completed and accepted by the City
as City-owned and maintained improvements until the
approval of said resolution. The one-year warranty period
described in Section 7-19-12, above, shall commence on
the date the resolution is approved.
(Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-2015) (Ord. 2014-10, 01-07-
2015) (Ord. 2010-05, 06-02-2010) (Ord. 2004-02, 01-
07-2004) (Ord. 1977-18, 10-19-1977)
7-19-33. Building permits.
(1) No building permit shall be issued for the
construction of any residential building, structure, or
improvement to the land or any lot within a residential
subdivision as defined herein, which has been approved
for platting or replatting, until all requirements of this
Chapter have been complied with. The Building Official
may issue building permits for noncombustible residential
construction when his/her justification is entered into the
City address file, after the developer increases any
required bonds for one additional year, and after the
finished street, curb and gutter, and all public utilities
under the street are installed and have been approved by a
qualified City inspector. Notwithstanding Chapter 7-22
herein, under no circumstances shall a Certificate of
Occupancy be issued until all requirements of this Chapter
have been complied with.
(2) A building permit may be issued for
noncombustible commercial construction prior to all
requirements of this Chapter being completed after all of
the following conditions are met:
(a) all public utilities required to be within the
road right-of-way have been completed, compacted,
tested, inspected, and certified;
(b) the complete width and depth of required
road base has been installed, compacted, tested, inspected,
and certified to grade, with all test results turned into the
Public Works Department;
(c) all required bonding shall be extended for
one additional year;
(d) the developer shall make available tire
cleaning areas where the road is accessed; and,
(e) a road width of not less than 28 feet shall be
maintained throughout the project until the finished road
surface is in place.
(3) Prior to the finished surface being added to the
road, a certified geotechnical report shall be obtained from
a qualified engineer and turned in to the Public Works
Department. The report shall stipulate that the minimum
road base is in place, is compacted, is free of
contamination, and will support the load for which it was
designed.
(4) Notwithstanding Chapter 7-22, herein, under no
circumstances will any Certificate of Occupancy be issued
for any building, structure, or improvement until all
requirements of this Chapter have been complied with.
(5) The issuance of a building permit or an
occupancy permit within a subdivision shall not be
deemed as an indication that the public improvements
within the subdivision are completed or accepted by the
City.
(Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-2015) (Ord. 2010-05, 06-02-
2010) (Ord. 2005-17, 06-15-2005) (Ord. 1977-18, 10-
19-1977)
(January 22, 2021)
7-19-34. Final plat execution, delivery, and
recordation.
(1) The subdivider shall deliver to the City the
fully executed final plat mylar within 90 days of final
plat application approval. Failure to fully execute the
final plat mylar, or to deliver the fully executed final
plat mylar to the City, within the specified 90 days,
shall result in the automatic revocation of, and shall
void, the final plat approval.
(2) No changes to the approved final plat mylar
may be made without the written approval of the City.
(3) Tooele City shall promptly record an
approved final subdivision plat mylar with the Tooele
County Recorder upon the occurrence of the
following:
(a) a statement of desired timing for
recording the plat from the subdivider; and,
(b) execution of a bond agreement pursuant
to Section 7-19-12, above.
(4) The subdivider shall pay all fees associated
with the recordation of the approval final plat mylar.
(Ord. 2020-05, 04-01-2020) (Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-
2015) (Ord. 2014-10, 01-07-2015) (Ord. 2004-02, 01-
07-2004) (Ord. 1977-18, 10-19-1977)
7-19-35. Minor Subdivision - Exemptions from
preliminary plan process.
(1) (1) A minor subdivision shall combine the
preliminary plan and final plat requirements for approval
of the subdivision into a single application and review
process. A subdivision is considered a minor subdivision
and exempt from a separate preliminary plan review
process if:
(a) it contains less than ten lots;
(b) it does not contain a right-of-way
dedication for public street; and,
(c) it does not involve off-site water or sewer
utilities.
(2) Information normally required as part of the
preliminary plan application may be required by the
Public Works or Community Development Departments
as part of a minor subdivision final plat application.
(Ord. 2020-05, 04-01-2020) (Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-
2015) (Ord. 2010-05, 06-02-2010)
7-19-36. Effect of revocation and voiding.
Any preliminary plan or final subdivision plat
approval revoked or rendered void pursuant to the
provisions of this Chapter 7-19 shall cause any new
application of approval to be subject to the laws,
ordinance, and policies of Tooele City current as of the
date of the completed new application.
(Ord. 2015-07, 03-18-2015) (Ord. 2004-02, 01-07-
2004)
7-78 (December 5, 2016)
CHAPTER 20. CONDOMINIUM APPROVAL
PROCEDURE
7-20-1. Application and scope.
7-20-2. Definition of terms.
7-20-3. Purpose.
7-20-4. Concept approval - Planning commission.
7-20-5. Submission of application.
7-20-6. Review of declarations.
7-20-7. Preliminary review and approval by city
engineer.
7-20-8. Preliminary review by Tooele City
Attorney.
7-20-9. Preliminary approval.
7-20-10. Final review.
7-20-11. Final approval - Planning commission and
city council.
7-20-12. Notice to residential tenants in conversion
project.
7-20-13. Tenant protest review.
7-20-14. Enforcement.
7-20-15. Severability.
7-20-16. Effective date.
7-20-1. Application and scope.
The procedures and requirements of this Chapter
shall apply to and govern the processing and
requirements for approval of condominium record of
survey maps for condominium projects. Said provisions
shall supplement zoning, site development, health,
building or other ordinances which may be applicable to
the particular condominium project, and shall apply to
the approval of condominium projects involving new
construction as well as projects involving the
conversion of existing structures. In addition,
condominium projects which contemplate dedication of
real property or improvements for the use of the public,
or condominium projects in which units are not
contained in existing or proposed buildings shall also be
considered subdivisions requiring compliance with
applicable provisions of Chapter 19 of this Title as
provided under the Condominium Ownership Act of
1975, 57-8-35 U.C.A. (1953), as amended.
(Ord. 1980-24, 06-24-1980)
7-20-2. Definition of terms.
For purposes of this Chapter:
(1) Code. "Code" shall mean the provisions and
ordinances of the Tooele City Code.
(2) Common Areas, Space and Facilities.
"Common areas, space and facilities" shall mean the
property and improvements of the condominium project
or portions thereof conforming to definition set forth in
Section 57-8-3, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as
amended.
(3) Condominium and Condominium Project,
and Condominium Unit. "Condominium," and
"condominium project," and "condominium unit" shall
mean property or portions thereof conforming to the
definitions set forth in Section 57-8-3, Utah Code
Annotated, 1953, as amended.
(4) Condominium Ownership Act of 1975, or
“Act”. "Condominium Ownership Act of 1975" or
"Act" shall mean theprovisions of Chapter 8 of Title 57
of Utah Code Annotated, as amended in 1975.
(5) Conversion. "Conversion" shall mean a
proposed change in the type of ownership of a parcel or
parcels of land, together with the existing attached
structures from single ownership of said parcel such as
an apartment house or multi-family dwelling into that
defined as a condominium project or other ownership
arrangement involving separate ownership of individual
units combined with joint collective ownership of
common areas, facilities or elements.
(6) Map. "Map" shall mean "Record of Survey
Map", as defined in Section 57-8-3(18), Utah Code
Annotated, 1953, as amended.
(7) Refurbishing or Renovation.. Repairs,
remodeling, improvements or restoration work,
nonstructural in nature, and not required by applicable
building codes.
(8) Unit. A "Unit" shall mean the physical
elements or space or time period of a condominium
project which are to be owned or used separately and
excludes common areas and facilities as defined in
Section 57-8-3, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as
amended.
(Ord. 1987-24, 01-02-1988) (Ord. 1980-24, 06-24-
1980)
7-20-3. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the mandate of
the State of Utah to establish procedures for the review
and approval of condominium projects to insure they
comply with applicable ordinances and state laws.
Condominium and other similar types of hybrid
ownership arrangements mixing individual ownership
with collective ownership of common areas represent an
increasingly popular response to complex forces at
work in our society and community. This type of
hybrid ownership also magnifies the impact upon public
health, safety and welfare, convenience and life-style
when conditions of poor land use or site planning,
mismanagement, neglect or deterioration, blight or
outdated structural conditions are allowed to occur or
continue.
Corrections of building code violations and
upgrading of safety or common functional elements of
the structure is of prime importance. In addition,
conversion of existing apartments or similar multifamily
rental dwelling structures into condominiums,
have had the effect and increase the potential of
displacing long-term residents, especially senior
citizens, who face the City's shortage of replacement
rental housing. That shortage, combined with
7-79 (December 5, 2016)
withdrawal of the private sector from the rental market
because of conversion, places additional pressure upon
the public sector, to which public agencies involved
with housing need time to respond. Therefore, it is the
purpose of this ordinance to regulate conversion to
promote the safety and revitalized use of the City's
structures for the benefit of increased home ownership
opportunity while attempting to mitigate the human
hardship of misplacement by reasonable notice and
disclosure requirements.
(Ord. 1980-24, 06-24-1980)
7-20-4. Concept approval - Planning commission.
(1) Prior to submission of any application for
approval to the City Engineer as required in 7-20-5,
below, the owner or developer of a proposed
condominium or condominium conversion project shall
submit a drawing or layout of the proposed project to
the Planning Commission for concept approval. The
Planning Commission shall review the proposed project
regarding, but not limited to, the following
considerations as applicable to the project:
(a) The site, including size, location, traffic
flow, accessibility and neighborhood development;
(b) The proposed land use, including
placement of buildings or other improvements, density
or intensity of use, common areas and facilities,
contouring and landscaping, and internal circulation
systems and parking;
(c) Policy cons ide r a tion s , including
conformity with the master plan of the City and
compliance with other applicable provisions of the City
Code, County Regulations and State Laws.
(2) The Planning Commission may, as a condition
to granting concept approval impose such reasonable
restrictions or additional reasonable requirements
relative to the aforementioned considerations as deemed
necessary by the Planning Commission depending upon
the particular circumstances of any given project.
(Ord. 1980-24, 06-24-1980)
7-20-5. Submission of application.
(1) The owner or developer of a proposed
condominium project desiring approval shall file an
application with the City Engineer on a form prescribed
by the City together with:
(a) Two (2) copies of the proposed Map
accurately drawn to scale, as required by Section 57-8-
13, U.C.A., 1953, as amended, which shall be made by
a registered Utah land surveyor using scale no smaller
than one inch (1") to equal forty feet (40'). In addition,
said map or an additional site plan shall reflect the
required floor plans identifying boundaries of the
project units, convertible and expandable areas or
spaces, and common areas. Said Map or plan should
designate the intended use of common areas (e.g.
storage, recreational, parking for guests as opposed to
unit owners, open space, etc.) and should indicate
whether such common areas are to be open to the
public, assigned to specific units or semi-private being
available only to unit owners. Said Map or site plan
shall also identify and describe in detail the location of
existing or proposed driveways, pedestrian ways,
curbcuts, walls, structures, fences, landscaping and
sprinkling systems.
(2) Two (2) copies, signed in the original, or the
proposed condominium declarations and bylaws,
together with a copy of the documents recorded after
final approval.
(3) Where conversion of an existing building is
proposed as part of the condominium project, a property
report for each conversion project including the
information required by the International Building Code
as amended herein, shall be submitted as part of the
application together with the plan for proposed
improvements renovations and repairs.
(4) Proof of notice to tenants required by Section
7-20-11 below shall be required before final approval,
but may be submitted at owner/developer's option after
preliminary approval is obtained.
(5) Filing fees. To assist the City to defray costs
involved with the review of the project, fees shall be
submitted with the application in the following
amounts:
$25.00 per project plan plus;
$ 5.00 per unit (1-10 units); plus,
$ 2.00 per unit over 10 units.
(6) Repealed. (Ord. 1993-04, 05-04-1993)
(7) Repealed. (Ord. 1993-04, 05-04-1993)
(Ord. 2004-15, 10-20-2004)
7-20-6. Review of declarations.
Condominium declarations and bylaws shall be
reviewed by the Tooele City Attorney to assure the
inclusion of provisions which to City's satisfaction
address and fix responsibility for the maintenance,
upkeep and repair of common areas including common
walls, electrical, mechanical, plumbing or utility
systems, recreational areas, landscaping and parking
areas. Also, declarations shall restrict the use of any
individual residential dwelling unit to single-families.
The City Engineer shall also review said declarations
sand require appropriate disclosure or treatment of any
unusual circumstances, variances or conditions placed
upon the condominium project for approval.
(Ord. 1980-24, 06-24-1980)
7-20-7. Preliminary review and approval by city
engineer.
Upon receipt of an application for approval of a
condominium project, the City Engineer shall review
the proposed building plans for new construction,
and/or the property report and plan of improvements,
renovations and repairs in the case of a conversion
project to determine if such plans comply with
7-80 (December 5, 2016)
applicable building codes. In the case of a conversion,
the City Engineer shall require inspections of the
property and may require supplementation, revision and
re-submission of the property report should it be
determined that substantial discrepancies exist or
inspections indicate report statements are not supported
by facts, code requirements or sound construction
practices. Upon preliminary review, the City Engineer
shall note corrections, repairs and replacements which
must be made to bring the structures into code
compliance together with a list or renovation
improvements proposed by the developer not required
by code. The City Engineer in such preliminary report,
shall indicate any requirements of the International
Building Code, as amended herein, he anticipates
waiving as being impractical because of the unique
circumstances associated with the structure and any
conditions he intends to impose upon such waivers.
The City Engineer may then recommend denial until
such time as existing violations of code are corrected or
may recommend preliminary approval of the project
and building report subject to the condition that
violations be corrected prior to final approval.
(Ord. 2004-15, 10-20-2004); (Ord. 1980-24, 06-24-
1980)
7-20-8. Preliminary review by Tooele City Attorney.
The Tooele City Attorney shall review the
application and related documents to determine whether
the project conforms to applicable requirements of the
Condominium Ownership Act of 1975, applicable
zoning ordinances of the district in which the
condominium project is located, the status or extent of
nonconforming rights, applicable conditions on the use
or building imposed by ordinance, variances,
conditional uses and/or prior approval of a planned unit,
clustered or group development. If the City Attorney
finds requirements, (s)he may recommend denial of the
condominium project until such violations have been
corrected or requirements have been completed, or
(s)he may recommend preliminary approval subject to
the condition the violations be corrected, completed or
bonded prior to final approval.
(Ord. 2016-15, 10-19-2016) (Ord. 1980-24, 06-24-
1980)
7-20-9. Preliminary approval.
(1) If upon submission of the reports and
recommendations of the City Engineer and City
Attorney, the City Engineer finds that: (1) both
recommendations are favorable, and (2) that the City
Engineer is not waiving any requirements imposed by
the ordinance, the City Engineer may, on an
administrative staff basis grant preliminary approval.
Absent such a finding that said criteria is met, or in the
event of a dispute regarding conditions imposed by such
an administrative preliminary approval, the matter shall
be set for hearing before the Planning Commission
pursuant to (2) below.
(2) When an administrative approval is not
appropriate under (1) above, the City Engineer shall
submit the reports and recommendations of the City
Engineer and City Attorney before a hearing of the
Planning Commission for consideration of preliminary
approval or modifications thereof. If the Planning
Commission finds that approval is recommended by the
City Engineer and City Attorney, and that the project is
in compliance or has presented approved plans which
will bring the structures into compliance with applicable
zoning, building, health or subdivision ordinances and
requirements, the Planning Commission may grant
preliminary approval and it may impose appropriate
conditions subsequent as part of its approval. Such
conditions may include correction of violations,
appropriate amendment to declarations and the
submission of Notice of Intent to tenants, etc., to be
completed prior to final approval.
(3) The effect of preliminary approval shall entitle
the owner/developer to proceed with obtaining building
permits, giving notice to tenants and preparing
documents for final approval, and to otherwise proceed
with the project with all aspects thereof being subject
and conditioned upon final approval.
(Ord. 1980-24, 06-24-1980)
7-20-10. Final review.
(1) Building Official. After preliminary review,
the Building Official, or in his absence, the City
Engineer, shall cause the structure to be inspected in the
normal course of inspection work being conducted
under permit. Prior to final approval, the Building
Official shall cause final inspections of all structures
and work therein to be completed upon the request of
the owner/developer to determine conformance to
applicable building codes. If the Building Official finds
remaining corrections, repairs or replacements which
are required to bring renovations, said Official may
require corrections and completion of such work prior
to final approval. However, should the Building
Official determine plans to correct code violations or to
complete proposed renovations or refurbishing after
final approval as a condition thereof, are reasonable and
shall not create hazards to the health or welfare of
occupants, said Building Official may recommend final
approval subject to completion of necessary or planned
work, provided the owner/developer files a faithful
performance bond in an amount equal to guarantee the
estimated cost of labor and materials to correct
violations of building codes, or conditions imposed by
ordinance or order. Said bond shall be approved by the
City Attorney as to form and content and said approved
bond must be filed with the final Map prior to
submission to and approval by the City Council. The
acceptance of such bond as a condition of final approval
shall not waive or substitute for the need of the
owner/developer to obtain a certificate of occupancy for
7-81 (December 5, 2016)
the project or units after work is completed prior to
actual occupancy, if applicable.
(2) By City Engineer. After preliminary approval,
the City Engineer shall be responsible to monitor
conditions of preliminary approval to insure compliance
therewith prior to presentation to the Planning
Commission and City Council for final approval. All
violations of existing ordinances shall be corrected and
requirements shall be completed prior to final approval,
or shall be corrected or completed as a condition of
final approval prior to submission to City Council or
shall be bonded according to the criteria and standards
set forth in (A) above. The sixty (60) day notice period
required in Section 7-20-11 shall commence from the
latest date of notice to any tenant and must elapse prior
to submission of the condominium project to the
Planning Commission for final approval.
(Ord. 1980-24, 06-24-1980)
7-20-11. Final approval - Planning commission and
city council.
Upon submission of the recommendations of the
City Engineer, Building Official and City Attorney, the
matter shall be set for consideration of the Planning
Commission. If said Commission finds that the project
is in compliance with applicable ordinances and the
requirements of preliminary approval, the Planning
Commission may recommend final approval. The
P la n n ing Commis sion mu s t ap prove any
recommendation from the City Engineer or Building
Official for work that is proposed for subsequent
completion, bonding or waiver and may affirm or
otherwise impose appropriate terms upon such bonding
or conditions upon its approval. Upon final approval by
the Planning Commission, the City Engineer shall
insure all conditions of approval have been completed,
all final documentation is signed and submitted
including any required bonds or agreements required to
be filed, and shall then submit the matter, together with
the recommendation of the Planning Commission with
his signature upon the map before the City Council for
final approval. If the City Council shall determine said
project is in conformity with the requirements of
applicable ordinances of Tooele City, it shall approve
said Map. If it should determine said project is not in
conformity with requirements of the ordinances of
Tooele City, or if it rejects any offers of dedication, or
if it is not satisfied with plans of a project which
constitutes a subdivision, it shall disapprove said Map
specifying reasons for disapproval. Within thirty (30)
days after the City Council has disapproved any project,
the developer may file with the City Engineer a Map
altered to meet the requirements of the City Council.
No final Map shall have any force or effect until the
same has been approved by the City Council as
reflected by the signature of the Mayor and is officially
recorded with the Tooele County Recorder within
eighteen (18) months from the date of the Mayor's
signature.
(Ord. 1980-24, 06-24-1980)
7-20-12. Notice to residential tenants in conversion
project.
(1) Notice. As part of the application for approval
of a condominium project, when said project involves
the conversion of an existing residential structure where
the structure has been occupied by residential tenants
prior to application for conversion, the owner/developer
shall provide notice of intended conversion to said
tenants by certified mail. This notice requirement shall
not apply to nonresidential structures or to a residential
structure that was vacant upon acquisition and remained
so during the year prior to filing of the developer's
application for conversion; nor shall it preclude the
approval of a project prior to the expiration date where
every tenant has executed a waiver relinquishing his or
her right of notice under this provision.
(2) Contents. Such notice shall include:
(a) the intention and plans for the conversion
of the building to a condominium project;
(b) the estimated dates of construction period
and termination of occupancy which shall not be less
than sixty (60) days from the date notice is served upon
occupants or expiration of individual leases, whichever
is longer;
(c) the disclosure of the specific initial fixed
sales price for each unit which shall be no greater than
the price initially advertised and offered to the general
public;
(d) relocation information for the tenants
specifying available alternative housing relocation
resource agencies and organizations and a plan of any
services to be voluntarily provided by the
owner/developer.
(3) Dissemination of notice. A copy of said notice
together with a list prepared by the owner/developer
identifying names, apartment or unit numbers,
approximate ages, rental rates and other known special
handicaps or factors affecting relocation needs of the
tenants, shall be submitted to the Tooele City Housing
Authority and Tooele County Social Services
Department to advise said agencies of the conversion
and/or solicit their assistance with relocation services.
No final approval of such a conversion project shall be
granted by the Planning Commission until the
owner/developer has provided proof of service by
certified mail or subsequent proof of actual delivery by
method of services allowed under Section 78-36-6,
Utah Code Annotated, of such notices and relocation
plans as required above, and the time designated therein
(a minimum of sixty (60) days) has expired.
(Ord. 1980-24, 06-24-1980)
7-20-13. Tenant protest review.
(1) When a tenant of a residential dwelling has
received written formal notice of eviction without cause
7-82 (December 5, 2016)
and without at least 60 days notice of conversion and
has reason to believe that notice was issued because of a
proposed condominium project, the tenant may, within
15 days of the date of the notice of eviction, initiate an
appeal regarding the issue of proper notice to the
administrative hearing officer. The filing of such an
appeal shall stay the issuance of any approval or
issuance of any permits for the structure in question for
a period not to exceed 30 days and the matter shall be
set for hearing before the administrative hearing officer.
Subsequent appeals shall not act to further stay the
issuance of approval of the condominium project.
(2) Upon filing, a copy of the appeal form shall be
forwarded to the Tooele Housing Authority for
relocation advice and assistance. That Authority shall
within ten days forward to the administrative hearing
officer a statement of its report and recommendation.
(3) Upon filing of an appeal, the building official
shall institute an investigation to determine if the notice
requirements were satisfied. The building official shall
then report his findings to the administrative hearing
officer within 10 days of filing the appeal.
(4) The administrative hearing officer shall fix a
reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give due
notice to the appellant and to the owner/developer of
the condominium project, and shall, at the hearing,
review the appeal together with Agency and department
reports, recommendations, and related permit or
subdivision applications and shall decide the same
within 30 days from the date of filing of the appeal.
(5) The administrative hearing officer, with regard
to hearing the appeal, may:
(a) enforce the attendance of witnesses, the
production of books and papers and administer oaths;
(b) direct municipal resources, if necessary
and appropriate, to alleviate relocation hardships;
(c) hear and decide allegations of error in any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by a
municipal officer in the performance of the officer's
duties;
(d) see that the laws and ordinances are
faithfully executed and direct investigations
accordingly;
(e) institute any appropriate actions or
proceedings to prevent or punish persons from or for
performing any acts contrary to the building and zoning
ordinances of Tooele City;
(f) impose reasonable conditions relating to
the terms and conditions upon which the project will be
approved which may include suspension of approval
pending preparation and implementation of a reasonable
relocation plan or services for tenants who have not
been given proper notice, or denial of the application in
which event the owner/developer may not re-apply for
18 months from the date of denial.
(Ord. 2016-15, 10-19-2016) (Ord. 1994-56, 01-31-
1995) (Ord. 1988-18, 07-06-1988)
7-20-14. Enforcement.
(1) It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation,
partnership or association to sell or lease any unit of any
condominium or any other portion thereof until the final
Record of Survey Map, in full compliance with the
provisions of this Title, have been finally approved by
the City Council and duly recorded in the office of the
County Recorder, except that in the case of a
conversion, existing leasing arrangements may be
maintained during the conversion process.
(2) All departments, officials and public
employees of the City, vested with the duty or authority
to approve or issue permits, shall conform to the
provisions of this Code and shall neither accept
applications nor approve or issue any permit or license
for use, construction or any purpose in conflict with the
provisions of this Code. Any such Map, permit or
license, issued or approved in conflict with the
provisions of this Code shall be null and void.
(3) Repealed. (Ord. 91-08, 12-12-91)
(4) The City Engineer or the Building Official
shall have the authority to enforce this Code against
violations thereof by any of the following actions:
(a) To serve notice requiring the cessation or
correction of any action in violation of this Code upon
the developer, owner, agent of the developer, successorin-
interest of the developer or owner, tenant, purchaser,
builder, contractor or other person who commits or
assists in such violation;
(b) To recommend denial of the condominium
project application; or,
(c) To call upon the City Attorney to maintain
an action for injunctive relief to restrain, abate or cause
the corrections of such violation, or to institute criminal
proceedings.
(Ord. 1991-08, 12-12-1991) (Ord. 1980-24, 06-24-
1980)
7-20-15. Severability.
(1) If any article, section, subsection, paragraph,
sentence, clause or phrase of this Chapter, or any part
thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or
invalid or ineffective by any Court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or
effectiveness of the remaining portions of this Chapter,
or any part thereof. The City Council hereby declares
that is would have passed each article, section,
subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more
articles, sections, subsection, paragraphs, sentences,
clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional or
invalid or ineffective.
(2) If the application of any provisions or
provisions of this Chapter to any person, property or
circumstances is found to be unconstitutional or invalid
or ineffective in whole or in part by any Court of
competent jurisdiction, or other competent agency, the
effect of such decision shall be limited to the person,
7-83 (December 5, 2016)
property or circumstances immediately involved in the
controversy, and the application of any such provision
to other persons, properties and circumstances shall be
unaffected.
(Ord. 1980-24, 06-24-1980)
7-20-16. Effective date.
In the opinion of the City Council of Tooele City, it
is necessary to the peace, health and welfare of the
inhabitants of Tooele City that this ordinance become
effective immediately. This ordinance shall take effect
upon its first publication.
(Ord. 1980-24, 06-24-1980)
7-84 (September 10, 2012)
CHAPTER 21. RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES
FOR HANDICAPPED PERSONS
(Repealed. Ordinance 2012-17.)
7-85 (September 10, 2012)
(Page 7-85 Reserved)
7-86 (July 15, 2015)
CHAPTER 22. CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY
7-22-1. Certificate required.
7-22-2. Application.
7-22-3. Prerequisites.
7-22-4. Exceptions.
7-22-5. Deferral of prerequisites.
7-22-1. Certificate required.
No land shall be occupied or used and no building
hereafter erected in part, for any residential, commercial,
or industrial purpose until a certificate is issued by the
Building Official stating that the building and/or the use
complies with the provisions of this Title and with
applicable uniform codes. The certificate shall be called
a Certificate of Occupancy.
(Ord. 2000-20, 12-06-2000); (Ord. 87-16, 11-05-87)
7-22-2. Application.
Certificates of Occupancy shall be applied for
coincidentally with the application for a building permit,
and shall be issued within ten (10) days after the lawful
erection or alteration of the building is completed.
(Ord. 2000-20, 12-06-2000); (Ord. 84-01, 01-17-84)
7-22-3. Prerequisites.
In addition to other provisions of this Title, no
certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the following
public improvements are completed and in place:
(1) Street grading; base, dust treatment, paving, curb
and gutter, parkstrip landscaping, and sidewalk as outlined
in Title 4, Chapter 8, Tooele City Code;
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities;
(3) Culinary water facilities;
(4) Address numbers.
(Ord. 2000-20, 12-06-2000); (Ord. 87-16, 11-05-87);
(Ord. 2014-09, 09-03-2014)
7-22-4. Exceptions.
Upon a finding of unusual circumstances, the
Building Official may certify that the installation of
certain required improvements, which are not essential to
life, health, and safety, is impractical prior to physical
occupancy, and may issue a Temporary Certificate of
Occupancy. Prior to such issuance, the applicant shall do
the following:
(1) provide a cash bond in the amount of 200% of the
estimated value of the incomplete improvements;
(2) sign a Temporary Occupancy Bond Agreement on a
form acceptable to the City Attorney;
(3) pay a $200.00 administrative fee;
(4) agree to allowing the City upon the applicant’s
property in the event the bond is forfeited and the
City completes the bonded improvements; and,
(5) indemnify the City for any injuries or damages arising
from the bonded improvements completed by the
City.
Upon City approval of the improvements, whether
completed by the applicant or the City, the City shall issue
a Certificate of Occupancy.
(Ord. 2000-20, 12-06-2000); (Ord. 87-16, 11-05-87)
(Ord. 2000-20, 12-06-2000); (Ord. 87-16, 11-05-87)
7-22-5. Deferral of prerequisites.
(1) The installation of the public improvements
required by Section §7-22-3, herein, may be deferred by
the Community Development Director or Public Works
Director, or designee, upon written request of the building
permit applicant, addressed to the Community
Development Director, upon satisfying the following
criteria:
(a) the building permit shall be for the
construction of structures other than a new primary
building (i.e., for completion of an unfinished space,
garage or garage addition, building expansion, upgrade, or
remodel, shed, accessory structures); and,
(b) the deferral shall not pose a substantial risk
to the life, health, or safety of any persons, as determined
by the Community Development Director or Public Works
Director.
(2) The owner of the property subject to the building
permit shall sign a Deferral Agreement and Release, on a
form acceptable to the City Attorney, prior to issuance of
the building permit.
(3) The Deferral Agreement and Release shall be
recorded by the Community Development Director, or
designee, in the offices of the Tooele County Recorder.
(Ord. 2015-19, July 15, 2015) (Ord. 2004-19, 11-17-04)
7-87 (December 5, 2016)
CHAPTER 23. OFFICIAL CITY MAP AND
MAJOR STREET MASTER PLAN
7-23-1. Major streets established.
7-23-2. Interpretation of street classifications.
7-23-3. Building permit - Power of the Director on
appeal.
7-23-1. Major streets established.
There is hereby established a master plan setting
forth the existing and proposed major street system for
and in the City of Tooele which plan or map shall
constitute an addition to the official map heretofore
adopted and which plan or map is on file in the office of
the Tooele County Recorder and is hereby adopted and
made a part of this Title, the same as if set out in full
herein.
(Ord. 1982-17, 07-16-1982) (Ord. 1982-16, 07-07-
1982)
7-23-2. Interpretation of street classifications.
The terms used in classifying the streets set forth in
the Major Street Master Plan shall have the same
meaning and definitions as set forth in Section 4-8-2 of
this Code.
(Ord. 1982-17, 07-16-1982) (Ord. 1982-16, 07-07-
1982)
7-23-3. Building permit - Power of the Director on
appeal.
In order to preserve the integrity of the official City
map no permit shall be issued for any building or
structure or part thereof on any land located between the
mapped lines of any street as shown on the official map.
The Director of Community Development shall have the
power, upon an appeal filed with it by the owner of any
such land, to authorize the grant of a permit for a
building or structure or part thereof within any mapped
street location in any case in which the Director, upon
the evidence, finds (1) that the property of the appellant
of which such mapped street location forms a part will
not yield a reasonable return to the owner unless such
permit be granted; or (2) that, balancing of interest in
the municipality in preserving the integrity of the
official map and the interest of the owner in the use and
benefits of the property, the grant of such permit is
required by consideration of justice and equity. Before
taking any such action, the Director shall hold a hearing
thereon. In the event that the Director decides to
authorize a building permit, the Director shall have the
power to specify the exact location, ground area, height,
and other details and conditions of extent and character
and also the duration of the building, structure, or part
thereof to be permitted.
(Ord. 2016-15, 10-19-2016) (Ord. 1982-17, 07-16-
1982) (Ord. 1982-16, 07-07-1982)
7-88 (January 8, 1999)
CHAPTER 24. ANNEXED AREAS
7-24-1. Procedure for annexation.
7-24-2. Initial zoning classifications.
7-24-3. Transfer of Water Shares.
7-24-1. Procedure for annexation.
(1) Whenever a majority of the real property
owners and not less than one third (1/3) of the real
property owners as determined by the value of all of the
tracts taken together in the contiguous area to be
annexed, according to the last assessment rolls, desire to
have Tooele City annex the particular area to Tooele
City, they shall proceed as follows:
(a) Prepare a written petition signed by the
said majority, and by one third (1/3) of the real property
owners by value, as determined by the last assessment
rolls, of the real property to be annexed; which petition
shall be directed to the Tooele City Planning and
Zoning Board and the Tooele City Council, and shall
petition said Board and Council for the annexation of a
particular contiguous area to Tooele City, and shall set
forth the legal description of the entire tract to be
annexed.
(b) In addition, said property owners shall
cause an accurate plat of such territory to be prepared
under the supervision of the Tooele City Engineer or by
a surveyor licensed by the State of Utah setting forth the
metes and bounds description of the territory to be
annexed and designating both limits to which it is
contiguous. Said plat shall also include, in the margin,
a proper certification with date, signature and seal by
the Engineer or surveyor preparing the same, an
Approval for Execution by the Planning and Zoning
Board of Tooele City including the date of execution
and lines for the signatures of each member approving
the same, an Approval for Execution by the members of
the City Council approving the plat, including the date
and a signature line for each member executing the
same, a marginal box for execution by the City Attorney
approving the plat as to form, a marginal box for the
Tooele City Recorder's certification that the same was
filed with the City Recorder's Office and indicating the
day and time of said filing as well as a separate
certification by the City Recorder that said plat and
Ordinance Number was approved by the City Council
including the date of approval and certification by the
City Council. In addition, a marginal box shall be
provided for the County Recorder's documentation as to
the book, page, date and time of recordation as well as
the signature and seal of the County Recorder. There
shall be no other marginal notations upon the plat.
(c) After the plat has been prepared as set
forth in Section 1(b) hereof and the petition has been
executed by each real property owner signing the same,
their signatures having been acknowledged by a Notary
Public, said petition and plat shall be presented to the
City Attorney for his or her approval as to form.
(d) Subsequent to the approval of the City
Attorney as to the form of the plat, said petition and plat
shall be presented to the Tooele City Planning and
Zoning Board at either a general or special meeting,
attended by a quorum or majority of said Board for
approval of said body.
(e) Upon approval by the Planning and
Zoning Board and the execution of Approval upon the
plat by signatures of a majority of the members of said
Board voting therefor, the plat and petition shall be
filed with the City Recorder who shall present the same
to the Tooele City Council at the next regular meeting
thereof, for the approval by the City Council.
(f) If two thirds (2/3) of all of the members of
the City Council vote at a regular meeting of said
Council for the annexation as petitioned, they shall so
declare said annexation by Ordinance passed by said
two thirds (2/3) of all members of the Council. Those
members declaring the annexation by Ordinance shall
execute their approval by signature upon the plat in the
place provided.
(g) Subsequent to the approval by the City
Council, the City Recorder shall cause said plat and the
Ordinance to be certified as to their authenticity
indicating the day of approval by a two thirds (2/3)
majority of the council and shall cause the same to be
recorded in the office of the Tooele County Recorder.
(Ord. 84-01, 01-04-84; Ord. 75-12, 05-12-75)
7-24-2. Initial zoning classifications.
All new areas annexed to Tooele City as provided
above shall be classified as the City Council shall
ordain in the Ordinance of annexation. No portion of
said territory shall be granted a variance or be reclassified
to another zoning designation without the
procedure provided by the Tooele City Code for such
variances or reclassifications being adhered to. (Ord.
84-01, 01-04-84; Ord. 75-12, 05-12-75)
7-24-3. Annexation Agreements
(1) Annexation approval is conditioned upon all
annexation petitioners executing an Annexation
Agreement with the City. The Agreement shall
provide, among other things, for the transfer of water
rights to the City in compliance with Chapter 26 of this
Title. Execution of the Agreement shall occur prior to a
City Council vote on the proposed annexation. Refusal
to execute the Agreement shall be grounds for refusing
to annex the land subject to the petition.
(2) The City Recorder shall cause the Agreement
to be recorded with the Tooele County Recorder as an
encumbrance upon the title to the annexed property. A
copy of the executed Agreement shall be attached to the
Annexation Individual Policy Declaration approved by
the City Council, and shall be recorded with the Policy
Declaration. (Ord. 98-31, 08-18-98); (Ord. 96-22, 11-6-
96); (Ord. 95-20, 12-15-95)
7-89 (October 14, 2020)
CHAPTER 25. SIGNS
7-25-1. Title.
7-25-2. Purpose and scope.
7-25-3. Definitions.
7-25-4. Signs prohibited.
7-25-4.1 Electronic billboards prohibited.
7-25-5. Permits required.
7-25-6. Signs not requiring permits.
7-25-7. Maintenance.
7-25-8. Electronic signs.
7-25-8.1 Lighting.
7-25-9. Changeable copy.
7-25-10. Sign contractor's license.
7-25-11. Indemnification and insurance.
7-25-12. Signs permitted in all zoning districts.
7-25-13. Signs permitted in residential zoning
districts.
7-25-14. Signs permitted in commercial zoning
districts.
7-25-14.1. Repealed. (Ord, 2020-42)
7-25-15. Signs permitted in industrial zoning
districts.
7-25-16. Nonconforming signs.
7-25-17. Loss of legal nonconforming status.
7-25-18. Maintenance and repair of nonconforming
signs.
7-25-19. Signs in clear view zones - signs in the public
right-of-way.
7-25-20. Abandoned signs.
7-25-21. Construction specifications.
7-25-22. Community Development Department
duties.
7-25-23. Application for permits.
7-25-24. Permit fees.
7-25-25. Issuance and denial.
7-25-26. Permit conditions, refunds and penalties.
7-25-27. Inspection upon completion.
7-25-28. Variances.
7-25-29. Violations.
7-25-30. Removal of signs.
7-25-31. Penalties.
7-25-32. Appeals.
7-25-33. Conflict.
7-25-34. Severability.
7-25-35. Message Substitution.
7-25-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the Tooele City Sign
Ordinance.
(Ord. 1994-27, 12-19-1994)
7-25-2. General principles - purpose - scope.
(1) Tooele City is a growing community close to the
Salt Lake City metropolitan area. The City has an
economic base that relies increasingly on tourism and
retail sales activity. In order to preserve the City as a
desirable community in which to live, recreate, and do
business, a pleasing, visually attractive business
environment is of foremost importance. The regulation of
signs within the City is a highly contributive means by
which to achieve this desired end. The sign regulations in
this Chapter are prepared with the intent of enhancing the
City’s business environment and promoting the continued
well-being of the City.
(2) It is the purpose of this Chapter to promote the
public health, safety, and general welfare through a
comprehensive system of reasonable, consistent, and
nondiscriminatory sign standards and requirements.
These sign regulations are intended to:
(a) Enable the identification of places of
residence and business.
(b) Allow for the communication of information
necessary for the conduct of commerce.
(c) Lessen hazardous situations, confusion, and
visual clutter caused by proliferation, improper placement,
excess illumination, animation, and excessive height, area,
and bulk of signs which compete for the attention of
pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
(d) Enhance the attractiveness and economic
well-being of the City as a place to live, recreate, and
conduct business.
(e) Protect the public from the dangers of
unsafe, improperly placed, cluttered, and poorly
maintained signs, as well as other hazardous conditions
caused by signs.
(f) Permit signs that fit in their locational and
architectural context and that aid pedestrian and vehicular
orientation, and preclude placement of signs in a manner
that conceals or obstructs adjacent land uses or signs.
(g) Encourage signs that are appropriate to the
zoning district in which they are located and consistent
with the category of use to which they pertain.
(h) Curtail the size and number of signs and sign
messages to the minimum reasonably necessary to identify
a residential or business location and the nature of any
such business.
(i) Preclude signs from conflicting with the
principal permitted use of the site or adjoining sites.
(j) Regulate signs in a manner so as to not
interfere with, obstruct vision of, or distract motorists,
bicyclists, or pedestrians.
(k) Require signs to be constructed, installed,
and maintained in a safe and aesthetic manner.
(l) Preserve and enhance the natural and scenic
characteristics of this historic community.
(3) The use of signs is regulated according to zoning
district. No sign shall be permitted as a main or accessory
use except in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter.
(4) This Chapter is not intended to regulate building
design, official traffic signs, political signs not located in
the public right-of-way, the copy and message of signs,
signs not intended to be viewed from a public right-ofway,
window displays, product dispensers and point of
purchase displays, scoreboards on athletic fields, flags of
any nation, government, or noncommercial organization,
gravestones, religious symbols, commemorative plaques,
the display of street numbers, or any display or
7-90 (October 14, 2020)
construction not defined herein as a sign.
(Ord. 2013-03, 06-19-2013); (Ord. 2010-06, 05-19-2010);
(Ord. 1994-27, 12-19-1994)
7-25-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
“A-frame sign” means a portable sign made of two
pieces connected by hinges or other hardware and forming
the shape of a capital “A” or an inverted “V” when in use.
"Abandoned sign" means a sign which no longer
appears to identify, provide directions to, or advertise a
current business establishment, service, product, good,
event, or activity, or for which no legal owner or lessor
can be found upon reasonable diligence.
"Animated sign" means a sign or display manifesting
either kinetic or illusionary motion occasioned by natural,
manual, mechanical, electrical, or other means. Animated
signs include:
(1) "naturally energized" signs whose motion is
activated by wind or other atmospheric impingement.
Wind driven signs include flags, sails, fins, banners,
pennants, streamers, spinners, whirligigs, metallic disks,
or other similar devices designed to move in the wind;
(2) "mechanically energized" signs manifesting
a repetitious pre-programmed physical movement or
rotation in either one or a series of planes activated by
means of mechanically based drives; and,
(3) "electrically energized" signs which are
illuminated signs whose motion or visual impression of
motion is activated primarily by electrical means.
Electrically energized animated signs are of two types:
(a) "flashing signs" which are illuminated
signs exhibiting a pre-programmed repetitious cyclical
interruption of illumination from one or more sources in
which the duration of the period of illumination is either
the same as or less than the duration of the period of
darkness and in which the intensity of illumination varies
from zero to 100% during the programmed cycle; and
(b) "illusionary movement signs" which are
illuminated signs exhibiting the illusion of movement by
means of a pre-programmed repetitious sequential
switching action in which illuminated elements of the sign
are turned on or off to visually simulate the impression of
motion characteristic of chasing, running, blinking,
oscillating, twinkling, scintillating, or expanding and
contracting light patterns.
"Area" - see "sign, area."
"Awning" means a shelter projecting from and
supported by the exterior wall of a building constructed of
rigid or nonrigid materials on a supporting framework.
"Awning sign" means a sign painted on, printed on,
or attached flat against the surface of an awning.
"Back lit awning" - see "electric awning sign."
"Banner sign" means a sign made of fabric or any
nonrigid material with no enclosing framework.
"Billboard" - see "off-premise sign."
"Building" means any structure used or intended to be
used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, or
property.
"Canopy (building)" means a rigid multi-sided structure
covered with fabric, metal, or other material and
supported by a building at one or more points or
extremities and by columns or posts embedded in the
ground at other points or extremities. It may be
illuminated by means of internal or external sources.
"Canopy (freestanding)" means a rigid multi-sided
structure covered with fabric, metal, or other material and
supported by columns or posts embedded in the ground.
It may be illuminated by means of internal or external
sources.
"Canopy sign" means a sign affixed or applied to the
exterior facing surface or surfaces of a building or
freestanding canopy.
"Changeable copy sign" means a sign whose
informational content can be changed or altered by
manual or electric, electro-mechanical, or electronic
means. Changeable signs include:
(1) "manually activated signs" whose
alphabetic, pictographic, or symbolic information content
can be changed or altered by manual means;
(2) "electrically activated signs" whose
alphabetic, pictographic, or symbolic informational
content can be changed or altered on a fixed display
surface composed of electrically illuminated or
mechanically driven changeable segments. These signs
include:
(a) fixed message electronic signs whose
basic informational content has been pre-programmed to
include only certain types of information projection, such
as time, temperature, predictable traffic conditions, public
service announcements, or other events subject to prior
programming; and
(b) computer controlled variable message
electronic signs whose informational content can be
changed or altered by means of computer-driven
electronic impulses.
"City" means the City of Tooele unless the context
clearly discloses a contrary intent.
"Civic Organization" means a community-based
company, club, committee, association, corporation, or
any other organization or group of persons acting in
concert which is composed of persons who are members
thereof on a voluntary basis and which is primarily
established to further educational, charitable, religious,
cultural, or local economic development purposes.
"Clearance” (of a sign) means the smallest vertical
distance between the grade of the adjacent street,
highway, sidewalk, or street curb and the lowest point of
any sign, including framework and embellishments,
extending over that grade.
"Clear view zone" means the area of a corner lot
closest to the intersection which is kept free of visual
impairment or obstruction in order to allow full view by
both pedestrian and vehicular traffic, as further described
in Tooele City Code Section 7-2-11.
“Closing sale sign” means a sign advertising a closing
sale regulated by Chapter 5-3.
"Construction sign" means a temporary sign
identifying an architect, contractor, subcontractor, and/or
material supplier participating in construction on the
7-91 (October 14, 2020)
property on which the sign is located.
"Copy" means the graphic content of a sign surface in
either permanent or removable letter, pictographic,
symbolic, or alphabetic form.
“Department” means the Tooele City Community
Development Department or successor department.
"Directional/information sign" means an on-premise
sign giving directions, instructions, or facility information
and which may contain the name or logo of an
establishment but no advertising copy, e.g., parking or
exit and entrance signs. Such signs may contain logo
provided that the logo may not comprise more than 20%
of the total sign area.
“Director” means the Director of the Community
Development Department or authorized designee.
"Double-faced sign" means a sign with two faces
essentially back-to-back.
“Dwell time” means the length of time that elapses
between changes in the text, images, or graphics on an
electronic sign.
"Electric awning sign" or "back lit awning" means an
internally illuminated fixed space-frame structure with
translucent, flexible reinforced covering designed in
awning form and with graphics or copy applied to the
visible surface of the awning.
"Electrical sign" means a sign or sign structure in
which electrical wiring, connections or fixtures are used.
"Electronic message center" - see "changeable copy
signs, electrically activated."
“Electronic sign” or “digital sign” means any sign,
video display, projected image, or similar device with
text, images, or graphics generated by solid state
electronic components. Electronic signs include, but are
not limited to, signs that use light emitting diodes (LED),
plasma displays, fiber optics, or other technology that
results in bright, high-resolution text, images, and/or
graphics.
"Facade" means the entire building front including the
parapet.
"Face of sign" means the area of a sign on which the
copy is placed.
“Feather sign” means a generally narrow vertical
temporary sign with or without copy where the sign is
mounted onto a pole or individual mounting device with
the intent of utilizing natural or man-made air movement.
"Festoons" means a string of ribbons, tinsel, small
flags, or pinwheels.
"Flashing sign" - see "animated sign, electrically
energized."
"Frontage" means the length of the property line of any
one premise along an adjacent public right-of-way.
"Frontage, building" means the length of an outside
building wall facing a public right-of-way or other
primary vehicular access.
"Government sign" means any temporary or permanent
sign erected and maintained by the city, county, state, or
federal government for traffic direction or for designation
of or direction to any school, hospital, historical site, or
public service, property, or facility.
"Ground sign" means a sign which is anchored to the
ground similar to a pylon or freestanding sign, but which
has a monolithic or columnar line and which maintains
essentially the same contour from grade to top.
“Handheld sign” means a temporary sign carried or
held by a person.
"Height (of a sign)" means the vertical distance
measured from the highest point of the sign, excluding
decorative embellishments, to the grade of the adjacent
street or the surface grade beneath the sign, whichever is
less.
"Identification sign" means a sign whose copy is
limited to the name and address of a building, institution,
or person or to the activity or occupation being identified.
"Illegal sign" means a sign which does not conform
fully to the requirements of this Chapter and which has
not received legal nonconforming status.
"Illuminated sign" means a sign with an artificial light
source incorporated internally or externally for the
purpose of illuminating the sign.
"Incidental sign" means a small sign, emblem or decal
informing the public of goods, facilities, or services
available on the premises, e.g., a credit card sign or a sign
indicating hours of business.
“Inflatable” means any display, with or without copy,
that has a final shape supported by gasses enclosed within
a container or is continuously supported by blown air.
"Lot" means a parcel of land legally defined on a
subdivision map recorded with the county recorder, or a
parcel of land defined by a legal record or survey map.
"Low profile sign" or "monument sign" means a sign
mounted directly to the ground with maximum height not
to exceed 6 feet and a maximum area not to exceed 40
square-feet.
"Maintenance" means the cleaning, painting, repair, or
replacement of defective parts of a sign in a manner that
does not alter the basic copy, design, mechanism, or
structure of a sign.
"Mansard" means a sloped roof or roof-like facade
architecturally comparable to a building wall.
"Marquee" means a permanent roof-like structure or
canopy of rigid materials supported by and extending
from the facade or any exterior wall of a building.
"Marquee sign" means any sign attached to or
supported by a marquee structure.
"Monument sign" - see "low profile sign."
“Motion” means the depiction of movement or change
of position of text, images, or graphics on a sign. Motion
shall include visual effects such as dissolving and fading
text and images, running sequential text, graphic bursts,
lighting that resembles zooming, twinkling or sparkling,
changes in light or color, transitory bursts of light
intensity, moving patterns or bands of light, expanding or
contracting shapes, and similar actions.
"Multiple-faced sign" means a sign containing 3 or
more faces, not necessarily in back-to-back configuration.
"Nameplate" means a nonilluminated on-premise
identification sign giving only the name, address, and/or
occupation of an occupant or group of occupants.
"Nonconforming sign" means a sign which was erected
legally, but which does not comply with the subsequently
7-92 (October 14, 2020)
enacted provisions of this Chapter.
"Occupancy" means the portion of a building or
premises owned, leased, rented, or otherwise lawfully
occupied for a given use.
"Off-premise sign" or "billboard" means a sign
structure advertising an establishment, merchandise,
service, product, or entertainment which is not sold,
produced, manufactured, or furnished at the property on
which the sign is located.
"Off-site directional sign" means a sign which
provides directional assistance to access an establishment
conveniently and safely.
"On-premise sign" means a sign which pertains to the
use of the premises or property on which it is located.
"Owner" means a person recorded as such on official
land or business license records of Tooele County or the
City. The owner of property on which a sign is located is
presumed to be the owner of the sign unless facts to the
contrary are officially recorded or otherwise brought to
the attention of the Department, e.g., a sign leased from a
sign company.
"Painted wall sign" means any sign which is applied
with paint or similar substance on the surface of a wall.
"Parapet" means the extension of a false front or wall
above a roof line.
"Person" means any individual, corporation,
association, firm, partnership, or similarly defined
interest.
"Point of purchase display" means advertising of a
retail item accompanying its display, e.g., an
advertisement on a product dispenser or a tire display.
"Pole cover" means the cover enclosing or decorating
poles or other structural supports of a sign.
"Political sign" means a temporary sign used in
connection with a local, state, or national election or
referendum.
"Premises" means a parcel of land with its
appurtenances and buildings.
"Projection sign" means a sign, other than a flat wall
sign, which is attached to and projects from a building
wall or other structure.
“Pylon Sign” means an independent sign, greater than
6 feet in height, structurally designed to be fully supported
by the earth.
"Real estate sign" means a temporary sign advertising
the real estate upon which the sign is located as being for
rent, lease, or sale.
"Roof line" means the top edge of a roof or building
parapet, whichever is higher, excluding any mansards,
cupolas, pylons, chimneys, or minor projections.
"Roof sign" means any sign erected over or on the roof
of a building.
"Rotating sign" - see "animated sign, mechanically
energized."
"Sign" means any device, structure, fixture, or placard
using graphics, symbols, written copy, or other means for
the primary purpose of identifying, providing directions
to, or advertising any business establishment, product,
goods, or services.
"Sign, area":
(1) Projecting and freestanding signs shall have
only one side of any double- or multiple-faced sign
counted in calculating its area. The area of the sign shall
be measured as follows if the sign is composed of one or
more individual cabinets: a rectilinear line of not more
than eight sides shall be drawn around and enclosing the
perimeter of each cabinet or module. The line lengths and
angles shall be measured and the enclosed area calculated.
The perimeter of measurable area shall not include
embellishments such as pole covers, framing, decorative
roofing, support structures, etc., provided that there is no
written advertising copy on such embellishments.
(2) The area of wall signs shall be within a
single, continuous perimeter composed of any rectilinear
line geometric figure which encloses the extreme limits of
the advertising message. If the sign is composed of
individual letters or symbols using the wall as the
background with no added decoration, the total sign area
shall be calculated by measuring the area containing the
letters.
"Snipe sign" means a temporary sign or poster affixed
to a tree, fence, utility pole, or similar object or to the
ground.
"Subdivision identification sign" means a freestanding
or wall sign identifying a recognized subdivision,
condominium complex or residential development.
"Temporary sign" means a sign not constructed or
intended for long-term use.
“Temporary special event sign” means a sign
announcing an event that is scheduled and open to the
public. The term “temporary special event” shall not
include a grand opening sale, a closing sale, a garage sale,
or other similar events.
“Twirl time” means the time it takes for static text,
images, and graphics on an electronic sign to change to
different text, images, or graphics on a subsequent sign
face.
"Under-canopy sign" means a sign suspended beneath
a canopy, ceiling, roof, or marquee.
"Use" means the purpose for which a building, lot,
sign, or structure is intended, designed, occupied, or
maintained.
“Vehicle sign” means a vehicle utilized for the primary
purpose of displaying a sign or of identifying, providing
directions to, or advertising any establishment, product,
goods, or services. The word “vehicle” includes cars,
trucks, and trailers.
(1) Example: a vehicle parked for several days
at a location apparently unrelated to the sign on the
vehicle is a vehicle sign.
(2) Example: a vehicle containing a sign and
parked at the owner’s or operator’s place of residence or
employment is not a vehicle sign.
(3) Example: a bus, taxi, other vehicle
containing a sign and operating during the normal course
of business is not a vehicle sign.
"Wall sign" means a sign attached essentially parallel
to and extending not more than 24 inches from the wall of
7-93 (October 14, 2020)
a building with no copy on the sides or edges. This
definition includes painted, individual letter, and cabinet
signs, and signs on a mansard.
“Wheeled sign” means any sign moved upon or
attached to one or more wheels that is not a vehicle sign.
"Window sign" means a sign installed or painted on
the inside of a window and intended to be viewed from
the outside.
(Ord. 2020-41, 10-07-2020) (Ord. 2015-02, 02-04-2015)
(Ord. 2013-03, 06-19-2013) (Ord. 2012-21, 11-21-2012)
(Ord. 2010-06, 05-19-2010) (Ord. 2005-21, 09-21-2005)
(Ord. 2005-08, 04-20-2005) (Ord. 1994-27, 12-19-1994)
7-25-4. Signs prohibited.
The following signs are prohibited in all zoning
districts:
(1) abandoned signs;
(2) animated signs, but not changeable copy signs;
(3) banner signs exceeding 48 square-feet, pennants,
festoons, and search lights, except temporary special event
signs;
(4) signs imitating or resembling official traffic or
government signs or signals;
(5) signs, other than government signs and A-frame
signs, placed on any public right-of-way;
(6) signs on the premises of a home occupation
advertising that home occupation except as identified in
Section 7-25-13;
(7) off-premise signs and billboards;
(8) handheld signs;
(9) vehicle signs;
(10) wheeled signs;
(11) snipe signs;
(12) roof signs;
(13) inflatable signs located in the Downtown
Overlay District;
(14) inflatable signs exceeding ten feet in height and
two feet in width; and,
(15) all other signs not permitted by this Chapter.
(Ord. 2020-41, 20-07-2020) (Ord. 2015-02, 02-04-2015)
(Ord. 2013-03, 06-19-2013) (Ord. 2012-21, 11-21-2012)
(Ord. 2002-15, 08-07-2002) (Ord. 1994-27, 12-19-1994)
7-25-4.1 Electronic billboards prohibited.
The conversion, remodeling, rehabilitation, or upgrade
of an existing off-premise sign or billboard to an
electronic sign or digital sign is prohibited.
(Ord. 2015-02, 02-04-2015) (Ord. 2013-03, 06-19-2013)
7-25-5. Permits required.
Unless otherwise provided by this chapter, all signs
shall require permits and payment of fees. No permit is
required for the maintenance of a sign or for a change of
copy on painted, printed, or changeable copy signs.
(Ord. 2013-03, 06-19-2013) (Ord. 1994-27, 12-19-1994)
7-25-6. Signs not requiring permits.
The following types of signs are exempted from permit
requirements but must be in conformance with all other
requirements of this chapter:
(1) construction signs of 16 square-feet or less;
(2) directional/information signs of nine square-feet
or less;
(3) holiday or special events decorations;
(4) nameplates of two square-feet or less;
(5) political signs;
(6) public signs or notices, or any sign relating to an
emergency;
(7) real estate signs;
(8) window signs;
(9) A-frame signs;
(10) banner signs;
(11) incidental signs, and,
(12) temporary special event signs under Section
7-25-12(9)(f)(ii); and,
(13) registered 501(c)(3) organization, schools, and
civic organizations fundraising event signs under Section
7-25-12(8).
(Ord. 2020-41, 10-07-2020) (Ord. 2017-13, 06-07-2017)
(Ord. 2013-03, 06-19-2013) (Ord. 2012-21, 11-21-2012)
(Ord. 1994-27, 12-19-1994)
7-25-7. Maintenance.
All signs shall be properly maintained. Exposed
surfaces shall be clean and painted if paint is required.
Defective parts shall be replaced. The Department shall
have the right under Section 7-25-30 to order the repair or
removal of any sign which is defective, damaged, or
substantially deteriorated.
(Ord. 2013-03, 06-19-2013) (Ord. 2010-06, 05-19-2010)
(Ord. 1994-27, 12-19-1994)
7-25-8. Electronic signs.
Where allowed, electronic signs shall conform to the
following standards.
(1) Motion. Any motion or appearance of motion is
prohibited on an electronic sign face.
(2) Dwell time. Dwell time shall be at least three
seconds.
(3) Twirl time. Twirl time shall not exceed 0.25
seconds.
(4) Brightness. Signs shall not exceed 20% of the
total space of the illuminated sign to be white or yellow.
(5) Controls. All electronic signs shall contain
automatic dimming controls or photocell mechanisms or
technologies that automatically adjust sign brightness,
dwell time, twirl time, and motion to the standards of this
Section.
(6) Size. The maximum portion of a sign that is
allowed to be electronic, as opposed to static image, is
75%.
(7) Verification.
7-94 (October 14, 2020)
The City shall have the right to verify compliance, or
to receive additional verification of compliance, with the
standards of this Section, upon request.
(Ord. 2020-41, 10-07-2020) (Ord. 2015-02, 02-04-2015)
7-25-8.1 Lighting.
Unless otherwise prohibited by this Chapter, all signs
may be illuminated.
(Ord. 2015-02, 02-04-2015) (Ord. 2013-03, 06-19-2013)
(Ord. 1994-27, 12-19-1994)
7-25-9. Changeable copy.
Unless otherwise specified by this chapter, any sign
allowed by this Chapter may be a changeable copy sign.
(Ord. 2013-03, 06-19-2013) (Ord. 1994-27, 12-19-1994)
7-25-10. Sign contractor's license.
No person may engage in the business of erecting,
altering, relocating, constructing, or maintaining signs
without a valid contractor's license and all required state
and federal licenses.
(Ord. 2013-03, 06-19-2013) (Ord. 1994-27, 12-19-1994)
7-25-11. Indemnification and insurance.
(1) All persons involved in the maintenance,
installation, alteration, or relocation of signs located near
or upon any public right-of-way or other public property
shall agree to hold harmless and indemnify the City, its
officers, agents, and employees against any and all claims
of negligence arising from such work.
(2) All persons involved in the maintenance,
installation, alteration, or relocation of signs located near
or upon any public right-of-way or other public property
shall file with the City Recorder a satisfactory certificate
of insurance to indemnify the City against liability.
(Ord. 2013-03, 06-19-2013) (Ord. 1994-27, 12-19-1994)
7-25-12. Signs permitted in all zoning districts.
The following signs are allowed in all zoning districts:
(1) all signs not requiring permits, except those signs
prohibited by Section 7-25-4;
(2) one nonilluminated sign for each street frontage
of a construction project, not to exceed 48 square feet in
sign area in residential zones or 64 square feet in sign area
in all other zones, and such signs may be erected 60 days
prior to beginning of construction and shall be removed
30 days following completion of construction;
(3) one nonilluminated real estate sign per lot or
premises not to exceed twelve square feet in sign area, and
such signs must be removed 15 days following sale, rental
or lease of the real estate involved;
(4) one nonilluminated attached building nameplate
per occupancy, not to exceed two square feet in sign area;
(5) political signs;
(6) directional/information signs;
(7) off-site directional signs, not to exceed nine
square feet in area, announcing an event which is open to
the public and which has a duration of less than seven
days. Off-site directional signs allowed under this Section
may be placed no sooner than ten days prior to the event
opening and shall be removed by the sign permit applicant
within three days after the event closing;
(8) Registered 501(c)(3) organizations, schools, and
civic organizations fundraising event signs shall be
subject to the following time, place, and manner
standards:
(a) shall not exceed 12 square-feet in area;
(b) may be ground-mounted or wall-mounted,
but not roof-mounted;
(c) if grounded-mounted,
(i) shall not exceed four feet in height;
(ii) shall not be located within a clear view
zone; and,
(iii) shall not have more than two faces;
(d) may be located on any private property with
the property owner's prior written authorization, which
shall be made available for verification if requested by the
city;
(e) shall not exceed four signs per event;
(f) shall not exceed five business days in
duration;
(9) temporary special event signs. A temporary
special event sign shall be subject to the following time,
place, and manner standards:
(a) shall not exceed 48 square-feet in area;
(b) may be ground-mounted or wall-mounted,
but not roof-mounted;
(c) if grounded-mounted,
(i) shall not exceed four feet in height;
(ii) shall not be located within a clear view
zone; and,
(iii) shall not have more than two faces;
(d) may be located on any private property with
the property owner’s written authorization;
(e) shall not exceed four signs per event; and,
(f) may be displayed at the following times:
(i) four display periods in each calendar
year each not to exceed 21 total days prior, during and
after the scheduled event, subject to both a permit and a
fee, as listed in the Tooele City Fee Schedule, for each
display period; and,
(ii) the following established display
periods:
(A) Martin Luther King Day (Third
Monday of January): up to five days before and including
the holiday;
(B) Valentine’s Day (February 14) : up
to five days before and including the holiday;
(C) President's Day (Third Monday of
February): up to five days before and including the
holiday;
(D) Mother's Day (Second Sunday in
May): up to five days before and including the holiday;
(E) Easter: up to five days before and
7-95 (October 14, 2020)
including the holiday;
(F) Memorial Day (Last Monday in
May): up to five days before and including the holiday;
(G) Father's Day (Third Sunday in
June): up to five days before and including the holiday;
(H) Independence Day (July 4): up to
five days before and including the holiday;
(I) Pioneer Day (July 24): up to five
days before and including the holiday;
(J) Labor Day Father's Day (Third
Sunday in June): up to five days before and including the
holiday;
(K) Veteran's Day (November 11): up
to five days before and including the holiday;
(L) Thanksgiving Day (Fourth
Thursday in November): up to ten days before and
including the holiday; and,
(M) Christmas Day (December 25)
and New Year’s Day (January 1): up to 23 days beginning
December 10 and ending January 2;
(10) grand opening signs, not to exceed 30 days per
calendar year; and,
(11) closing sale signs.
(Ord 2020-41, 10-07-2020) (Ord. 2015-02, 02-04-2015)
(Ord. 2013-03, 06-19-2013) (Ord. 2011-10, 04-06-2011)
(Ord. 2010-06, 05-19-2010) (Ord. 2008-12, 09-03-2008)
7-25-13. Signs permitted in residential zones.
(1) Signs are allowed as follows in residential zones:
(a) all signs as permitted in Section 7-25-12;
(b) one subdivision identification sign per street
frontage, neighborhood, subdivision or development, not
to exceed 48 square feet in sign area in each location;
(c) one identification sign per entrance to
apartment or condominium complexes, not to exceed 36
square feet in sign area;
(d) for permitted nonresidential uses, including
churches and synagogues, one freestanding sign, not to
exceed 48 square feet in sign area, and one wall sign not
to exceed 48 square feet in sign area, except window signs
or a sign hung from the front door, no larger than 24 x 18
inches, advertising a home occupation are prohibited;
(e) one bus bench sign at each bona fide stop
along a public transit route provided the owners of the
benches are authorized to operate in Tooele City and
advertising on the benches does not exceed 20 square feet
in area.
(2) All allowed freestanding signs in residential
zones shall have a maximum height limit of six feet and
shall have a setback of 15 feet from any public right-ofway.
(Ord. 2020-41, 10-07-2020) (Ord. 1994-27, 12-19-1994)
7-25-14. Signs permitted in commercial zoning
districts.
(1) Signs are allowed as follows in commercial
zoning districts:
(a) all signs as permitted in Sections 7-25-12
and 7-25-13;
(b) one low profile sign per street frontage;
(c) one pylon sign per street frontage provided,
however, that:
(i) building sites located adjacent to a
controlled access arterial road (i.e., 106 foot right-of-way)
may have no more than one pylon sign for every full 300
feet of road frontage;
(ii) building sites located adjacent to a
limited access collector road (i.e., 84-foot right-of-way)
may have no more than one pylon sign for every full 175
feet of road frontage;
(iii) building sites with less than the required
frontage may aggregate their respective frontages to
qualify for a pylon sign and collocate on the sign pursuant
to written collocation agreement filed with the City;
(iv) building sites with more than one street
frontage shall be limited to one pylon sign;
(v) building sites not located adjacent to a
controlled access arterial road or limited access collector
road shall not have a pylon sign located within 200 feet of
said arterial or 100 feet of said collector, respectively;
(vi) building sites not located adjacent to a
controlled access arterial road or limited access collector
road may collocate on an existing pylon sign by
contractual arrangement, not as a matter of entitlement,
with the owners and/or tenants of building sites containing
pylon signs; and
(vii) pylon signs shall comply with the
following minimum design standards:
(A) shall not exceed one square-foot in
sign area for each lineal foot of property frontage;
(B) shall not exceed 150 square-feet in
area;
(C) shall not exceed 25 feet in height;
(D) shall not be placed closer than 50
feet from adjacent building site property lines; and,
(E) shall not be placed closer than ten
feet from a right-of-way property line.;
(d) one wall sign, marquee sign or electric
awning sign not to exceed 15% of the aggregate area of
building elevation on which the signs are installed, to
include window signs and wall-mounted banners;
(e) one under-canopy sign for each separate
occupancy or separate entrance not to exceed eight square
feet in sign area, and such signs must have a minimum
clearance of eight feet to grade;
(f) Repealed. (Ord. 2008-12, 09-03-08).
(g) portable or wheeled signs for new business
openings for not more than 15 days;
(h) one projection sign, which may project into
the public way up to four feet when not in conflict with
state requirements within a designated “Downtown
Overlay” or “Mixed Use” zoning district. Projections
must be no closer than ten feet horizontally from the top
back of curb. The bottom of the sign shall not be less than
7-96 (October 14, 2020)
seven feet above the top back of curb or not less than ten
feet above the top back of curb when within a clear view
zone;
(i) closing sale signs, subject to Section 5-3-18
(Limitation);
(j) feather signs pursuant to the following:
(i) feather signs shall be no taller than ten
feet from the ground at the base of the sign;
(ii) feather signs shall not be located less
than five feet from any street right-of-way;
(iii) feather signs shall not be located within
any clear view area;
(iv) feather signs shall be allowed in a ratio
of one sign for every 50 feet (portions thereof not
qualifying for a sign) of street frontage along which the
sign is posted; and,
(v) feather signs shall only be located on
the property for which they represent or advertise; and,
(k) a business property may not to exceed three
temporary signs in total;
(l) banner signs are to be used as supplemental
signs only. Permanent signs are required prior to the use
of a banner sign, except that new occupants may place a
banner sign for a maximum of 75 days while waiting for
a permanent sign to be manufactured and installed;
(m) banner signs are allowed pursuant to the
following standards:
(i) Size and dimension. Banner signs shall
not exceed 48 square feet nor four feet in height.
(ii) Number of signs. Each business shall
have no more than one banner sign. Banner signs are in
addition to other signage allowed by this Chapter.
(iii) Appurtenances. No appurtenances may
be added or attached to banner signs. Appurtenances
include lighting, balloons, items extending beyond the
allowed sign dimensions, and mechanical parts.
(iv) Lighting. Banner signs may not be
directly illuminated.
(v) Maintenance. All businesses shall
maintain their banner signs in good condition. Sagging,
tattered, torn, dirty, or faded banners are not permitted.
(vi) Banner signs shall not impede the use of
doors, windows, or exits, or interfere with pedestrian
traffic on public or private walkways.
(vii) The City is authorized to remove,
confiscate, and dispose of banner signs that do not comply
fully with all of the above standards after giving business
owner one business day notice prior to removal.
(n) (i) A-frame signs are allowed in the
Downtown Overlay District and all commercial districts
pursuant to the following standards:
(A) Location. The Downtown Overlay
District is defined as extending from 100 South Street to
Utah Avenue (200 North) and from 50 West Street to
Garden Street (50 East). In the Downtown Overlay
District only, A-frame signs may be located on the public
sidewalk so long as an unobstructed six-foot pedestrian
zone is maintained between the building and the signs. In
the Downtown Overlay District only, A-frame signs may
be located in the public park strip. A-frame signs may be
located in front of the building in which the business
advertising on the sign is located. For businesses
co-locating on a sign, the sign must be located in front of
one of the buildings or building units in which the
businesses advertising on the sign are located.
(B) Size and dimension. A-frame signs
shall not exceed 30 inches wide and 36 inches tall.
(C) Time. To facilitate maintenance of the
public park strips and sidewalks, A-frame signs may be
placed within the public right-of-way only between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
(D) Number of signs. Each business within
the Downtown Overlay District and commercial zones
shall be allowed in a ratio of one A-frame sign for every
ten feet of business property frontage, but not to exceed
three total permitted signs temporary signs. A-frame signs
shall be spaced at minimum ten feet apart. A-frame signs
are in addition to other signage allowed by this Chapter
but not to exceed three total permitted temporary signs.
(E) Appurtenances. No appurtenances may
be added or attached to A-frame signs. Appurtenances
include lighting, balloons, items extending beyond the
allowed sign dimensions, and mechanical parts.
(F) Lighting. A-frame signs may not be
directly illuminated.
(G) Maintenance. All businesses shall
maintain their A-frame signs in good order. The term
"good order" shall include the following: fully painted
inside and out; readable copy firmly affixed to the sign; no
rotting or broken wood, hinges, chains, or other parts.
(ii) The City is authorized to remove, confiscate,
and dispose of A-frame signs that do not comply fully
with all of the above standards with at least one business
day notice to the property owner prior to removal.
(2) In commercial zones, where an occupancy is on
a corner lot, a minimum clear view zone is to be
maintained in a triangulated area at the point of
intersection to allow an unobstructed view of oncoming
traffic.
(3) In commercial zones, pylon signs shall maintain
a minimum clearance of ten feet over any pedestrian use
and 14 feet over any vehicular way.
(4) All signs must comply with lighting and other
minimum design standards set forth in this Title.
(Ord. 2020-41, 10-07-2020) (Ord. 2015-02, 02-04-2015)
(Ord. 2013-03, 06-19-2013) (Ord. 2010-06, 05-19-2010)
(Ord. 2005-08, 04-20-2005) (Ord. 2002-15, 08-07-2002)
(Ord. 1994-27, 12-19-1994)
7-25-14.1. A-frame signs in the Downtown Overlay
District. (Repealed.)
(Ord. 2020-41, 10-07-2020) (Ord. 2012-21, 11-21-2012)
7-25-15. Signs permitted in industrial zoning districts.
(1) Signs are allowed as follows in industrial zoning
districts:
7-97 (October 14, 2020)
(a) all signs as permitted in Sections 7-25-12, 7-
25-13 and 7-25-14;
(b) one freestanding sign per street frontage not
to exceed one square foot of sign area for each lineal foot
of property frontage. Signs must not project beyond
property lines nor exceed a height of 35 feet. Where
street frontage exceeds 300 lineal feet, one additional
freestanding sign may be allowed per 300 foot increment;
(c) wall signs not to exceed 30% of the
aggregate square footage of the wall area upon which they
are installed. Electric awning signs not to exceed 30% of
the aggregate square footage of the wall area upon which
they are installed. The combination of wall signs and
electric awning signs shall not exceed 30% of the allowed
wall area;
(d) projecting signs instead of any wall or
freestanding signs provided they do not project beyond
the property line and maintain a clearance of ten feet over
pedestrian area, and 14 feet over vehicular ways;
(e) roof signs where no other sign types can
provide effective identification, but they shall be
constructed so as to conceal all structure and fastenings,
and the height of the roof sign shall not exceed 20% of the
total height of the building to which it is attached; and,
(f) incidental signs not to exceed four squarefeet
in aggregate area per occupancy.
(2) All signs in industrial zones must maintain
minimum clearances and construction electrical standards.
(Ord. 2020-41, 10-07-2020) (Ord. 2013-03, 06-19-2013)
(Ord. 2010-06, 05-19-2010) (Ord. 1994-27, 12-19-1994)
7-25-16. Nonconforming signs.
Existing signs which do not conform to the specific
provisions of this Chapter may be eligible for the
designation "legal nonconforming" provided that:
(1) the Department determines that such signs are
properly maintained and do not in any way endanger the
public; and,
(2) the sign was installed in full compliance with a
valid City permit, with a valid City variance (not
including a use variance), or with all applicable City laws
on the date of installation.
(Ord. 2013-03, 06-19-2013) (Ord. 2010-06, 05-19-2010)
(Ord. 1994-27, 12-19-1994)
7-25-17. Loss of legal nonconforming status.
A legal nonconforming sign shall lose this designation
if:
(1) the sign is relocated or replaced; or,
(2) the structure or size of the sign is altered in any
way except toward compliance with this chapter. This
does not refer to change of copy or maintenance.
(Ord. 2013-03, 06-19-2013) (Ord. 1994-27, 12-19-1994)
7-25-18. Maintenance and repair of nonconforming
signs.
Legal nonconforming signs are subject to all
requirements of this Code regarding safety, maintenance,
and repair. A legal nonconforming sign may be
reconstructed and restored if it is involuntarily destroyed
in whole or in part due to fire or other calamity, unless the
sign is an abandoned sign. Maintenance shall not include
the conversion, modification, remodel, or upgrade of a
sign to an electronic sign or digital sign.
(Ord. 2013-03, 06-19-2013) (Ord. 1994-27, 12-19-1994)
7-25-19. Signs in clear view zones - signs in the public
right-of-way.
(1) Signs in excess of three feet above curb grade or
support poles larger than 12 inches in diameter may not be
installed in clear view zones. Freestanding signs must
have at least ten feet clearance to grade.
(2) No signs may be located in the public right-ofway
except A-frame signs and signs owned and installed
by the City or the State of Utah. The Department is
authorized to remove, confiscate, and dispose of all signs
placed in the public right-of-way in violation of this
Chapter.
(Ord. 2020-41, 10-07-2020) (Ord. 2013-03, 06-19-2013)
(Ord. 2012-21, 11-21-2012) (Ord. 1994-27, 12-19-1994)
7-25-20. Abandoned signs.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter,
any on-premise sign which is located on property that is
undeveloped or becomes vacant and unoccupied for a
period of one month or more, or any sign which pertains
to a time, event, or purpose which no longer applies, shall
be deemed to have been abandoned. Permanent signs
applicable to a business temporarily suspended because of
a change of ownership or management of such business
shall not be deemed abandoned unless the property
remains vacant for a period of three months or more.
(2) Any off-premise sign which no longer, and for a
period of two consecutive months, advertises goods,
products, services or facilities available to the public or
which directs persons to a different location where such
goods, products, services or facilities are not for a period
of two consecutive months available, shall be deemed to
have been abandoned.
(3) Abandoned signs shall be removed by the owner
of the premises on which the sign is located.
(4) All abandoned signs become a nuisance, per
Section 8-4-8 (Nuisance abatement), after six months of
evidence of abandonment and as designated by the
Building Official.
(Ord. 2020-41, 10-07-2020) (Ord. 2013-03, 06-19-2013)
(Ord. 1994-27, 12-19-1994)
7-25-21. Construction specifications.
All signs shall be installed in compliance with building
and electrical codes as adopted by the City.
(Ord. 1994-27, 12-19-1994)
7-25-22. Community Development Department duties.
(1) The Department is authorized to process
applications for permits, hold public hearings as required,
and enforce and carry out all provisions of this Chapter.
7-97.1 (October 14, 2020)
The Department is authorized to enforce regulations and
procedures consistent with this Chapter.
(2) Department personnel are empowered, upon
presentation of proper credentials, to enter or inspect any
building, structure, or premises in the City for the purpose
of inspection of a sign and its structural and electrical
connections to ensure compliance with all applicable
codes and ordinances. Such inspections shall be carried
out during business hours unless an emergency exists.
(Ord. 2013-03, 06-19-2013) (Ord. 2010-06, 05-19-2010)
(Ord. 1994-27, 12-19-1994)
7-25-23. Application for permits.
Application for a permit for the erection or relocation
of a sign shall be made to the Department upon a form
provided by the Department and shall include the
following information:
(1) name and address of the owner of the sign;
(2) street address or location of the property on
which the sign is to be located, along with the name and
address of the property owner;
(3) the type of sign or sign structure as defined in
this Chapter;
(4) a site plan with measurements showing the
proposed location of the sign along with the locations of
all existing signs on the same premises; and,
(5) specifications and drawings showing the
materials, design, dimensions, components, structural
supports, and electrical components of the proposed sign.
(Ord. 2013-03, 06-19-2013) (Ord. 2010-06, 05-19-2010)
(Ord. 1994-27, 12-19-1994)
7-25-24. Permit fees.
All applications for permits filed with the Department
shall be accompanied by a payment of the permit fee for
each sign as established by the City.
(Ord. 2013-03, 06-19-2013) (Ord. 2010-06, 05-19-2010)
(Ord. 1994-27, 12-19-1994)
7-25-25. Issuance and denial.
(1) The Director shall issue a permit for the erection,
structural alteration, or relocation of a sign within five
business days of receipt of a completed application,
provided that the sign complies with all applicable laws
and regulations of the City. In all applications, where a
matter of interpretation arises, the more specific definition
or higher standard shall prevail.
(2) When a permit is denied, the Zoning
Administrator shall, within five business days, give a
written notice to the applicant along with a brief statement
of the reasons for denial, citing code sections and
interpretation of possible nonconformity. The Zoning
Administrator may suspend or revoke an issued permit for
any false statement or misrepresentation of fact in the
application.
(Ord. 2020-41, 10-07-2020) (Ord. 2013-03, 06-19-2013)
(Ord. 2010-06, 05-19-2010) (Ord. 1994-27, 12-19-1994)
7-25-26. Permit conditions, refunds and penalties.
(1) If a permit is denied, the permit fee will be
refunded to the applicant.
(2) If no inspections have been made and no work
authorized by the permit has been performed, the permit
fee may be refunded to the applicant upon request,
provided that the permit is returned to the Department
within fiva business days of issuance.
(3) If any sign is installed or placed on any property
prior to receipt of a permit, the specified permit fee shall
be doubled. However, payment of the doubled fee shall
not relieve any person of any other requirements or
penalties prescribed in this Chapter.
(2020-41, 10-07-2020) (Ord. 2013-03, 06-19-2013) (Ord.
2010-06, 05-19-2010) (Ord. 1994-27, 12-19-1994)
7-25-27. Inspection upon completion.
(1) Any person installing, structurally altering, or
relocating a sign for which a permit has been issued shall
notify the Department upon completion of the work. The
Department may require a final inspection, including an
electrical inspection and inspection of footings on
freestanding signs.
(2) The Department may require at the time of
issuance of a permit that written notification for an
inspection be submitted prior to the installation of certain
signs.
(Ord. 2010-06, 05-19-2010) (Ord. 1994-27, 12-19-1994)
7-25-28. Variances.
Any person or entity desiring a waiver or modification
of the requirements of this Chapter as applied to a sign, an
application for sign permit, or a parcel of property upon
which a sign is located or is applied to be located may
apply to the Board of Adjustment for a variance from the
terms of this Chapter under Section 2-4-7 (Variances) of
this Code.
(Ord. 2013-03, 06-19-2013) (Ord. 2010-06, 05-19-2010)
(Ord. 1994-27, 12-19-1994)
7-25-29. Violations.
(1) When a violation of this Chapter exists, the
Zoning Administrator shall issue a written order to the
alleged violator. The order shall specify those sections of
this Chapter the individual may be in violation of and
shall state that the individual has ten days from the date of
the order in which to correct the alleged violation or
appeal to the Director.
(2) If, upon inspection, the Department finds that a
sign is abandoned or structurally, materially, or
electrically defective, or in any way endangers the public,
the Zoning Administrator or Building Official shall issue
a written order to the owner of the sign and occupant of
the premises stating the nature of the violation and
requiring the repair or removal of the sign within five days
of the date of the order.
(Ord. 2020-41, 10-07-2020) (Ord. 2013-03, 06-19-2013)
(Ord. 2010-06, 05-19-2010) (Ord. 1994-27, 12-19-1994)
(October 14, 2020) 7-97.2
7-25-30. Removal of signs.
(1) The Zoning Administrator may cause the
removal and disposal of illegal temporary signs with one
business day notice to the sign or property owner.
Temporary signs located in the public right-of-way or on
public property can be removed without prior notice to the
sign owner.
(2) The Zoning Administrator and/or Building
Official may cause the removal of an illegal sign in cases
of emergency or for failure to comply with the written
orders of removal or repair. After removal or demolition
of the sign, a notice shall be mailed to the sign owner
stating the nature of the work and the date on which it was
performed and demanding payment of the costs as
certified by the Department.
(3) If the amount specified in the notice is not paid
within five business days of the notice, it shall become an
assessment upon a lien against the property of the sign
owner, and will be certified as an assessment against the
property together with a 10% penalty for collection in the
same manner as the real estate taxes.
(4) The owner of the property upon which the sign
is located shall be presumed to be the owner of all signs
thereon unless facts to the contrary are brought to the
attention of the Department, as in the case of a leased
sign.
(5) For purposes of removal, the definition of sign
shall include all sign embellishments and structures
designed specifically to support or be a part of the sign.
(6) In cases of emergency, the Zoning Administrator
and/or Building Official may cause the immediate
removal of a dangerous or defective sign without notice.
Signs removed in this manner must present a hazard to the
public safety.
(7) Any temporary sign caused to be removed by the
Zoning Administrator or Building Official shall be held
for a minimum of five business days before disposal. The
owner of the removed sign may retrieve the sign during
the time the sign is held but shall not re-install the sign
unless done according to and in conformance with the
terms of this Chapter.
(Ord. 2020-41, 10-07-2020) (Ord. 2015-02, 02-04-2015)
(Ord. 2013-03, 06-19-2013) (Ord. 2010-06, 05-19-2010)
(Ord. 1994-27, 12-19-1994)
7-25-31. Penalties.
(1) Any person or entity that fails to comply with
any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to
the civil penalties identified in the Tooele City Fee
Schedule.
(2) A violation of any of the provisions of this
Chapter is punishable as a class C misdemeanor.
(3) The City may pursue both civil and criminal
enforcement for violations of this Chapter but may
recover either civil fines or criminal fines, not both, for
any single episode of violation.
(Ord. 2015-14, 04-15-2015) (Ord. 2013-03, 06-19-2013)
(Ord. 1994-27, 12-19-1994)
7-25-32. Appeals.
(1) Any failure to respond to an application within
five days of receipt of any decision rendered by an
ordinance enforcement officer, a building official, the
Zoning Administrator, or any authorized designee, in
denying a permit or in alleging a violation of this Chapter
may be appealed in writing to the Director.
(2) The action or decision being appealed shall not
be stayed pending the outcome of any administrative
appeals unless the Director finds that there is good cause
to do so.
(3) The Director shall issue a written decision within
30 days of receipt of the appeal. A decision not issued
with 30 days of receipt of the appeal shall be deemed a
denial of the appeal.
(4) The decision of the Director may be appealed by
filing a written appeal with the Mayor’s office within ten
days of the date of the Director’s decision. The
Administrative Hearing Officer shall schedule and
conduct an informal hearing, shall notify the appellant and
the Director of the date and time of the hearing, and shall
issue a written decision within 15 days of the hearing.
The decision shall be mailed by first-class mail to the
appellant.
(Ord. 2020-41, 10-07-2020) (Ord. 2013-03, 06-19-2013)
(Ord. 2010-06, 05-19-2010) (Ord. 1994-27, 12-19-1994)
7-25-33. Conflict.
If any portion of this Chapter is found to be in conflict
with any other provision of any zoning, building, fire,
safety, or health ordinance of the City, the provision
which establishes the higher standard shall prevail.
(Ord. 1994-27, 12-19-1994)
7-25-34. Severability.
Should any word, phrase, sentence, or section of this
Chapter be determined to be invalid for any reason by any
court of competent jurisdiction wherein the validity of the
said word, phrase, sentence, or section was at issue, the
invalidity of said provision shall not affect the validity of
the balance of this Chapter and said provision shall be
considered severable from the balance of this Chapter to
the extent that the meaning and clear intent of the balance
is not materially affected.
(Ord. 2010-06, 05-19-2010)
7-25-35. Message substitution.
Subject to the land owner’s consent, a noncommercial
message of any type may be substituted for any duly
permitted or allowed commercial message or any duly
permitted or allowed noncommercial message; provided,
that the sign structure or mounting device is legal without
consideration of message content. Such substitution of
message may be made without any additional approval or
permitting. This provision prevails over any more
specific provision to the contrary within this Chapter. The
purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent
favoring of commercial speech over noncommercial
speech, or favoring of any particular noncommercial
(October 14, 2020) 7-97.3
message over any other noncommercial message. This
Section does not create a right to increase the total amount
of signage on a parcel, nor does it affect the requirement
that a sign structure or mounting device be properly
permitted.
(Ord. 2010-06, 05-19-2010)
(March 9, 2015) 7-98
CHAPTER 26. WATER RIGHTS
7-26-1. Water Rights Acquisition Policy and
Conveyance Requirements.
7-26-2. Water Rights Required–Determination of
Amount.
7-26-3. Type of Water Rights Acceptable for
Conveyance.
7-26-4. Possible Adjustments or Revisions to Water
Rights Conveyance Requirements.
7-26-5. Time of Conveyance.
7-26-6. Appeals and Requests for Adjustment,
Modification, Exemption, or Waiver of
Water Rights Conveyance Requirements.
7-26-7. Effective Date.
7-26-1. Water Rights Acquisition Policy and
Conveyance Requirements.
Intent. It is intended that all applicants requesting
annexation of land into Tooele City for residential
development, all applicants requesting that property
already within the boundaries of the City rezone the
property to a higher density or more intensive use which
increases the need for water service from the City, all
applicants requesting the subdivision of land, and all
applicants requesting a development permit shall provide
water rights in an amount sufficient to satisfy the
anticipated future water needs of the respective proposed
development to be served and supplied by the City water
system as provided in this Chapter. Satisfaction of this
water rights acquisition policy and the accompanying
conveyance requirements shall be considered as a
condition to and requirement of approval for all such
applications.
(Ord. 2015-03, 03-04-2015) (Ord. 1998-31, 08-18-1998)
7-26-2. Water Rights Required–Determination of
Amount.
(1) Residential Uses. The amount of water rights to
be conveyed in order to satisfy this policy and provide an
adequate supply of water based on the needs created by
anticipated future development shall be defined for
residential development as one (1.0) acre-foot per
equivalent residential dwelling unit.1
(2) Non-Residential Uses. An amount sufficient to
satisfy the projected needs of the proposed development
shall be determined by the Tooele City Public Works
Director. The Public Works Director may delegate
responsibilities under this Chapter.
(3) State Engineer Requirements.
(a) For interior use, the quantity of water
credited to a development applicant upon the
applicant’s dedication of water rights shall be that
portion of the water right which the Office of the State
Engineer has approved for depletion, and that quantity
shall not include any amounts which the State Engineer
requires to be returned to the hydrologic system.
(b) For exterior use, the quantity of water
credited to a development applicant upon the
applicant’s dedication of water rights shall be that
portion of the water right which the State Engineer has
approved for diversion, which quantity may include any
amounts which the State Engineer requires to be
returned to the hydrologic system.
(Ord. 2015-03, 03-04-2015) (Ord. 2000-03, 1-5-2000)
(Ord. 1999-34, 12-01-1999) (Ord. 1998-31, 08-18-
1998).
7-26-3. Type of Water Rights Acceptable for
Conveyance.
(1) Water rights proposed for conveyance to the
City shall be municipal or municipal-type water rights.
Prior to acceptance of such water rights, the City shall
evaluate the rights proposed for conveyance and may
refuse to accept any right which it determines to be
insufficient in annual quantity or flow rate, unsuitable
for municipal use, not reasonably likely to be approved
for change to municipal purposes within the City by the
State Engineer, or otherwise deficient. The City’s
refusal of such rights shall not constitute a waiver of,
and shall not relieve an applicant from complying with,
the requirements of this Chapter. In determining the
quantity of water available under the water rights, the
City will evaluate the priority of the water rights, the
historic average quantities of water associated with the
water rights, and other relevant factors. The City will
require an approved application for the change of use
and change of point of diversion, as applicable, with
the State Engineer in order to quantify and verify the
water rights.
(2) Fee-in-lieu. Pursuant to established City
Council policy, in lieu of actual conveyance of water
rights pursuant to this Chapter, certain development
applicants may pay to the City an amount per acre-foot
for access to water rights controlled by the City in a
quantity necessary to satisfy the anticipated future
water needs of the proposed development to be served
and supplied by the City water system.
(3) Supply and Delivery Facilities May be
Required. In addition to furnishing water rights
pursuant to this Chapter, the applicant will be required
to comply with other provisions of the Tooele City
Code, including the payment of water impact fees, and
also may be required to pay additional costs necessary
to construct the facilities necessary to supply, store, and
distribute water.
1/
The above requirement is based on a combination of
State of Utah standards and Tooele historical usages of
approximately .45 acre-feet of water for indoor use and
.55 acre-feet of water for outdoor use assuming a 10,000
square-foot lot. The City may prorate the outdoor use
requirement by considering such factors as the size of the
lot, a lot’s impervious surface, and a lot’s irrigable area.
This requirement is a reasonable average and is required
despite a showing of variations in water usage above or
below the average.
(March 9, 2015) 7-99
(Ord. 2015-03, 03-04-2015) (Ord. 2005-19, 08-03-2005)
(Ord. 2000-03, 01-05-2000) (Ord. 1998-31, 08-18-1998)
7-26-4. Possible Adjustments or Revisions to Water
Rights Conveyance Requirements.
(1) Annexation; deferral. Where an annexation
contains property which is being annexed without the
consent of the owner, or where water service will not
immediately be provided by the City as a result of an
annexation, the City may, in the exercise of the discretion
of the City Council, elect to not require the conveyance
of water rights at the time of annexation as long as the
annexation specifically identifies such parcels and
provides either an alternative means to satisfy these water
rights conveyance requirements or provides that any
subsequent change in zoning classification or subsequent
development approval which increases the need for water
service by the City will require the conveyance of
additional water rights to the extent necessary to provide
adequate water to serve such future development. Such
an election shall not constitute a waiver of, and shall not
relieve an applicant from complying with, the
requirements of this Chapter.
(2) Lands Which are Restricted Against Future
Development. Where development of the property in
question is restricted by unusual circumstances such as
topographic features, environmentally sensitive or fragile
conditions, or voluntary limitations on landscape and
other activities which will reduce the amount of water to
be provided by the City, the Public Works Director may
reduce the amount of the water right required to be
conveyed to an amount commensurate with the nature of
the proposed restricted development. Any such
restriction must be accompanied by enforceable
provisions for securing compliance in a form to be
approved the Tooele City Attorney.
(3) Redevelopment.
(a) Dwellings. A dwelling building permit
application associated with land that contains or once
contained a dwelling, which dwelling will be or has been
razed, shall not require the conveyance of water rights.
The burden shall be upon the applicant to demonstrate by
substantial evidence that the land contains or once
contained a dwelling. The water rights adjustment made
for dwellings pursuant to this Subsection shall apply to
the new dwelling and curtelage only. Additional irrigable
land added to the parcel upon which the to-be-razed
dwelling sits, or the prior dwelling sat, shall require the
conveyance of additional water rights or the payment of
a fee-in-lieu, as determined by the Public Works
Director.
(b) Other primary structures. A building permit
application associated with land that once contained a
primary structure that was not a dwelling shall require the
conveyance of water rights or the payment of a fee-in-lieu
of conveyance if the applicant cannot demonstrate by
substantial evidence that water rights were previously
conveyed to the City for the prior structure. If water
rights were conveyed to the City for a prior non-dwelling
structure, but those water rights are determined by the
Public Works Director to be insufficient for the
structure and associated irrigated areas identified in a
new building permit application, the applicant shall
convey additional water rights or pay an additional feein-
lieu of conveyance, as determined by the Public
Works Director.
(4) Expansion and change of use. Where a nonresidential
building alteration or change of use requires
a new building permit or a new occupancy permit, and
the building alteration or change of use is anticipated to
result in increased culinary water usage, the permit
applicant shall convey additional water rights or pay an
additional fee-in lieu of conveyance, as determined by
the Public Works Director. Dwelling alterations or
expansions shall not require the conveyance of
additional water rights unless resulting in the creation
of a new dwelling unit. No rebate or refund shall be
owing where a building alteration or change of use may
result in decreased culinary water usage.
(5) Water-wise methods. Where a building site,
building, or use of a building, including landscaping,
incorporates technologies or processes designed to
decrease impacts to City water systems and facilities,
where the water rights conveyance requirement was
reduced in reliance upon those technologies or
processes, and where those technologies or processes
fail or cease to be used, for any reason or to any
degree, the City may require the conveyance of
additional water rights or the payment of an addition
fee-in-lieu of conveyance corresponding to the
increased culinary water usage resulting from such
failure or cessation of use, as determined by the Public
Works Director. The fee-in-lieu may be invoiced by
the City to the building water account through the
regular city water bill, to be paid in full over a period
of no more than three years. The City may record a
Notice with the office of the Tooele County Recorder
regarding any property utilizing this provision.
(6) Secondary water. Where site landscaping uses
secondary water provided by the City or by an
irrigation company, where the water rights conveyance
requirement was reduced in reliance upon secondary
water usage, and where secondary water usage
decreases in favor of an increase in culinary water
usage, the City may require the conveyance of
additional water rights or the payment of an additional
fee-in-lieu of conveyance corresponding to the
increased culinary water usage, as determined by the
Public Works Director. The fee-in-lieu may be
invoiced by the City to the property water account
through the regular city water bill, to be paid in full
over a period of no more than three years. The City
may record a Notice with the office of the Tooele
County Recorder regarding any property utilizing this
provision.
(7) Exemption for de minimus usage.
Notwithstanding the requirements of this Chapter, the
City Council may establish a policy whereby building
alterations or changes of use resulting in de minimus
increases of culinary water usage shall not require the
(March 9, 2015) 7-99.1
conveyance of additional water rights or the payment of
a fee-in-lieu of conveyance. The term de minimus shall
be defined in the policy.
(Ord. 2015-03, 03-04-2015) (Ord. 1999-34, 12-01-1999)
(Ord. 1998-31, 08-18-1998)
7-26-5. Time of Conveyance.
(1) The conveyance of title to the water rights, free
and clear of all liens, encumbrances, and claims of any
nature not expressly approved in writing by Tooele City,
shall be an express condition to the City’s approval of
any final annexation, rezoning, or development permit.
Tooele City may require a water rights title insurance
policy or the equivalent.
(2) The water rights conveyance required by this
Chapter shall occur promptly following the earliest
development approval for which the amount of water
rights necessary to satisfy the anticipated future water
needs of the development can be ascertained with
reasonable certainly. An approved residential final plat
shall not be signed or recorded, nor any building permit
issued, prior to conveyance of the water rights or
payment of the fee-in-lieu. Notwithstanding City review
of a land use application, a land use application shall not
be considered complete until the associated water rights
are conveyed or the fee-in-lieu paid, as applicable.
Should the amount reasonably anticipated fall short of the
amount actually required, the applicant shall convey
additional water rights or pay an additional fee-in-lieu, as
determined by the Public Works Director, as soon as
possible following written notice to do so, but no later
than a subsequent development permit for the subject
development.
(3) Notwithstanding Subsection (2), above, the City
may approve a non-residential building permit prior to
the conveyance of the required water rights where:
(a) the applicant has filed a change application
with the State Engineer for sufficient water rights for the
development;
(b) there is no indication that the State Engineer
will deny approval of the change application; and,
(c) the applicant has executed and recorded a
water rights agreement on a form approved by the City
Attorney.
(Ord. 2015-03, 03-04-2015) (Ord. 1999-34, 12-01-1999)
(Ord. 1998-31, 08-18-1998)
7-26-6. Appeals and Requests for Adjustment,
Modification, Exemption, or Waiver of Water Rights
Conveyance Requirements.
(1) Any applicant, person, or entity which is subject
to this water rights acquisition policy and conveyance
requirement may file, in writing, either prior to or
concurrent with the application that triggers the water
rights conveyance requirement, an appeal or a request for
adjustment, modification, exemption, or waiver of the
requirement with the City Council seeking relief from all
or a portion of the water rights acquisition policy
requirements as contained in this Chapter.
(2) Supporting Information to be Submitted. Any
such appeal or request for relief shall be signed by the
applicant and contain adequate information and
documentation in support of the relief requested. The
City Council may request additional information which
they deem reasonably necessary in order to make a
decision on the application. The burden shall be upon
the applicant in any such appeal or request for
adjustment, modification, exemption, or waiver of this
water rights conveyance requirement to demonstrate
that the strict application of the policy under their
particular facts and circumstances is inequitable,
unreasonable, or unlawful.
(3) Decision by City Council. Within 30 days of
the filing of the completed appeal or request, together
with all supporting information and documentation
required by the City Council, the City Council shall
schedule a public meeting with appropriate notice. At
the public meeting, the applicant and all interested
persons shall be entitled to present information,
documentation, and witnesses in support of or in
opposition to the application. At the conclusion of the
meeting, the City Council shall either issue its decision
or vote to study further the appeal or request and issue
its decision at the next regular City Council meeting.
(Ord. 2015-03, 03-04-2015) (Ord. 1998-31, 08-18-
1998)
7-26-7. Effective Date.
Tooele City specifically finds that it is necessary
for the immediate preservation of the health, safety, and
welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the City
that this ordinance shall take effect retroactive to the
date of subdivision final plat or site plan application for
those subdivisions or site plans that fail to do any one
of the following:
(1) (a) for residential subdivisions or the
residential portion of mixed-use subdivisions, obtain
subdivision final plat approval from the City Council
prior to August 1, 2005;
(b) for non-residential subdivisions or the nonresidential
portion of mixed-use subdivisions, obtain
site plan approval from the Planning Commission prior
to August 1, 2005;
(2) complete public improvement bonding pursuant
to Tooele City Code §7-19-12 prior to August 1, 2006;
or
(3) complete all bonded public improvements prior
to August 1, 2007.
(Ord. 2015-03, 03-04-2015) (Ord. 2007-07, 04-04-
2007) (Ord. 2006-15, 07-05-2006) (Ord. 2005-19, 08-
13-2005) (Ord. 2005-07, 05-04-2005) (Ord.19 98-31,
08-18-1998)
(March 9, 2015) 7-99.2
(7-99.2 Reserved)
7-100 (January 27, 1999)
CHAPTER 27. PERSONAL WIRELESS
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
7-27-1. Title.
7-27-2. Purpose.
7-27-3. Findings.
7-27-4. Definitions.
7-27-5. Application of provisions.
7-27-6. Site plan application requirements.
7-27-7. Building permits.
7-27-8. Priority of antenna site locations.
7-27-9. Permitted uses.
7-27-10. Non-permitted uses.
7-27-11. Co-location requirement.
7-27-12. Lease agreements for use of city land.
7-27-13. Standards for antennas and antenna support
structures.
7-27-14. Conditional use permit considerations.
7-27-15. Additional requirements for monopoles and
towers.
7-27-16. Safety requirements.
7-27-17. Abandonment.
7-27-18. Required site features.
7-27-19. Maintenance requirements.
7-27-1. Title.
This Ordinance shall be known as the Wireless
Telecommunications Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 98-38, 12-02-98)
7-27-2. Purpose.
The purposes of this ordinance are:
(1) To regulate personal wireless services antennas,
with or without support structures, and related electronic
equipment and equipment structures.
(2) To provide for the orderly establishment of
personal wireless services facilities in the City.
(3) To minimize the number of antenna support
structures by encouraging the co-location of multiple
antennas on a single structure, by encouraging the location
of antennas on pre-existing support structures, and by
encouraging the use of City-owned property for antenna
support structures.
(4) To establish siting, appearance and safety
standards that will help mitigate potential impacts related
to the construction, use and maintenance of personal
wireless services facilities.
(5) To comply with the Telecommunications Act of
1996 by establishing regulations that
(a) do not prohibit or have the effect of
prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services;
(b) do not unreasonably discriminate among
providers of functionally equivalent services;
(c) are not based on the environmental effects of
radio frequency emissions, other than the requirement that
such facilities comply with the Federal Communication
Commission’s regulations concerning such emissions.
(Ord. 98-38, 12-02-98)
7-27-3. Findings.
The City Council makes the following findings:
(1) Personal wireless services devices are an integral
part of the rapidly growing and evolving
telecommunications industry, and present unique zoning
challenges and concerns for the City.
(2) The City needs to balance the interests and
desires of the telecommunications industry and its
customers to provide competitive and effective
telecommunications systems in the City, against the
sometimes differing interests and desires of others
concerning health, safety, welfare, and aesthetics, and
orderly planning of the community.
(3) The City has experienced an increased demand
for personal wireless services facilities to be located in the
City, and expects the increased demand to continue into
the future.
(4) It is in the best interests of the City to have
quality personal wireless services available, which
necessarily entails the erection of personal wireless
services facilities in the City.
(5) The unnecessary proliferation of personal
wireless services facilities throughout the City creates a
negative visual impact on the community.
(6) The visual effects of personal wireless services
facilities can be mitigated by fair standards regulating
their siting, construction, maintenance and use.
(7) Spacing personal wireless services facilities
evenly throughout the city reduces the negative impact
created by the proliferation of telecommunication towers.
(8) Because of the height and appearance of personal
wireless services facilities, surrounding properties bear a
disproportionate share of the negative impacts of a
telecommunications tower.
(9) A private property owner who leases space for a
personal wireless services facility is the only one who
receives compensation for the facility, even though
numerous other property owners in the area are adversely
affected by the location of the facility.
(10) Encouraging personal wireless services facilities
to be located on City property, with lease payments paid
to the City instead of an individual property owner,
indirectly compensates all citizens of the community for
the adverse impacts of the facilities, and is therefore the
fairest method of distributing burden and benefit.
(11) Locating antennas on existing buildings and
structures creates less of a negative visual impact on the
community than the erection of towers.
(12) Buildings and structures on public property can
accommodate antenna arrays, thus reducing the
proliferation of towers in all areas of the City.
(13) The public policy objectives to reduce the
proliferation of telecommunication towers and to mitigate
their impact can best be facilitated by permitting the
locating of wireless communication systems on existing
structures located on City owned property.
(14) Stealth facilities, which are facilities designed to
disguise the presence of telecommunications facilities, are
preferable to towers and other obtrusive support structures
which create an unmitigated aesthetic impact on
7-101 (January 27, 1999)
surrounding property.
(15) Because of the obtrusive height and size of
telecommunications support structures, such facilities
have a more substantial negative visual impact in
residential areas than in commercial or industrial areas,
which frequently contain other high profile structures.
(16) The site location requirements set forth in this
ordinance for the placement of personal wireless services
are necessary to protect the heath, safety and general
welfare of the community.
(17) Chapter 69-3, Utah Code Annotated, grants cities
the authority to create or acquire sites to accommodate the
erection of telecommunication towers in order to promote
the location of telecommunication towers in a manageable
area and to protect the aesthetics and environment of the
area. The law also allows the City to require the owner of
any tower to accommodate the multiple use of the tower
by other companies where feasible and to pay the City the
fair market rental value for the use of any City-owned site.
(Ord. 98-38, 12-02-98)
7-27-4 Definitions.
The following words shall have the described
meaning when used in this ordinance, unless a contrary
meaning is apparent from the context of the word.
(1) “Antenna” means a transmitting or receiving
device used in telecommunications that radiates or
captures radio signals.
(2) “Antenna Support Structures” means any
structure that can be used for the purpose of supporting an
antenna(s).
(3) “City” means Tooele City, Utah.
(4) “City-owned Property” means real property that
is owned, leased or controlled by the City.
(5) “Co-location” means the location of an antenna
on an existing structure, tower or building that is already
being used for personal wireless services facilities.
(6) “Guyed Tower” means a tower that supports an
antenna or antennas and requires guy wires or other
stabilizers for support.
(7) “Lattice Tower” means a self-supporting three or
four-sided, open steel frame structure used to support
telecommunications equipment.
(8) “Monopole” means a single, self-supporting,
cylindrical pole, constructed without guy wires or ground
anchors, that acts as the support structure for antennas.
(9) “Monopole Antenna with Platform” means a
monopole which includes antennas and antenna support
structure which exceed three feet (3') in width, but do not
exceed fifteen feet (15') in width or eight feet (8') in
height.
(10) “Monopole Antenna with no Platform” means a
monopole which includes antennas and antenna support
structure that do not exceed three feet (3') in width or ten
feet (10') in height.
(11) “Personal Wireless Services” means commercial
mobile telecommunications services, unlicensed wireless
telecommunications services, and common carrier
wireless telecommunications exchange access services.
(12) “Personal Wireless Services Antenna” means an
antenna used in connection with the provision of personal
wireless services.
(13) “Personal Wireless Services Facilities” means
facilities for the provision of personal wireless services.
Personal wireless services facilities include transmitters,
antennas, structures supporting antennas, and electronic
equipment that is typically installed in close proximity to
a transmitter.
(14) “Private Property” means any real property not
owned by the City, even if the property is owned by
another public or governmental entity.
(15) “Roof Mounted Antenna” means an antenna or
series of individual antennas mounted on a roof,
mechanical room or penthouse of a building or structure.
(16) “Stealth Facilities” means personal wireless
services facilities which have been designed to be
compatible with the natural setting and surrounding
structures, and which camouflage or conceal the presence
of antennas and/or towers. The term includes, but is not
limited to, clock towers, church steeples, light poles, flag
poles, signs, electrical transmission facilities and water
tanks.
(17) “Tower” means a free-standing structure, such as
a monopole tower, lattice tower, or guyed tower, that is
used as a support structure for antenna(s).
(18) “Wall Mounted Antenna” means an antenna or
series of individual antennas mounted on the vertical wall
of a building or structure.
(19) “Whip Antenna” means an antenna that is
cylindrical in shape. Whip antennas can be directional or
omnidirectional and vary in size depending on the
frequency and gain for which they are designed.
(Ord. 98-38, 12-02-98)
7-27-5. Application of provisions.
This ordinance (the Wireless Telecommunications
Zoning Ordinance) applies to both commercial and
private low power radio services and facilities, such as
“cellular” or PCS (personal communications system)
communications and paging systems. This ordinance
shall not apply to the following types of communications
devices, although they may be regulated by other City
ordinances and policies:
(1) Amateur Radio. Any tower or antenna owned
and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the
Federal Communications Commission.
(2) Satellite. Any device designed for over-the-air
reception of television broadcast signals, multichannel
multipoint distribution service or direct satellite service.
(3) Cable. Any cable television headend or hub
towers and antennas used solely for cable television
services.
(Ord. 98-38, 12-02-98)
7-27-6 Site plan application requirements.
Any person desiring to develop, construct or establish
a personal wireless services facility in the City shall
submit an application for site plan approval to the City.
The City shall not consider the application until all
required information has been included. The application
7-102 (January 27, 1999)
shall include the following:
(1) Fee. The fee for site plan review shall be
$200.00.
(2) Site Plan. A site plan consisting of one or more
pages of maps and drawings drawn to scale. The
applicant shall submit five (5) copies of the proposed site
plan to the building department. One of the copies shall be
8 ½” x 11", and the other four copies shall be at least 8
½ “ x 11", but not larger than 24" x 36". The proposed
site plan shall be drawn to a scale large enough to clearly
show all details and in any case not smaller than sixty feet
(60') to the inch. The site plan for personal wireless
services facilities shall include the following information
and items:
(a) Name and street address of the site or
location.
(b) Name of applicant.
(c) Name of owner of property.
(d) North arrow.
(e) Scale of drawing.
(f) Area of lot in square feet.
(g) Lot line dimensions.
(h) A vicinity map containing sufficient
information to accurately locate the property shown on the
plan.
(i) Names and locations of fronting streets and
locations and dimensions of public streets, private streets
and driveways.
(j) Footprints of existing and proposed
buildings and structures, including a notation of each
unit’s height above the grade.
(k) Location and size of existing and proposed
antennas, with dimensions to property lines.
(l) Location of existing and proposed fire
protection devices.
(m) Location, dimensions, and distance to
property lines of existing and proposed drive accesses.
(n) Location and dimensions of existing and
proposed curbs, gutters, and sidewalks.
(o) Location and dimension of off-street parking
spaces.
(p) Location and type of surface water drainage
system.
(q) Drawings of proposed structure elevations
showing the height, dimensions, appearance and materials
proposed.
(r) Location and description (height, materials)
of existing and proposed fences.
(s) Location and description (dimensions,
distance to property lines and type of lighting (direct or
indirect) of existing and proposed signs.
(t) A security lighting plan, if proposed.
(u) Landscape plan to scale indicating size,
spacing and type of plantings
(v) A signed lease agreement with the City if the
site is located on City property.
(3) Written descriptions to be included with
application:
(a) Environment. A full description of the
environment surrounding the proposed facility, including
a description of adjacent uses, any adjacent residential
structures, and any structures and sites of historic
significance.
(b) Maintenance. A description of the
anticipated maintenance needs for the facility, including
frequency of service, personnel needs, equipment needs,
and traffic noise or safety impacts of such maintenance.
(c) Service Area. A description of the service
area for the antenna or tower and a statement as to
whether the antenna or tower is needed for coverage or
capacity.
(d) Location. A map showing the site and the
nearest telecommunications facility sites within the
network, a description of the distance between the
telecommunications facility sites, and a description of
how this service area fits into the service network.
(e) Licenses and Permits. Copies of all licenses
and permits required by other agencies and governments
with jurisdiction over the design, construction, location
and operation of the antenna.
(f) Radio Frequency Emissions. A written
commitment to comply with applicable Federal
Communications Commission radio frequency emission
regulations.
(g) Liaison. The name, address, telephone
number, and fax number of a contact person who can
respond to questions concerning the application and the
proposed facility.
(4) Requirements for Monopoles. If the applicant
desires to construct a monopole, the applicant shall also
submit a detailed written description of why the applicant
cannot obtain coverage using existing buildings or
structures.
(5) Requirements for Facilities Not Located on
Highest Priority Site. If the applicant desires to locate
antennas on a site other than the highest priority site (as
described in Section 18, paragraph 9), the applicant shall
provide the following information to the approving
authority:
(a) Higher Priority Sites. The identity and
location of any higher priority sites located within the
desired service area.
(b) Reason for Rejection of Higher Priority
Sites. The reason(s) why the higher priority sites are not
technologically, legally or economically feasible.
(c) Justification for Proposed Site. Why the
proposed site is essential to meet the service demands of
the geographic service area and the citywide network.
(6) Approval Process. The application and site plan
shall be reviewed by the City pursuant to its standard site
plan approval process. If the facility requires a
conditional use permit, the review shall be pursuant to the
City’s standard conditional use permit approval process.
The City shall process all applications within a reasonable
time and shall not unreasonably discriminate among
providers of functionally equivalent services. Any
decision to deny a request to place, construct, or modify
personal wireless service facilities shall be in writing and
supported by substantial evidence contained in a written
record.
7-103 (January 27, 1999)
(Ord. 98-38, 12-02-98)
7-27-7. Building Permits.
(1) General Requirements. No tower or antenna
support structure shall be constructed until the applicant
obtains a building permit from the City. No building
permit shall be issued for any project for which a site
plan, amended site plan or conditional use permit is
required, until the site plan, amended site plan or
conditional use permit has been approved by the
appropriate authority. If the design or engineering of the
antenna support structure is beyond the expertise of the
Building Official, the City may require third party review
by an engineer selected by the City prior to the issuance
of a building permit. The applicant shall pay an
additional fee to cover the cost of the third party review.
(2) Requirements for Monopoles and Towers. If the
applicant is constructing a monopole or other tower-type
structure, the applicant shall, if requested by the City,
submit a written report from a qualified, structural
engineer licensed in the State of Utah, documenting the
following:
(a) Height and design of the monopole or tower,
including technical, engineering, economic, and other
pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed
design.
(b) Seismic load design and wind load design
for the monopole or tower.
(c) Total anticipated capacity of the monopole
or tower, including number and types of antennas which
can be accommodated.
(d) Structural failure characteristics of the
monopole or tower and a demonstration that the site and
setbacks are of adequate size to contain debris.
(e) Soil investigation report, including structural
calculations.
(Ord. 98-38, 12-02-98)
7-27-8. Priority of antenna site locations.
(1) Personal wireless services antennas shall be
located as unobtrusively as is reasonably possible. To
accomplish this goal, the provider shall make a good faith
effort to locate antennas on sites in the following order of
priority:
(a) Existing structures. Lawfully existing
buildings, structures and antenna support structures,
provided that the buildings, structures or support
structures are:
(i) located in a non-residential zone; or
(ii) located in a residential zone on property
that is being used for non-residential uses (e.g.
government, school or church); or
(iii) located in a residential zone on a
property that is being used for a multi-family residential
building having eight or more dwelling units and which is
at least thirty-five (35) feet in height..
(b) Stealth facilities. Stealth facilities as defined
by this ordinance.
(c) Monopoles on city-owned property.
Monopoles constructed on City-owned property.
(d) Monopoles on non-residential private
property. Monopoles constructed on private property,
provided that the private property is:
(i) located in a non-residential zone; or
(ii) located in a residential zone on property
that is used for a non-residential use (e.g. government,
school or church); or
(e) Other. Sites other than those listed above.
(2) Burden of Proof. The applicant shall attempt to
locate its antennas on sites in the order of priority set forth
above. If the applicant desires to locate antennas on a site
other than the highest priority site, the applicant shall have
the burden of demonstrating to the approving authority
why it could not locate antennas on sites with a higher
priority than the site chosen by the applicant. To do so,
the applicant shall provide the following information to
the approving authority:
(a) Higher Priority Sites. The identity and
location of any higher priority sites located within the
desired service area.
(b) Reason for Rejection of Higher Priority
Sites. The reason(s) why the higher priority sites are not
technologically, legally or economically feasible. The
applicant must make a good faith effort to locate antennas
on a higher priority site. The City may request
information from outside sources to justify or rebut the
applicant’s reasons for rejecting a higher priority site.
(c) Justification for Proposed Site. Why the
proposed site is essential to meet the service demands of
the geographic service area and the citywide network.
(Ord. 98-38, 12-02-98)
7-27-9. Permitted Uses.
The following antenna locations are permitted uses,
provided that the applicant complies with other applicable
laws and regulations:
(1) Existing Structures on City-owned Property.
Existing buildings, structures and antenna support
structures located on City-owned property.
(2) Existing Structures on Private Property.
Lawfully existing buildings and structures located on
private property, provided that the private property is
(a) located in a non-residential zone, or
(b) located in a residential zone on property that
is used for a non-residential use (e.g. government, school
or church), or
(c) located in a residential zone on property that
includes a multi-family residential building having eight
(8) or more dwelling units and which is at least thirty-five
(35) feet in height.
(3) Co-location. Co-location on a lawfully existing
antenna support structure located on private property.
(4) Monopoles in Industrial Areas. Monopoles
constructed in industrial or manufacturing zones.
(5) Stealth Facilities in Non-residential Zones.
Stealth facilities constructed in non-residential zones,
unless they are constructed as part of a structure for which
a conditional use permit is otherwise required, in which
case they shall be conditional uses.
(Ord. 98-38, 12-02-98)
7-104 (January 27, 1999)
7-27-10 Non-Permitted Uses.
The following antenna types and antenna locations
are not permitted, except upon a showing of necessity
(inability to achieve coverage or capacity in the service
area) by the applicant, in which case they shall be
considered as conditional uses:
(1) Lattice Towers and Guyed Towers. Lattice
towers, guyed towers, and other non-stealth towers, with
the exception of monopoles, are not permitted in any
zone.
(2) Monopoles on Private Property in a Residential
Zone. Monopoles located on residentially zoned private
property, if the residentially zoned property has a
residential use (as opposed to a school, church, or other
non-residential use).
(3) Conditional Uses. Antennas proposed for any
other location shall be considered as conditional uses,
provided that the applicant complies with other applicable
laws and regulations.
(Ord. 98-38, 12-02-98)
7-27-11 Co-location Requirement.
Unless otherwise authorized by the approving
authority for good cause shown, every new monopole
shall be designed and constructed to be of sufficient size
and capacity to accommodate at least one additional
wireless telecommunications provider on the structure in
the future. Any conditional use permit for the monopole
may be conditioned upon the agreement of the applicant
to allow co-location of other personal wireless providers
on such terms as are common in the industry.
(Ord. 98-38, 12-02-98)
7-27-12 Lease Agreement.
The City shall enter into a standard lease agreement
with the applicant for any facility built on City property.
The Mayor or the Mayor’s designee is hereby authorized
to execute the standard lease agreement on behalf of the
City. The Lease shall contain the condition that the site
plan and/or conditional use permit must first be approved
by the approving authority before the lease can take
effect, and that failure to obtain such approval renders the
lease null and void.
(Ord. 98-38, 12-02-98)
7-27-13 Standards for Antennas and Antenna Support
Structures.
Personal wireless services facilities are characterized
by the type or location of the antenna structure. There are
five general types of antenna structures contemplated by
this ordinance: wall mounted antennas; roof mounted
antennas; monopoles with no platform; monopoles with a
platform; and stealth facilities. If a particular type of
antenna structure is allowed by this ordinance as a
permitted or conditional use, the minimum standards for
that type of antenna are as follows, unless otherwise
provided in a conditional use permit:
(1) Wall Mounted Antennas.
(a) Maximum Height. Wall mounted antennas
shall not extend above the roof line of the building or
structure or extend more than four (4) feet horizontally
from the face of the building.
(b) Setback. Wall mounted antennas shall not
be located within one hundred feet (100') feet of any
residence.
(c) Mounting Options. Antennas mounted
directly on existing parapet walls, penthouses, or
mechanical equipment rooms are considered to be wall
mounted antennas if no portion of the antenna extends
above the roof line of the parapet wall, penthouse, or
mechanical equipment room.
(d) Color. Wall mounted antennas, equipment
and supporting structures shall be painted to match the
color of the building or structure or the background
against which they are most commonly seen. Antennas
and the supporting structure on the building shall be
architecturally compatible with the building. Whip
antennas are not allowed on a wall mounted antenna
structure.
(2) Roof Mounted Antennas.
(a) Maximum Height. The maximum height of
a roof mounted antenna shall be eighteen feet (18') above
the roof line of the building.
(b) Setback. Roof mounted antennas shall be
located at least five feet (5') from the exterior wall of the
building or structure, and at least fifty (50') feet from any
residence.
(c) Mounting options. Roof mounted antennas
may be mounted on top of existing penthouses or
mechanical equipment rooms if the antennas and antenna
support structures are enclosed or visually screened from
view. The screening structure may not extend more than
eight (8) feet above the existing roof line of the penthouse
or mechanical equipment room.
(d) Color. Roof mounted antennas, equipment
and supporting structures shall be painted to match the
color of the building or structure or the background
against which they are most commonly seen. Antennas
and supporting structures shall be architecturally
compatible with the building.
(3) Combination of Wall and Roof Mounted
Antennas. Any building may have a combination of wall
and roof mounted antennas. The total area for all wall and
roof mounted antennas and supporting structures on any
one building shall not exceed the lesser of sixty (60)
square feet or five percent (5%) of each exterior wall of
the building.
(4) Monopoles with no Platform.
(a) Maximum Height and Width. The
maximum height of the monopole or monopole antenna
shall be seventy-five feet (75'), although the approving
body may, as a conditional use, allow an antenna or
antenna support structure up to 110 feet in height, if the
applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the approving
body that the additional height is necessary to obtain
coverage or to allow co-location, and that the applicant
has taken steps to mitigate adverse effects on the
surrounding neighborhood. The entire antenna structure
mounted on the monopole shall not exceed three feet (3')
in width. The antenna itself shall not exceed ten feet (10')
7-105 (January 27, 1999)
in height.
(b) Setback. Monopoles shall be set back a
minimum of 115% of the height of the monopole from any
residential lot line, measured from the base of the
monopole to the nearest residential lot line.
(c) Color. Monopoles, antennas, and related
support structures shall be painted a neutral color, or a
color to match the background against which they are
most commonly seen.
(5) Monopoles with Platform.
(a) Maximum Height and Width. The maximum
height of the monopole or monopole antenna shall be
seventy-five feet (75'), although the approving body may,
as a conditional use, allow an antenna or antenna support
structure up to 110 feet in height, if the applicant
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the approving body that
the additional height is necessary to obtain coverage or to
allow co-location, and that the applicant has taken steps to
mitigate adverse effects on the surrounding neighborhood.
The antennas and antenna mounting structures on the
monopole shall not exceed eight feet (8') in height or
fifteen feet (15') in width. The antenna itself shall not
exceed ten feet (10') in height.
(b) Setback. Monopoles shall be set back a
minimum of 115% of the height of the monopole from any
residential lot line, measured from the base of the
monopole to the nearest residential lot line.
(c) Color. Monopoles, antennas, and related
support structures shall be painted a neutral color, or a
color to match the background against which they are
most commonly seen.
(6) Stealth Facilities.
(a) Maximum Height. The maximum height of
a stealth facility shall be the maximum structure height on
the zoning district in which the stealth facility is located.
The applicant may exceed the maximum structure height
if allowed pursuant to a conditional use permit.
(Ord. 98-38, 12-02-98)
7-27-14 Conditional Use Permit Considerations.
In addition to the City’s standard conditional use
permit considerations, the approving authority shall
consider the following factors when deciding whether to
grant a conditional use permit for a personal wireless
services facility:
(1) Compatibility. Compatibility of the facility with
the height, mass and design of buildings, structures and
uses in the vicinity of the facility.
(2) Screening. Whether the facility uses existing or
proposed vegetation, topography or structures in a manner
that effectively screens the facility.
(3) Disguise. Whether the facility is disguised in a
manner that mitigates potential negative impacts on
surrounding properties.
(4) Parcel Size. Whether the facility is located on a
parcel of sufficient size to adequately support the facility.
(5) Location on Parcel. Whether the structure is
situated on the parcel in a manner that can best protect the
interests of surrounding property owners, but still
accommodate other appropriate uses of the parcel.
(6) Location in general. Whether location or colocation
of the facility on other structures in the same
vicinity is practicable, without significantly affecting the
antenna transmission or reception capabilities.
(7) Co-location. The willingness of the applicant to
allow co-location on its facility by other personal wireless
services providers on such terms as are common in the
industry.
(Ord. 98-38, 12-02-98)
7-27-15 Additional Regulations for Monopoles and
Towers.
(1) Distance from other Monopoles. Monopoles and
towers shall be located at least one thousand feet (1000')
from each other, except upon a showing of necessity by
the applicant, or upon a finding by the City that a closer
distance would adequately protect the health, safety and
welfare of the community. This distance requirement
shall not apply to stealth facilities or to antennas attached
to lawful structures such as transmission towers, utility
poles, outdoor lighting structures, and water tanks.
(2) Location on Parcel. Monopoles shall be located
as unobtrusively on a parcel as possible, given the
location of existing structures, nearby residential areas,
and service needs of the applicant. Monopoles shall not
be located in a required landscaped area, buffer area or
parking area.
(Ord. 98-38, 12-02-98)
7-27-16 Safety Requirements.
(1) Regulation Compliance.
(a) Compliance with FCC and FAA regulations.
All operators of personal wireless services facilities shall
demonstrate compliance with applicable Federal
Communication Commission (FCC) and Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) regulations, including FCC radio
frequency regulations, at the time of application and
periodically thereafter as requested by the City. Failure to
comply with the applicable regulations shall be grounds
for revoking a site plan or conditional use permit
approval.
(b) Other licenses and permits. The operator of
every personal wireless services facility shall submit
copies of all licenses and permits required by other
agencies and governments with jurisdiction over the
design, construction, location and operation of the facility
to the City, shall maintain such licenses and permits in
good standing, and shall provide evidence of renewal or
extension thereof upon request by the City.
(2) Protection Against Climbing. Monopoles shall
be protected against unauthorized climbing by removing
the climbing pegs from the lower 20 feet of the monopole.
(3) Fencing. Monopoles and towers shall be fully
enclosed by a minimum 6-foot tall fence or wall, as
directed by the City, unless the City determines that a wall
or fence is not needed or appropriate for a particular site
due to conditions specific to the site.
(4) Security Lighting Requirements. Monopoles and
towers shall comply with the FAA requirements for
lighting. As part of the conditional use permit
7-106 (January 27, 1999)
consideration, the City may also require security lighting
for the site. If security lighting is used, the lighting impact
on surrounding residential areas shall be minimized by
using indirect lighting, where appropriate.
(Ord. 98-38, 12-02-98)
7-27-17 Abandonment.
The City may require the removal of all antennas and
monopoles if the facility has been inoperative or out of
service for more than twelve (12) consecutive months.
(1) Notice. Notice to remove shall be given in
writing by personal service, or by certified mail addressed
to the operator’s last known address.
(2) Violation. Failure to remove the antennas and
monopoles after receiving written notice to remove is a
violation of the terms of this Chapter. The City may
initiate criminal and/or civil legal proceeding against any
person, firm, entity or corporation, whether acting as
principal, agent, property owner, lessee, lessor, tenant,
landlord, employee, employer or otherwise, for failure to
remove antennas and monopoles in accordance with this
Chapter. The City may seek a civil injunction requiring
the removal of any structures on the site in accordance
with this Chapter. Any lease agreement with the City may
also stipulate failure to remove the antennas and
monopoles after receiving written notice to do so pursuant
to this Chapter automatically transfers ownership of the
antennas, monopoles, support buildings and all other
structures on the site to the City.
(Ord. 98-38, 12-02-98)
7-27-18 Site Requirements.
(1) Regulations for Accessory Structures.
(a) Storage Areas and Solid Waste Receptacles.
No outside storage or solid waste receptacles shall be
permitted on the site.
(b) Equipment Enclosures. All electronic and
other related equipment and appurtenances necessary for
the operation of any personal wireless services facility
shall, whenever possible, be located within a lawfully preexisting
structure or completely below grade. When a
new structure is required to house such equipment, the
structure shall be harmonious with, and blend with, the
natural features, buildings and structures surrounding such
structure.
(c) Accessory Buildings. Freestanding
accessory buildings used with a personal wireless services
facility shall not exceed 450 square feet and shall comply
with the setback requirements for structures in the zone in
which the facility is located.
(2) Parking. The City may require a minimum of
one (1) parking stall for sites containing a monopole,
tower, and/or accessory buildings, if there is insufficient
parking available on the site.
(3) Landscaping. All sites with a personal wireless
services facility shall be landscaped in accordance with
the zone requirements where the facility is located.
(Ord. 98-38, 12-02-98)
7-27-19 Maintenance Requirements.
All personal wireless services facilities shall be
maintained in a safe, neat and attractive manner.
(Ord. 98-38, 12-02-98)
(May 16, 2003) 7-107
CHAPTER 28. CONSTITUTIONAL TAKING
ISSUES
7-28-1. Purpose.
7-28-2. Definition.
7-28-3. Guidelines.
7-28-4. Analysis.
7-28-5. Appeal.
7-28-6. Limitation.
7-28-7. Legal action.
7-28-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide advisory
guidelines and procedures to assist the City in identifying
and analyzing actions that may involve the taking of
private real property without payment of just
compensation as required by the Constitutions of the
United States and the State of Utah.
(Ord. 2003-07, 04-02-03)
7-28-2. Definition.
As used herein, the term “constitutional taking
issues” means actions involving the physical or regulatory
taking of private real property by the City that might
require compensation to a private real property owner
under:
(1) The Fifth or Fourteenth Amendments of the
United States Constitution;
(2) Article I, Section 22 of the Utah Constitution; or
(3) Any recent court rulings governing the physical
or regulatory taking of private real property.
(Ord. 2003-07, 04-02-03)
7-28-3. Guidelines.
When the City is proposing to take action that will
affect private real property, the City shall determine
whether the contemplated action may involve
constitutional taking issues. A “Yes” answer to any of the
following questions could raise the possibility of a taking
of private real property for which just compensation may
be required:
(1) Does the action result in a permanent or
recurring physical occupation of private property?
(2) Does the action require a property owner to
dedicate property or grant an easement to the City?
(3) Does the action create or otherwise impose a
permanent or ongoing nuisance, originating on City
property, that impacts neighboring lands so that their
owners or occupants sustain a special and unreasonable
interference with the quiet enjoyment of their property?
(4) Does the action interfere with a fundamental
attribute of ownership such as the right to reasonable
access, the right to light, air and view within the right-ofright
way of an abutting public street, or the right to
exclude others from private property?
(5) Does the action unreasonably interfere with a
separately protected and vested right, such as the right to
continue a nonconforming use; the right to have an
application reviewed under the law that was in effect
when a complete application was submitted; the right to
obtain legally issued subdivision plat approvals, building
permits, or licenses; or other protected property interests?
(6) Does the action impose a severe economic
burden that is inappropriately unfair when considered in
light of (a) the burden placed on the property owner, (b)
the nature of the government action and benefit, and (c)
the property owner’s investment-backed expectations?
(7) Does the action deprive the property owner of all
economically viable use of the property in a situation
where the proposed use does not constitute a nuisance or
a severe threat to health and safety?
(8) Does the action limit the use of private property
without substantially advancing a legitimate public
interest?
(9) Can the City demonstrate by an individualized
determination that any conditions, dedications or
exactions imposed as a condition of approval of
development applications place only fair and roughly
proportionate burdens on development, offsetting the
burdens that the proposed development places on public
utilities, streets and other services but not imposing
additional burdens on development that the community as
a whole should bear?
(10) Does the action discriminate against property
owners, imposing restrictions or burdens on one property
owner that other similarly situated property owners do not
bear?
(Ord. 2003-07, 04-02-03)
7-28-4. Analysis.
If the City determines that a proposed governmental
action involves constitutional taking issues, the City shall
review and analyze the possible taking to determine the
course to be taken. In reviewing the proposed action, the
following factors shall be considered:
(1) The effect the potential taking would have on the
use or value of the private property;
(2) The likelihood that the action may result in a
constitutional taking;
(3) Any alternatives to the proposed action that
would fulfill the City’s lawful objectives and reduce the
risk of a constitutional taking;
(4) The cost to the City for payment of
compensation if a taking is determined.
(Ord. 2003-07, 04-02-03)
7-28-5. Appeal.
Any private property owner whose interest in the
property is subject to a physical or regulatory taking by
the City, pursuant to a final and authoritative decision or
action of the City, may appeal the City’s decision or
action by filing a written notice of appeal and statement of
the grounds for the appeal in the City Recorder’s Office
within thirty (30) days from the date of the City’s decision
or action. The City Council or its designee shall hear all
evidence regarding the appeal and render its decision and
findings in writing within fourteen (14) days from the date
the appeal was filed. If the City fails to hear and decide
the appeal within fourteen (14) days, the City’s decision
(May 16, 2003) 7-108
or action is presumed to be approved.
(Ord. 2003-07, 04-02-03)
7-28-6. Limitation.
The guidelines set forth herein are advisory only and
shall not be construed to expand nor limit the scope of the
City’s liability for a constitutional taking. The City shall
have no legal liability to any person, firm or entity of any
nature whatsoever and a court may not impose liability
upon the City for failure to comply with the provisions of
this Chapter.
(Ord. 2003-07, 04-02-03)
7-28-7. Legal action.
A property owner’s failure to appeal the City’s action
does not constitute, and may not be interpreted as
constituting, a failure to exhaust administrative remedies
or as a bar to bringing legal action.
(Ord. 2003-07, 04-02-03)
(April 5, 2019) 7-109
CHAPTER 29. TEMPORARY VEHICLE SALES
LOTS.
7-29-1. Definitions.
7-29-2. Temporary Vehicle Sales lot Use Permit.
7-29-3. Permit Duration.
7-29-4. Permit Display.
7-29-5. Permit Application Information and
Requirements.
7-29-6. Parking Requirements.
7-29-7. Other Requirements.
7-29-8. Licensing Requirements.
7-29-9. Waste Disposal Deposit.
7-29-10. Revocation.
7-29-11. Appeals.
7-29-1. Definitions.
(1) “Director” shall mean the Director of the
Community Development Department or designee.
(2) “Permit” shall mean a temporary vehicle sales
permit.
(3) “Temporary vehicle sales” and “temporary
vehicle sales lot” shall mean a vehicle sales activity or
event which is not fixed upon a given lot or parcel of land
and which is of a maximum duration of seven days.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2005-05, 03-02-2005)
(Ord. 2003-13, 04-16-2003) (Ord. 2002-17, 08-07-2002)
7-29-2. Temporary Vehicle Sales Lot Permit.
Subject to the provisions of this Section, the Director
may issue a permit for temporary vehicle sales, providing
that the Director finds that the sales will not conflict with
the existing and allowed uses in the neighborhood of the
subject property. Temporary vehicle sales shall be
restricted to commercial (GC, RC, not NC) and industrial
(I, LI) zoning districts. However, a temporary vehicle
sale shall be allowed on land zoned Open Space (OS)
subject to the following conditions, which are in addition
to the other requirements and conditions of this Chapter
and Chapter 13a (OS Open Space Zone) of the Tooele
City Code, as amended:
(1) the sale shall not be permitted on land
subject to recorded conservation or agriculture protection
documents, or hillside or environmental protection
regulations; and,
(2) the sales lot shall contain permanent
adequate lighting, permanent attached or detached
restrooms, and a permanent structure that provides
adequate patron shelter.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2005-05, 03-02-2005)
(Ord. 2003-13, 04-16-2003) (Ord. 2002-17, 08-07-2002)
7-29-3. Permit Duration.
Permits shall be for a maximum of seven days, and no
more than four permits shall be issued to the same or
affiliated applicant in any calendar year.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2005-05, 03-02-2005)
(Ord. 2003-13, 04-16-2003) (Ord. 2002-17, 08-07-2002)
7-29-4. Permit Display.
Permits shall be displayed at all times in a prominent
location at the site of the temporary use.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2005-05, 03-02-2005)
(Ord. 2002-17, 08-07-2002)
7-29-5. Permit Application Information and
Requirements.
Permit applications shall be in writing and shall
contain sufficient information to evaluate the proposed
temporary vehicle sales lot’s compliance with the
requirements of this Section. The information shall
include, but not be limited to, the following information,
and shall demonstrate compliance with the following
requirements:
(1) a site drawing indicating the location of the
temporary vehicle sales lot and any existing structures and
improvements on the lot or parcel on which the temporary
vehicle sale is to be conducted, including, but not limited
to, the following information, and shall demonstrate
compliance with the following requirements:
(a) parking areas;
(b) existing curb and gutter;
(c) existing sidewalks;
(d) existing curb cuts;
(e) proposed outside storage;
(f) proposed retail display areas;
(g) public restroom facilities;
(h) building setbacks required by the
applicable zoning district;
(i) existing fire hydrants;
(j) existing and proposed fencing; and
(k) proposed dust control, as required by
the Director; and,
(l) any other information reasonably
required by the Director or the Tooele City Code.
The site drawing need not be professionally drawn, but
must be accurate, legible, and to scale;
(2) either evidence of property ownership or written
authorization of the owner of the property upon which the
temporary vehicle sale will occur;
(3) proposed hours of operation, which shall be
limited to between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.;
(4) proposed duration of the sales event;
(5) proposed days of the week the sales event will
occur;
(6) proposed lighting plan for hours of operation
after sunset;
(7) proposed fencing;
(8) proposed buildings, including tents;
(9) the level and nature of anticipated noise (see
Section 11-2-6 of the Tooele City Code) and/or dust
generated by the temporary vehicle sale; and,
(10) other items reasonably requested by the Director.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2005-05, 03-02-2005)
(Ord. 2003-13, 04-16-2003) (Ord. 2002-17, 08-07-2002)
7-29-6. Parking Requirements.
(1) Temporary vehicle sales shall provide one onsite
customer parking stall for each ten motorized vehicles
(April 5, 2019) 7-110
being offered for sale, sold but still on site, and accepted
in trade but still on-site.
(2) The requirement may not include parking
required for or associated with another use, and shall be
adequate to accommodate both the temporary use and the
regular use of the property.
(3) The location of the temporary vehicle sale must
have safe, supporting, maintained surfacing, as required
by the Director, for both the sales and parking areas.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2005-05, 03-02-2005)
(Ord. 2003-13, 04-16-2003) (Ord. 2002-17, 08-07-2002)
7-29-7. Other Requirements.
In addition to other reasonable requirements made by
the Director or the Tooele City Code, Sections 7-29-
5(1)(a) (parking), -5(1)(g) (public restrooms), and -5-
(1)(k) (dust control), herein, as amended, shall constitute
affirmative obligations of the permit applicant.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2005-05, 03-02-2005)
(Ord. 2003-13, 04-16-2003)
7-29-8. Licensing Requirements.
Nothing in this Chapter shall exempt temporary
vehicle sales lots from complying with the licensing
regulations contained in Title 5 of the Tooele City Code
or the building and development regulations contained in
Titles 4 and 7 of the Tooele City Code.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2005-05, 03-02-2005)
(Ord. 2002-17, 08-07-2002)
7-29-9. Waste Disposal Deposit.
The applicant for each approved permit shall clean
the sales site and dispose of all waste generated by the
temporary vehicle sale. Prior to permit issuance, each
permit applicant shall deposit with the Finance
Department a $200.00 waste disposal cleaning deposit
and arrange for a dumpster to be delivered to the
temporary sales lot.
Failure to clean the site or dispose of all waste
generated by the temporary vehicle sale may result in the
forfeiture of all or a portion of the deposit, depending on
the cost of third-party cleanup, and shall constitute a
violation of this Chapter.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2005-05, 03-02-2005)
(Ord. 2002-17, 08-07-2002)
7-29-10. Revocation.
Any violation of the provisions of this Chapter may
result in revocation of the current permit. Upon
revocation, the permit applicant and the business entity
represented by the permit applicant shall be ineligible for
a new permit for 12 months following the date of
revocation.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2005-05, 03-02-2005)
(Ord. 2002-17, 08-07-2002)
7-29-11. Appeals.
Any discretionary decision of the Director made
pursuant to this Chapter may be appealed in writing to the
administrative hearing officer within ten days of the
decision. The appeal shall set forth the appellant’s
reasons why the Director’s decision should be overturned
or modified.
(Ord. 2019-08, 03-20-2019) (Ord. 2016-15, 10-19-2016)
(Ord. 2005-05, 03-02-2005) (Ord. 2002-17, 08-07-2002)
(April 5, 2019) 7-111
(Page 7-111 Reserved)
(January 20, 2016) 8-1
TITLE 8. HEALTH AND SANITATION
Chapter 1. Health Code.
Chapter 2. Sewers (Repealed).
Chapter 3. Garbage Collection and Solid Waste
Management.
Chapter 4. Abatement of Nuisances.
Chapter 5. Wastewater Control Ordinance General
Provisions.
Chapter 6. Building Sewers, Connections, and
Repairs.
Chapter 7. Pump Stations.
Chapter 8. Subdivision.
Chapter 9. POTW Sewer Construction.
Chapter 10. Fees and Charges.
Chapter 11. Industrial Pretreatment Program.
Chapter 12. Subdivisions (Renumbered and
Repealed).
Chapter 13. POTW Sewer Construction (Renumbered
and Repealed).
Chapter 14. No-fault Utilities Claims.
Chapter 15. Outdoor Smoking.
CHAPTER 1. HEALTH CODE
8-1-1. Code of food service sanitation regulations.
(Repealed.)
8-1-2. Unlawful to allow garbage to accumulate.
(Renumbered.)
8-1-3. Garbage cans. (Repealed.)
8-1-4. Garbage preparation. (Repealed.)
8-1-5. Befouling gutters and ditches. (Renumbered.)
8-1-6. Dumping of garbage and waste.
(Renumbered.)
8-1-7. Unsanitary buildings and dwellings.
(Repealed.)
8-1-8. Dumping of refuse in designated areas.
(Renumbered.)
8-1-9. Food service permits required. (Repealed.)
8-1-10. Issuance of permits. (Repealed.)
8-1-11. Operation fees. (Repealed.)
8-1-12. Inspections of suspension or revocation of
permits. (Repealed.)
8-1-13. Plan review. (Repealed.)
8-1-14. Employee permits. (Repealed.)
8-1-15. Employee permits required. (Repealed.)
8-1-16. Examination. (Repealed.)
8-1-17. Expiration of employee permits. (Repealed.)
8-1-18. Revocation of employee food service permits.
(Repealed.)
8-1-19. Reciprocity. (Repealed.)
8-1-20. Repealed. (Ord 94-56, 01-31-95)
8-1-21. Extra-territorial jurisdiction. (Repealed.)
8-1-22. Penalties. (Repealed.)
8-1-23. Conflicting ordinances. (Repealed.)
8-1-24. Enforcement power of health officer.
(Repealed.)
8-1-1. Code of food service sanitation regulations.
(Repealed.)
(Ord. 2016-03, 01-19-2016)
8-1-2. Unlawful to allow garbage to accumulate.
(Renumbered to 8-3-17.)
(Ord. 2016-03, 01-20-2016)
8-1-3. Garbage cans. (Repealed.)
(Ord. 2016-03, 01-20-2016)
8-1-4. Garbage preparation. (Repealed.)
(Ord. 2016-03, 01-20-2016)
8-1-5. Befouling gutters and ditches. (Renumbered to
8-3-18.)
(Ord. 2016-03, 01-20-2016)
8-1-6. Dumping of garbage and waste. (Renumbered
to 8-3-19.)
(Ord. 2016-03, 01-20-2016)
8-1-7. Unsanitary buildings and dwellings.
(Repealed.)
(Ord. 2016-03, 01-20-2016)
8-1-8. Dumping of refuse in designated areas.
(Renumbered to 8-3-20.)
(Ord. 2016-03, 01-20-2016)
8-1-9. Food service permits required. (Repealed.)
(Ord. 2016-03, 01-20-2016)
8-1-10. Issuance of permits. (Repealed.)
(Ord. 2016-03, 01-20-2016)
8-1-11. Operation fees. (Repealed.)
(Ord. 2016-03, 01-20-2016)
8-1-12. Inspections of suspension or revocation of
permits. (Repealed.)
(Ord. 2016-03, 01-20-2016)
8-1-13. Plan review. (Repealed.)
(Ord. 2016-03, 01-20-2016)
8-1-14. Employee permits. (Repealed.)
(Ord. 2016-03, 01-20-2016)
8-1-15. Employee permit requirements. (Repealed.)
(Ord. 2016-03, 01-20-2016)
8-1-16. Examination. (Repealed.)
(Ord. 2016-03, 01-20-2016)
8-1-17. Expiration of employee permits. (Repealed.)
(Ord. 2016-03, 01-20-2016)
(January 20, 2016) 8-2
8-1-18. Revocation of employee food service permits.
(Repealed.)
(Ord. 2016-03, 01-20-2016)
8-1-19. Reciprocity. (Repealed.)
(Ord. 2016-03, 01-20-2016)
8-1-20. Repealed.
(Ord. 1994-56, 01-31-1995)
8-1-21. Extra-territorial jurisdiction. (Repealed.)
(Ord. 2016-03, 01-20-2016)
8-1-22. Penalties. (Repealed.)
(Ord. 2016-03, 01-20-2016)
8-1-23. Conflicting ordinances. (Repealed.)
(Ord. 2016-03, 01-20-2016)
8-1-24. Enforcement power of health officer.
(Repealed.)
(Ord. 2016-03, 01-20-2016)
(Pages 8-3 & 8-4 Reserved)
8-3 (March 24, 2017)
CHAPTER 2. SEWERS
8-2-1 through 8-2-29. Repealed. (Ord. 88-02, 03-16-
88)
(April 20, 2020) 8-4
CHAPTER 3. GARBAGE COLLECTION AND
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
8-3-1. Purpose.
8-3-2. Definitions.
8-3-3. Residential collection.
8-3-4. Commercial collection.
8-3-5. Residential collection contract.
8-3-6. Residential solid waste collection fees.
8-3-7. Garbage containers and rental fees.
8-3-8. Additional containers.
8-3-9. Time and place of pickup.
8-3-10. Closing of garbage containers required.
8-3-11. Accumulation or disposal of solid waste
prohibited.
8-3-12. Unlawful use of solid waste containers.
8-3-13. Covering of vehicles required. (Repealed.)
8-3-14. Renumbered to Section 3-1-29.
8-3-15. Regulations.
8-3-16. Civil Penalty.
8-3-17. Unlawful to allow garbage to accumulate.
8-3-18. Befouling gutters and ditches.
8-3-19. Dumping of garbage and waste.
8-3-20. Dumping of refuse in designated areas.
8-3-21. Appeals.
8-3-1. Purpose.
This Chapter is for the purpose of providing a
systematic collection, transportation, storage, processing,
recovery and disposal system for all solid waste generated
within Tooele City. This Chapter is also intended for the
purpose of protecting and providing for the health, safety,
comfort and convenience of Tooele City and its
inhabitants.
(Ord. 1993-18, 10-01-1993)
8-3-2. Definitions.
(1) "Approved garbage containers" means those
containers specifically provided by the City for residential
use, which containers are designated specifically for
automated garbage collection and have permanently
attached, tight fitting lids.
(2) "City" means Tooele City.
(3) "Commercial solid waste" means solid waste
resulting from the normal activities of commercial users.
(4) "Commercial user" means an enterprise, not a
residence, such as a business, association, corporation,
manufacturer, hotel, motel, resort, governmental or public
entities and churches, etc.
(5) "Mobile home park" means property under single
ownership or management used for occupancy by mobile
homes.
(6) "Person" means a person, firm, partnership,
association, corporation, company or organization of any
kind.
(7) "Residence" or "residential user" mean a
building or dwelling comprising not more than three
dwelling units designed for separate housekeeping
tenements and where no business of any kind is conducted
except such home occupations as are allowed by the
zoning ordinance of Tooele City. " Residence" includes
condominiums but does not include hotels, motels, and
mobile home parks.
(8) "Residential solid waste" means solid waste
resulting from the normal activities of households and
residential use.
(9) "Solid waste" means all putrescible and
nonputrescible materials or substances discarded or
rejected as being spent, useless, worthless, or in excess to
the owner's needs at the time of discard or rejection,
including garbage, refuse, industrial and commercial
waste, and waste which constitutes solid waste as defined
in 40 C.F.R. Part 258, the Criteria for Municipal Solid
Waste Landfills ("Part 258") which includes household
waste, commercial solid waste or industrial solid waste (as
such terms are defined in Part 258), or other types of
waste governed by subtitle D of the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act, and solid waste within
the meaning of the Solid Waste Management Act, Title
19, Chapter 6, Part 5, Utah Code Annotated 1953, as
amended, including demolition and construction debris.
(10) "Solid waste disposal contractor" means a
person or persons engaged in the business of collecting,
hauling or transporting through the streets of Tooele City,
any solid waste for disposal or for any other purpose.
(Ord. 1993-18, 10-01-1993)
8-3-3. Residential collection.
(1) Except as provided for herein, all occupied
residences within Tooele City shall be provided with
mandatory solid waste collection, removal and disposal
services and approved garbage containers by the City or
its designated agent. All residential solid waste generated
within the City shall be transported and delivered to a
City-designated and approved solid waste disposal
facility.
(2) Except as otherwise expressly permitted by this
Section, no residential solid waste shall be moved, hauled
away or transported upon the streets or public ways within
the City except by the City or their designated agents. It
is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person, except
as permitted in this Section, to haul or remove residential
solid waste within or from the City. Nothing contained in
this Section shall, however, preclude persons from hauling
their own residential solid waste over the streets or public
ways within the City to a City-designated solid waste
disposal facility, provided that person is regularly paying
the City for collection services.
(Ord. 1993-18, 10-01-1993)
8-3-4. Commercial collection.
Except as provided for in this Section, commercial
users shall collect and remove their own commercial solid
waste that is generated within the City, either directly or
by employing the services of a City-licensed contractor.
All commercial solid waste generated within the City shall
be transported and delivered to a City-designated and
approved solid waste disposal facility. Owners or
(April 20, 2020) 8-5
operators of small commercial enterprises, including
mobile home parks that produce solid waste in amounts
comparable to typical residences may, with City approval,
participate in the City's solid waste collection system on
the same basis as residential users, provided they are
located in an area that receives residential solid waste
collection services and provided it makes satisfactory
arrangements with the City to pay for said services, which
may include periodic payment for services or inclusion of
the fees with the Tooele City utility bill in the same
manner as residential collection fees are assessed and
collected.
(Ord. 1993-18, 10-01-1993)
8-3-5. Residential collection contract.
(1) The City may grant a contract to an independent
contractor to operate a residential solid waste collection
and sanitary disposal pickup service within the City upon
such terms and conditions as the city council shall require
by contract. All solid waste shall be collected, removed
and disposed of with such frequency and in such manner
as the city council may from time to time determine
appropriate.
(2) The holder of any City collection contract shall
be answerable to the city council and City Engineering
Department for the conduct and operation of solid waste
collection and disposal services.
(Ord. 1993-18, 10-01-1993)
8-3-6. Residential solid waste collection fees.
(1) Each owner or occupant of real property located
within the City which has one or more residences located
thereon shall be billed and assessed on a monthly basis
charges for collection, removal and disposal services for
residential solid waste and fees for City-provided
approved garbage containers. Such charges and fees shall
be established by resolution of the city council and shall
be billed and collected by the City finance department as
a part of the regular billing and collection system of
Tooele City. This shall include the collection of
delinquent fees.
(2) Fees for garbage pickup and can rental may be
terminated only when a responsible party requests in
writing that Tooele City terminate all of it's utility services
to the affected property.
(3) In the event that a responsible party fails or
neglects or refuses to pay any fee as required by this
Chapter, the City may at its discretion and after notice,
terminate its utility service to the affected residence or
institute a civil action to recover the delinquency, together
with interest at the rate of 18% per annum and a
reasonable attorney's fee.
(4) It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant to
fail to pay any fee required by this Chapter or required by
a resolution adopted pursuant to this Chapter, or to seek
to avoid the payment of fees legally owed.
(Ord. 1993-18, 10-01-1993)
8-3-7. Garbage containers and rental fees.
(1) Solid waste shall be collected by the City or its
agent from residential users only in containers approved
and issued to them by the City. The use of any other type
of containers or the use of approved containers issued to
another residence is unlawful and prohibited. All other
solid waste not collected by the City shall be placed in
suitable and sufficient garbage receptacles, either with
tight fitting lids or durable water resistant containers
manufactured specifically for use in solid waste
collection.
(2) Every residential user shall be issued at least one
approved garbage container by the City. Title to
containers furnished by the City to residential users shall
be retained by the City and the payment made by the
residents therefor shall be rental for the use thereof.
Rental fees for containers shall be established by
resolution of the city council. Rental fees for garbage
containers may be prorated for any part of a month that
water service is supplied. Garbage container rental fees
shall be charged and collected in the same manner as the
charge for solid waste collection services.
(3) Users renting containers furnished by the City, or
having custody thereof, shall keep the container free from
destructive or decorative markings, shall maintain the
original color thereof, and shall keep the inside of said
containers clean and free from build-up of fungus or
bacteria or any other type of contaminant that causes
odors or facilitates deterioration of the inside or outside of
such container. Users shall be responsible for containers
and shall not be negligent in the use of the containers.
(4) Residential users shall report to the City, or
authorized garbage hauler, any damage to or
malfunctioning containers that limit their usefulness for
receipt of solid waste so that the same may be returned to
the supplier for repair or replacement if they are covered
by warranty, or for repair for replacement by the City or
its agent.
(5) Containers lost or missing through no fault of the
user thereof shall be replaced by the City without charge,
but users shall exercise due care to protect containers
against loss through theft or misappropriation. Containers
shall not be removed from the premises that they have
been assigned to. The owner, lessee or occupant of each
residence shall be held responsible for each container
issued to that residence. No hot ashes or flammable or
explosive materials shall be deposited in a garbage
container. A purchase fee, based on the cost to the City
at the current rate, will be charged to anyone who
damages or removes a garbage container from the
property that the container has been assigned to. The
purchase fee may be added to the collection fees and
collected in the same manner.
(6) Containers furnished by the City are issued to
specific users by number and are nontransferable. Upon
discontinuance of use by a resident, containers shall be
returned to the City or its designated agent.
(Ord. 1993-18, 10-01-1993)
(April 20, 2020) 8-6
8-3-8. Additional containers.
(1) Should a residential user determine that an
additional container is necessary, a request may be made
to the City for an additional container or containers.
(2) Additional containers will be provided to a user
at an additional charge per month which charge shall be
set by resolution of the city council. Such charge shall be
incurred for a minimum of four months.
(3) At such time the user determines the additional
container or containers are no longer needed, the user
shall return said container(s) to the City at which time the
additional charge will be deleted from the billing provided
the four months minimum has been met. If an additional
container is not returned to the City, charges for such
container shall continue on a month-to-month basis until
returned.
(4) Additional containers may be rented subject to
availability of the containers to the City. Providing initial
containers to new residents will take priority over
providing additional containers to residents who already
have been issued one container.
(Ord. 1993-18, 10-01-1993)
8-3-9. Time and place of pickup.
(1) All residential solid waste containers shall be
placed on the edge of the street next to the driveway on
the opposite side of the driveway approach from the
mailbox, but in no event within ten feet of a mailbox, and
with the container's wheels as close to the curb or edge of
the road as reasonably possible, with the hinge thereof to
curbside and the lid opening facing toward the street.
When snow or street construction prevents placing of the
container against the curb, the container shall be placed
not over two feet from the edge of said snow or
construction and in a manner that will not obstruct traffic
or unduly impede the snow plowing activities of the City.
In areas of the City where there is no curb or gutter,
containers shall be placed off of the traveled portion of
the street but close enough to the street that the container
can be picked up without undue difficulty.
(2) Containers shall not be placed or permitted to
block driveways or through traffic.
(3) Unless otherwise provided by regulation,
garbage and refuse must not be set out upon the street for
collection prior to the evening of the day before collection
and must be set out prior to 7:00 a.m. on the day of
collection.
(4) All empty containers must be removed from the
street as soon as practicable after being emptied, and in
every case must be removed from the street the same day
they are emptied.
(5) Those physically unable to wheel containers to
curbside may make arrangements with the City for
assistance.
(6) It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle upon a
public street within the City during the hours of garbage
pickup in a manner that interferes with access to garbage
containers by the garbage collection vehicle.
(Ord. 1993-18, 10-01-1993)
8-3-10. Closing of garbage containers required.
No garbage containers shall be overfilled to the
extent that the lid does not remain firmly closed at all
times or to such an extent that the contents may be spilled
during the process of pickup and dumping into the
garbage collection vehicle.
(Ord. 1993-18, 10-01-1993)
8-3-11. Accumulation or disposal of solid waste
prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate
solid waste or cause solid wasted to be deposited upon
any street or alley or upon any premises in the City
without express permission from the City or the County
Health Department. No person shall for the purpose of
final disposal dump, place or bury any solid waste within
the incorporated areas of the City. No person shall for the
purpose of final disposal, burn solid waste within the
incorporated limits of the City except burning for
agricultural purposes and then only when approved by the
City or the County Health Department. All solid waste
generated within Tooele City shall be transported and
delivered to a Tooele City designated and approved solid
waste disposal facility.
(Ord. 1993-18, 10-01-1993)
8-3-12. Unlawful use of solid waste containers.
It shall be unlawful for commercial users to deposit
commercial solid waste in residential containers. It shall
be unlawful for residential users to deposit residential
solid waste in any commercial user's solid waste
containers.
(Ord. 1993-18, 10-01-1993)
8-3-13. Covering of vehicles required. (Repealed.)
(Ord. 2020-14, 04-15-2020) (Ord. 1993-18, 10-01-1993)
8-3-14. (Renumbered to Section 3-1-29)
8-3-15. Regulations.
The city council or city engineering department may
adopt such regulations from time to time as, in its opinion
may be necessary to implement the provisions of this
Chapter.
(Ord. 1993-18, 10-01-1993)
8-3-16. Civil Penalty.
(1) Any violation of this Chapter shall be punishable
by a civil penalty of $100.
(2) Each day of violation shall be a separate
violation subject to an additional civil penalty.
(Ord. 2020-10, 04-15-2020) (Ord. 1993-18, 10-01-1993)
8-3-17. Unlawful to allow garbage to accumulate.
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow garbage
or other refuse to accumulate upon the premises occupied
by such person.
(Ord. 2016-03, 01-20-2016) (Ord. 1967-3, 08-14-1967)
(April 20, 2020) 8-7
8-3-18. Befouling gutters and ditches.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep or
deposit any paper or other rubbish in any gutter or ditch
within the garbage district.
(Ord. 2016-03, 01-20-2016) (Ord. 1967-3, 08-14-1967)
8-3-19. Dumping of garbage and waste.
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit,
leave or cause or permit to be dumped, deposited or left,
any garbage or offensive material, vegetable waste, or any
other waste food products, animal by-products, ashes, or
any other refuse or waste material, except at such times
and places as may be designated by the Mayor in
accordance with the terms of this chapter.
(Ord. 2016-03, 01-20-2016) (Ord. 1967-3, 08-14-1967)
8-3-20. Dumping of refuse in designated areas.
No refuse, ashes or like waste material shall be
dumped or deposited at any place within the city, except
at the city disposal area or such places as shall be
designated by the Mayor as authorized disposal areas, and
all such dumping shall be done in accordance with the
rules and regulations established by the Mayor.
(Ord. 2016-03, 01-20-2016) (Ord. 1967-3, 08-14-1967)
8-3-21. Appeals.
A person subject to a civil penalty for violation of
this Chapter may appeal the penalty within 10 calendar
days as provided in Chapter 1-28 (Administrative Hearing
Officer).
(Ord. 2020-10, 04-15-2020)
(April 20, 2020) 8-8
(Page 8-8 Reserved)
8-9 (November 16, 2017)
CHAPTER 4. ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES
8-4-1. Purpose.
8-4-2. Declaration regarding nuisances.
8-4-3. Definitions.
8-4-4. Nuisances and other unlawful conditions.
8-4-5. General enforcement authority.
8-4-6. Criminal penalties.
8-4-7. Civil penalties. (Repealed)
8-4-8. Nuisance abatement. (Repealed)
8-4-9. Notice of violation: content, extension.
8-4-10. Notice of violation: service.
8-4-11. Notice of violation: penalties.
8-4-12. Notice of violation: appeal.
8-4-13. Notice of violation: default judgment.
8-4-14. Notice of compliance.
8-4-15. Code enforcement order: authority.
8-4-16. Code enforcement order: enforcement.
8-4-17. Code enforcement order: appeal.
8-4-18. Stipulation agreement.
8-4-19. Recordation.
8-4-20. Withholding permits; appeal.
8-4-21. Abatement: emergency.
8-4-22. Abatement: non-emergency.
8-4-23. Recovery of Fees and Costs.
8-4-24. Abatement superfund.
8-4-1. Purpose.
The purposes of this Chapter include the protection of
the public health, safety, and general welfare, and the
implementation of City policies to promote the neat and
orderly appearance of Tooele City.
(Ord. 2014-13, 10-15-2014) (Ord. 2006-08, 03-01-2006)
(Ord. 2004-22, 12-15-2004) (Ord. 1994-52, 10-25-1994)
8-4-2. Declaration regarding nuisances.
It is hereby declared that weeds, motor vehicles,
objects, structures, graffiti, and certain conditions
constitute a nuisance when they create a fire hazard, a
source of contamination or pollution of water, air, or land,
a threat to human health or safety, a breeding place or
habitation for insects or rodents or other pests or vermin,
or are unsightly, malodorous, or deleterious.
(Ord. 2014-13, 10-15-2014) (Ord. 2006-08, 03-01-2006)
(Ord 2004-22, 12-15-2004)
8-4-3. Definitions.
“Abandoned motor vehicle” means any motor vehicle
which displays common indicia of abandonment.
“Abate” meant to effectuate an abatement.
“Abatement” means any action or proceeding
commenced or pursued by the City to remove, alleviate,
or correct a nuisance or other violation of this Chapter.
“Abatement period” means the 14-day period,
beginning upon service of a notice of violation, within
which abatement by a responsible person is required to be
completed.
“Administrative hearing officer” means an
administrative hearing officer appointed under Chapter 1-
28 of this Code.
“Association” means any business entity, including,
without limitation, corporation, partnership, company,
business, but not an individual.
“Code enforcement order” means an order issued by
an administrative hearing officer in the context of an
abatement commenced pursuant to this Chapter.
“Code enforcement performance bond” means a cash
bond required by an administrative hearing officer and
posted by a responsible person to gain compliance with
this Chapter or with a code enforcement order.
“Code enforcement tax lien” means a lien recorded
with the Tooele County Recorder and County Treasurer to
facilitate the collection of all abatement-related costs,
including monetary penalties, administrative fees, filing
fees, and other reasonable and related costs.
“Department” means the Tooele City Community
Development Department.
“Developed land” means real property, whether
subdivided or not, upon which is built one or more
buildings.
“Director” means the director of the Tooele City
Community Development Department.
“Good cause” means incapacitating illness or
accident, death of a parent, sibling, or child, lack of
proper notice, or unavailability due to unavoidable and
non-preventable emergency or circumstance.
“Graffiti” means any unauthorized inscription, word,
figure, painting, or other defacement that is written,
marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or
engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public
or private property by any implement or material.
“Imminent hazard” means any condition that creates
a present and immediate danger to the public health,
safety, or welfare.
“Inoperable motor vehicle” means any motor vehicle
which is mechanically not functionable for a period of
over 30 days. The 30-day period may be extended by the
Community Development Director for a maximum of 6
months upon proof by the owner of ongoing restoration.
“Junked motor vehicle” means a motor vehicle which
has outlived its usefulness in its original form and which
is commonly gathered up and sold to be converted into
another product, either of the same or of a different kind,
or as scrap.
“Monetary penalty” means the civil fines accrued for
failure to complete an abatement. Monetary penalty does
not include appeal filing fees, reinspection fees, or
abatement costs.
“Motor vehicle” means any motorized vehicle which
initially was designed or constructed to be self-propelled.
The term “motor vehicle” includes, without limitation,
automobiles, motorcycles, and heavy equipment.
“Notice of compliance” means a document issued by
the City confirming that a responsible person has abated
the nuisance and corrected the violations set out in a
notice of violation, paid all fees, penalties, and costs
associated with the notice of violation, and otherwise has
fully complied with the requirements of this Chapter, all
as determined by an officer.
8-10 (November 16, 2017)
“Notice of violation” means a document prepared and
issued by an officer that informs a responsible person of
a nuisance or other violation of this Chapter, and that
contains an order to abate the nuisance or correct the
violation.
“Nuisance” means anything offensive or obnoxious to
the health, safety, or welfare of the inhabitants of the City;
or any act or thing repugnant to, creating a hazard to, or
having a detrimental effect on the property of another
person or to the community, and includes, but is not
limited to, the following:
(a) A nuisance or public nuisance as defined by
Utah law.
(b) Junked, wrecked, abandoned, or inoperable
motor vehicles not kept as provided in this Chapter.
(c) Any attractive nuisance which may prove
detrimental to children, whether in a building, on the
premises of a building, or upon undeveloped or
unimproved land. This includes any abandoned wells,
shacks, basements, or excavations; abandoned
refrigerators; any structurally unsound fences or
structures; or any lumber, trash, fences, debris, or
vegetation which may prove a hazard for inquisitive
minors.
(d) Whatever is dangerous or detrimental to
human life or health as determined according to the
ordinances of Tooele City or Tooele County.
(e) Overcrowding a room with occupants so as
to exceed the weight-carrying capabilities of the structure
as determined by the Building Official, based upon the
International Building Code or International Fire Code
specifications for a similar structure.
(f) Insufficient ventilation or illumination as
determined by the requirements of the International
Mechanical Code.
(g) Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or
plumbing facilities as determined by the International
Plumbing Code.
(h) Uncleanliness as determined according to
the ordinances of Tooele City or Tooele County.
(i) Whatever renders air, food, or drink
unwholesome or detrimental to the health of human beings
as determined according to the ordinances of Tooele City
or Tooele County.
(j) To conduct any business of bone crushing or
the making of glue or the manufacturing process involving
the carcasses of dead animals or parts thereof in a manner
that the odor or activities are obvious to 3 or more persons
within 50 feet of the premises upon which the activity is
conducted.
(k) To allow snow, ice, hail, or sleet to
accumulate on any paved sidewalk abutting the property
of any owner, occupant, or lessor, or to place or propel, or
cause to be placed or propelled, snow, ice, or hail in the
public way or in any manner which poses a hazard to
vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(l) To allow any lot or excavation to become
the repository of stagnant water or decaying or offensive
substances.
(m) To allow the growth of weeds or other
offensive, noxious, hazardous, or undesirable vegetation
upon property.
(n) To allow the existence of refuse or unsightly
or deleterious objects, structures, or mechanical devices
upon property.
(o) Graffiti upon any real property or
appurtenant or accessory structures or fixtures.
“Officer” means Administrative Code Enforcement
Officer and Ordinance Compliance Officer.
“Responsible person” means any property owner,
occupant, or other person or association with control over
property who allows, permits, causes, or maintains a
nuisance or a violation of this Chapter to exist upon the
property owned, occupied, or controlled. Use of the
singular “person” in this Chapter includes the plural
“persons.”
“Undeveloped land” means real property that is
subdivided into one or more building lots or parcels of
record which are not built upon.
“Unimproved land” means real property that is not
built upon with a primary structure.
“Violation” means any violation of this Chapter.
“Wrecked motor vehicle” means a motor vehicle
which has been destroyed, disabled, or seriously damaged.
(Ord. 2017-32, 11-15-2017) (Ord 2017-17, 06-21-2017)
(Ord. 2014-13, 10-15-2014) (Ord. 2006-08, 03-01-2006)
(Ord. 2004-22, 12-15-2004) (Ord. 1994-52, 10-25-1994)
8-4-4. Nuisances and other unlawful conditions.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person or association
owning, occupying, or otherwise exercising control over
real property in Tooele City to allow, permit, cause, or
maintain a nuisance, including any of the following:
(a) weeds and/or grass in excess of 6 inches in
height located:
(i) in the public right-of-way between the
property line and the edge of street pavement;
(ii) on any land less than 5 acres in size; or,
(iii) within 30 feet of the property line of any
land of 5 or more acres in size ;
(b) the accumulation of garbage, refuse, or
unsightly or deleterious objects or structures upon real
property, unless contained in connection with an
association lawfully situated and licensed for the same;
(c) junked, wrecked, or inoperable motor
vehicles upon real property, for longer than 72 hours,
except that up to 2 such vehicles or parts thereof may be
stored within an enclosed building or completely screened
by a sight-obscuring fence;
(d) abandoned motor vehicles;
(e) any other unsightly or deleterious condition
that gives rise to a threat to human health or safety; and,
(f) the failure, by any person owning,
occupying, or exercising control over any real property
within the City, to remove graffiti from the property
within 15 days after the graffiti appears on the property.
(2) Automobile impound yards and wrecking yards,
which are lawfully established, licensed, and operated
within the City, are not a nuisance under this Chapter if
the yards are completely screened by a sight-obscuring
8-11 (November 16, 2017)
fence and are compliant with all Tooele City conditional
use permit, site plan, building permit, and other City
requirements.
(Ord. 2017-32, 11-15-2017) (Ord 2017-17, 06-21-2017)
(Ord. 2014-13, 10-15-2014) (Ord. 2014-04, 02-05-2014)
(Ord. 2006-08, 03-01-2006) (Ord. 2004-22, 12-15-2004)
(Ord. 1994-52, 10-25-1994)
8-4-5. General enforcement authority.
(1) Officer. An officer has the authority to abate
and to gain compliance with the provisions of this Chapter
upon finding that a violation of this Chapter exists. An
Officer may commence administrative or criminal
investigation procedures, commence administrative
enforcement procedures, issue notices of violation and
notices of compliance, inspect public and private property,
and abate nuisances upon public and private property
(2) Police Department. A Tooele City peace officer
has the same authority as an officer, and is further
authorized to commence criminal enforcement
procedures, including citation and arrest.
(3) Discretion. The City has the sole discretion in
commencing or pursuing abatement and to otherwise gain
compliance with this Chapter. Nothing shall require an
Officer or a peace officer to commence or pursue an
abatement or other action to gain compliance with this
Chapter. The City recognizes the principle of
prosecutorial discretion in the context of this Chapter.
(4) Inspection. Any officer or peace officer has
authority to enter upon property and premises to perform
inspections, examinations, and surveys as may be
necessary to gain compliance with this Chapter, including
the taking of photographs, samples, or other physical
evidence. All inspections, examinations, and surveys
requiring entry onto private property or premises shall be
accompanied by a warrant, be done in a reasonable
manner, and be based upon probable cause. However, no
warrant shall be required where a responsible person’s
consent is voluntarily given, or where the inspection,
examination, or survey is conducted from a public rightof-
way or from another property whose owner or occupant
has given voluntary consent to enter.
(Ord. 2017-32, 11-15-2017) (Ord. 2014-13, 10-15-2014)
(Ord. 2004-22, 12-15-2004) (Ord. 1994-52, 10-25-1994)
8-4-6. Criminal penalties.
(1) In addition to other penalties provided in this
Chapter, the following shall be a class B misdemeanor
criminal offense:
(a) any violation of this Chapter;
(b) any violation of a code enforcement order;
and,
(c) any failure to remedy a violation described
in a notice of violation.
(2) An individual person convicted of a criminal
offense shall be sentenced to pay a fine up to $1000. An
association convicted of a criminal offense shall be
sentenced to pay a fine up to $5,000.
(3) Restitution. In addition to any fines imposed,
any individual or association convicted of a criminal
offense shall pay to the City restitution for all expenses
incurred by the City to abate the nuisance or to correct the
violation for which the individual or association was
charged.
(4) Each and every day that a violation of this
Chapter continues after being charged, by criminal
citation or Information, shall constitute a separate criminal
offense. Penalties for separate criminal offenses may be
imposed consecutively.
(5) A criminal prosecution brought under this
Chapter is not an exclusive remedy and shall not preclude
the City from commencing and pursuing an administrative
proceeding to abate a nuisance or to correct a violation of
this Chapter.
(Ord. 2014-13, 10-15-2014) (Ord. 2004-22, 12-15-2004)
(Ord. 1994-52, 10-25-1994)
8-4-7. Civil Penalties. (Repealed.)
(Ord. 2014-13, 10-15-2014)
8-4-8. Nuisance abatement. (Repealed.)
(Ord. 2014-13, 10-15-2014)
8-4-9. Notice of violation: content, extension.
(1) An abatement is commenced by the issuance and
service of a notice of violation.
(2) Content. A notice of violation shall indicate the
following:
(a) the nature of the nuisance or other violation
of this Chapter;
(b) the street address and parcel number for the
property upon which the nuisance or violation exists;
(c) the name of the property owner of record
according to the records of the Tooele County Recorder;
(d) the date of the nuisance or violation;
(e) the penalties associated with the nuisance or
violation;
(f) the abatement required;
(g) the abatement period;
(h) the contact information for the officer with
whom the notice of violation may be discussed;
(i) the procedure for obtaining a notice of
compliance; and,
(j) the procedure for filing an appeal.
(3) Extension. A responsible person may request a
14-day extension of the abatement period by submitting a
written request to the Department during the abatement
period. An approved extension shall result in an amended
notice of violation which establishes a new abatement
period. An extension request shall state and affirm the
following:
(a) the responsible person understands that the
extension is conditioned upon the responsible person’s
waiver of the right to appeal the notice of violation;
(b) the responsible person is actively engaged in
the abatement required by the notice of violation; and,
(c) the responsible person is unable to complete
abatement during the abatement period due to
circumstances that are unusual, extraordinary, or outside
the responsible person’s control.
8-11.1 (November 16, 2017)
(Ord. 2017-32, 11-15-2017) (Ord. 2014-13, 10-15-2014)
8-4-10. Notice of violation: service.
(1) A notice of violation shall be served by one or
more of the following methods:
(a) regular mail, first-class postage prepaid, to
both:
(i) the last known address of a responsible
person as found in the records of the Tooele County
Recorder; and,
(ii) the address of the property subject to
the notice of violation; or,
(b) certified U.S. mail, return receipt requested,
to the last known address of a responsible person, as
found in the records of the Tooele County Recorder; or,
(c) personal delivery to a responsible person;
or,
(d) posting of the notice of violation upon the
property or premises which is the subject of the notice of
violation.
(2) Service by regular mail shall be deemed made on
the third day after the date of mailing.
(Ord. 2017-32, 11-15-2017) (Ord. 2014-13, 10-15-2014)
8-4-11. Notice of violation: penalties.
(1) The monetary penalties associated with
abatement shall be established by resolution of the Tooele
City Council.
(2) The monetary penalties associated with a notice
of violation shall accrue daily until the earlier of the
following occurs:
(a) the abatement period ends; or,
(b) a notice of compliance is issued by an
officer; or,
(c) a code enforcement order halting,
modifying, or suspending the penalties is issued.
(3) Accrued monetary penalties (but not abatement
costs) associated with a notice of violation shall be
suspended upon:
(a) the responsible person causing the nuisance
or other violation described in the notice of violation to be
corrected during the abatement period or amended
abatement period;
(b) the responsible person requesting an
inspection from the City during the abatement period; and,
(c) a notice of compliance being issued in
response to the request for inspection.
(4) The suspension of monetary penalties associated
with a notice of violation shall continue and become
permanent if during the 12 months immediately following
the date of the notice of compliance there is no recurrence
of substantially the same nuisance or violation.
(5) If a responsible person fails to correct the
nuisance or violation described in a notice of violation
during the abatement period, or if the responsible person
commits or allows substantially the same nuisance or
violation to occur during the 12 months immediately
following the date of a notice of compliance, all monetary
penalties that began to accrue daily on the date of the
original notice of violation shall be owed in full to the
City.
(6) In the event of multiple responsible persons
associated with a notice of violation, default judgment, or
code enforcement order, all responsible persons shall be
jointly and severally liable for abatement, for compliance
with any orders, and for payment of any monetary
penalties and costs.
(Ord. 2017-32, 11-15-2017) (Ord. 2014-13, 10-15-2014)
8-4-12. Notice of violation: appeal.
(1) A responsible person served with a notice of
violation may appeal to the administrative hearing officer.
(2) A code enforcement order that upholds some but
not all of the violations described in a notice of violation
shall have the effect of amending the notice of violation
and resetting the date of the notice of violation and the
abatement period.
(3) A notice of violation that is amended by order or
decision of the administrative hearing officer is a code
enforcement order and is not administratively appealable
to the administrative hearing officer.
(Ord. 2017-32, 11-15-2017) (Ord. 2014-13, 10-15-2014)
8-4-13. Notice of violation: default judgment.
(1) A responsible person who fails to request a
compliance inspection during the abatement period and
who does not timely appeal the notice of violation is
deemed to have waived any administrative appeal rights
associated with a notice of violation and shall be subject
to the entry of default judgment upholding the notice of
violation. The default judgment shall direct the abatement
and impose the monetary penalty, fees, and costs
associated therewith.
(2) A default judgment shall be issued by the
administrative hearing officer upon officer affidavit that
a responsible person both failed to request a timely
compliance inspection and failed to make a timely appeal.
(3) A copy of a signed default judgment shall be
served on all affected responsible persons by any method
of service allowed for a notice of violation.
(4) A responsible person adversely affected by a
default judgment may appeal the default judgment to the
administrative hearing officer. The administrative hearing
officer may set aside a default judgment only upon a
written finding of good cause shown by the appealing
responsible person.
(5) Following the issuance of a default judgment and
the failure to timely appeal the default judgment, or
following the issuance of a code enforcement order
upholding the default judgment, the City may forthwith
proceed to abate the nuisance or violation described in the
default judgment, and may forthwith proceed to collect all
accrued monetary penalties and costs associated with the
abatement.
(Ord. 2017-32, 11-15-2017) (Ord. 2014-13, 10-15-2014)
8-4-14. Notice of compliance.
(1) It shall be the duty of a responsible person served
with a notice of violation to request a City compliance
inspection when the described nuisance or violation has
8-11.2 (November 16, 2017)
been abated.
(2) It is prima facie evidence that the nuisance or
violation is continuing if no compliance inspection is
requested.
(3) The City shall perform the requested compliance
inspection. If the officer finds that the nuisance or
violation for which the notice of violation was issued has
been abated fully, the officer shall issue a notice of
compliance to the responsible person requesting the
compliance inspection.
(4) A notice of compliance shall be deemed effective
upon the day of the inspection that determined full
compliance. No further monetary penalties shall accrue
after this date unless the same or a similar nuisance or
violation occurs within the 12 months immediately
following the notice of compliance.
(5) If, following a request for compliance inspection,
the City declines to issue a notice of compliance, it
remains the duty of the responsible person to request a
reinspection once further abatement is completed.
(6) The first compliance inspection shall not require
the payment of a fee. All reinspections shall require the
payment of a fee established by the City Council.
(7) If the City declines to issue a notice of
compliance, it shall provide a written explanation to the
responsible party requesting the compliance inspection.
(8) A responsible person may appeal the denial of a
notice of compliance to the administrative hearing officer.
(9) A request for compliance inspection or
reinspection shall toll the abatement period and the
accrual of monetary penalties until the issuance of written
reasons for the denial of a notice of compliance or until
the occurrence of substantially the same nuisance or
violation with the 12 months immediately following the
notice of violation.
(Ord. 2017-32, 11-15-2017) (Ord. 2014-13, 10-15-2014)
8-4-15. Code enforcement order: authority.
In addition to the authority granted under Chapter 1-
28 of this Code, the administrative hearing officer shall
have authority to do the following:
(1) upon appeal, to uphold, modify, or reject a notice
of violation, and to issue a code enforcement order to that
effect;
(2) upon appeal, to uphold, modify, or reject a notice
of compliance, and to issue a code enforcement order to
that effect;
(3) upon officer affidavit, to issue a default
judgment;
(4) upon appeal, to uphold, modify, or reject a
default judgment, and to issue a code enforcement order
to that effect;
(5) upon appeal, to uphold, modify, suspend,
dismiss, or order the payment of monetary penalties
associated with a notice of violation, and to issue a code
enforcement order to that effect;
(6) upon appeal, to establish a payment plan for
payment of monetary penalties associated with a notice of
violation, and to issue a code enforcement order to that
effect;
(7) to make written findings of fact and conclusions
of law associated with a code enforcement order;
(8) to issue a code enforcement order requiring a
responsible person to post a cash code enforcement
performance bond and to sign an associated bond
agreement prepared by the City Attorney;
(9) to issue a code enforcement order for the return
of the cash code enforcement performance bond to the
posting responsible person;
(10) to incorporate a stipulation agreement into
a code enforcement order;
(11) to declare a code enforcement tax lien
released and/or fully satisfied, and to issue a code
enforcement order to that effect; and,
(12) to issue any other lawful code enforcement
order regarding any aspect of abatement.
(Ord. 2017-32, 11-15-2017) (Ord. 2014-13, 10-15-2014)
8-4-16. Code enforcement order: enforcement.
The City may use all lawful means to enforce a code
enforcement order, including a default judgment, and to
recover all costs associated with such enforcement.
(Ord. 2014-13, 10-15-2014)
8-4-17. Code enforcement order: appeal.
A responsible person subject to a code enforcement
order may appeal to a court in the manner provided in
Chapter 1-28 of this Code.
(Ord. 2014-13, 10-15-2014)
8-4-18. Stipulation agreement.
The City may enter into a stipulation agreement with
a responsible person to resolve a notice of violation. A
signed stipulation agreement shall be delivered to the
administrative hearing officer, who shall issue a code
enforcement order incorporating the stipulation
agreement. By entering into a stipulation agreement, a
responsible person waives all administrative and judicial
appeals associated with the notice of violation.
(Ord. 2014-13, 10-15-2014)
8-4-19. Recordation.
(1) If a nuisance or violation continues to exist after
the abatement period, and the notice of violation has not
been appealed, an officer may record the notice of
violation, together with any default judgment and code
enforcement order, with the office of the Tooele County
Recorder. This recordation is not a lien against property,
but a notice concerning any continuing nuisance or
violation found upon the property.
(2) If a notice of compliance or code enforcement
order finding compliance is issued after a notice of
violation, default judgment, or code enforcement order
has been recorded, the officer shall cause the notice of
compliance or code enforcement order finding compliance
to be recorded with the office of the Tooele County
Recorder. This recordation shall have the effect of
updating and nullifying a previously recorded notice of
violation, default judgment, or code enforcement order to
which it relates.
8-11.3 (November 16, 2017)
(3) Notice of any recordation shall be served upon
the owners of the real property against which a
recordation has been made. The failure to serve such
notice shall not be grounds to void the recordation.
(Ord. 2017-32, 11-15-2017) (Ord. 2014-13, 10-15-2014)
8-4-20. Withholding permits; appeal.
(1) During the pendency of any unresolved notice of
violation or code enforcement order, the City may
withhold from a responsible person subject to the notice
or order any permit, license, or land use approval
associated with the property upon which the nuisance or
violation of this Chapter continues. The withholding shall
continue until the issuance of a notice of compliance or
code enforcement order finding compliance.
(2) The withholding of a permit, license, or land use
approval pursuant to authority of this Section may be
appealed to the administrative hearing officer.
(Ord. 2017-32, 11-15-2017) (Ord. 2014-13, 10-15-2014)
8-4-21. Abatement: emergency.
(1) The City is authorized to summarily abate an
imminent hazard.
(2) Whenever an officer and the Director determine
that an imminent hazard exists, the officer may issue an
emergency order directing one or more of the following
actions:
(a) order the immediate vacation of any owners,
tenants, and occupants, and prohibit occupancy until all
imminent hazards have been abated;
(b) post the property or premises as unsafe,
substandard, or dangerous;
(c) board, fence, and otherwise secure any
property or premises;
(d) raze, grade, and otherwise remove structures
and objects on the property to the extent necessary to
remove any imminent hazard;
(e) make emergency repairs;
(f) cut and remove weeds, grass, and other
vegetation as necessary to mitigate an imminent fire
hazard due to vegetation height, concentration, dryness, or
other combustibility factors; and,
(g) take any other reasonable action to eliminate
an imminent hazard or to protect the public from an
imminent hazard.
(3) A notice of violation shall be served upon a
responsible person associated with an imminent hazard.
The notice shall describe the nature of the imminent
hazard. Service is not required prior to taking steps to
abate an imminent hazard.
(4) City personnel and agents may enter property or
premises without a warrant to the extent necessary to
abate an imminent hazard.
(5) The City shall pursue only the minimum level of
abatement necessary to abate an imminent hazard under
this Section. Once an imminent hazard is abated
sufficiently to constitute a nuisance or violation that is not
an imminent hazard, the City shall follow the procedures
of this Chapter for non-emergency abatement.
(6) A responsible person shall be liable for all costs
associated with the abatement of an imminent hazard.
(7) Promptly after an emergency abatement, an
officer shall notify a responsible person of the abatement
actions taken, the itemized costs for those actions, and the
location of any seized and removed personal property.
(8) A responsible person may appeal the costs of an
emergency abatement to the administrative hearing
officer.
(Ord. 2017-32, 11-15-2017) (Ord 2017-17, 06-21-2017)
(Ord. 2014-13, 10-15-2014)
8-4-22. Abatement: non-emergency.
(1) If a responsible person fails to abate a nuisance
or violation within the abatement period or within the
deadline established in a code enforcement order, the City
is authorized to abate the nuisance or violation.
(2) The City and its agents have authority to enter
upon any property or premises as may be necessary to
abate a nuisance or violation. Such entry onto a private
property or premises shall be accompanied by a warrant,
be done in a reasonable manner, and be based upon
probable cause. However, no warrant shall be required
where a responsible person’s consent is voluntarily given.
(3) A responsible person shall be liable for all costs
associated with the abatement. If the City undertakes
preparatory or other steps to perform an abatement, but
the responsible person completes the abatement before the
City begins or completes the abatement, the responsible
person shall remain responsible for the City’s preparatory
and other costs.
(4) Promptly after an abatement, an officer shall
notify a responsible person of the abatement actions taken,
the itemized costs for those actions, and the location of
any seized and removed personal property.
(5) A responsible person may appeal the costs of an
abatement to the administrative hearing officer.
(Ord. 2017-32, 11-15-2017) (Ord. 2014-13, 10-15-2014)
8-4-23. Recovery of Fees and Costs.
(1) As provided in U.C.A. Sections 10-11-3 and -4,
as amended, and after any established deadlines for the
payment of monetary penalties and abatement-related fees
and costs has passed, the officer may file and record with
the Tooele County Recorder and Treasurer a code
enforcement tax lien and an itemized statement of all such
penalties, fees, and costs.
(2) Upon full payment of all amounts owing under a
code enforcement tax lien, or upon the entry of a code
enforcement order or judicial order declaring the lien
amount satisfied, the City shall file and record an
appropriate notice of satisfaction and/or release of lien.
(3) The City may pursue all lawful means to recover
all penalties, fees, and costs imposed or incurred pursuant
to this Chapter.
(Ord. 2017-32, 11-15-2017) (Ord. 2014-13, 10-15-2014)
8-4-24. Abatement superfund.
There is hereby established a revolving fund, to be
known as the abatement superfund, to defray the costs of
abatement. The abatement superfund shall be funded by
8-11.4 (November 16, 2017)
monetary penalties, compliance reinspection fees, appeal
fees, and other fees and costs collected pursuant to this
Chapter.
(Ord. 2017-32, 11-15-2017) (Ord. 2014-13, 10-15-2014)
8-11.5 (November 16, 2017)
(Page 8-11.5 Reserved)
(March 28, 2017) 8-12
CHAPTER 5. WASTEWATER CONTROL
ORDINANCE GENERAL PROVISIONS.
8-5-1. Short title.
8-5-2. Purpose.
8-5-3. Definitions and abbreviations.
8-5-4. Supervision.
8-5-5. General provisions.
8-5-6. Mandatory Connections.
8-5-1. Short title.
This regulation, Tooele City Code Title 8, Chapters
5 through 13, shall be known as the "Wastewater Control
Ordinance."
(Ord. 1993-12, 09-20-1993)
8-5-2. Purpose.
It is necessary for the health, safety, and welfare of
the residents within the City of Tooele Publicly Owned
Treatment Works (POTW) to regulate the collection of
wastewater and treatment thereof to provide for maximum
public benefit. The provisions herein set forth are uniform
requirements for contributors into the wastewater
collection and treatment system for the POTW and
enables the POTW to comply with all applicable local,
state, and federal laws and regulations. The POTW may
adopt procedures and rules for the implementation,
administration, and enforcement of this Wastewater
Control Ordinance.
(Ord. 2015-17, 06-03-2015) (Ord. 1993-12, 09-20-1993)
8-5-3. Definitions and abbreviations.
(1) Definitions. Unless the context specifically
indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as
used in this Title, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated:
"Biochemical Oxygen Demand" or "BOD5" means
the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedures in five (5) days at twenty degrees (20°)
Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/L) using
methods approved under 40 CFR Part 136, as amended.
"Building or lateral sewer" means a privately owned
and maintained sewer conveying the wastewater of a user
from a building or other structure to a POTW sewer,
including direct connections to a POTW sewer where
permitted by the POTW. A later sewer is a building sewer.
"City" means Tooele City.
"Construction standards" means the general
construction requirements adopted by the POTW for
installation of sewerage facilities and building or lateral
sewers.
"Duplex" means a single building containing two
independent dwelling units.
"Dwelling unit" means a building or other structure
where an individual or family resides as a separate
housekeeping unit.
"Family" as defined in Toole City Code Section
7-1-5.
"Food preparation and processing establishments"
means establishments engaged in the preparation of food
or drink to be consumed on the premises and/or to be
delivered or picked up for resale and/or consumption.
"Garbage" means solid wastes from the preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food and from handling,
storage, and sale of food.
"Multiple dwelling unit" means any building or other
structure, having more than one dwelling unit therein.
"Normal Domestic Strength Wastewater" means
wastewater, when analyzed in accordance with procedures
established in 40 CFR Part 136, as amended, containing
no more than two hundred (200) mg/L of BOD5 and/or
two hundred fifty (250) mg/L of TSS. Discharges to the
POTW that exceed these concentrations may be
surcharged as specified in Section 8-10 of this Title.
"Person" means any individual, partnership,
co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association,
joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or
any other legal entity, or their legal representatives,
agents, or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the
feminine and the singular shall include the plural where
indicated by context.
"Publicly Owned Treatment Works" or "POTW" is a
treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33
U.S.C 1292), which is owned by the City. This definition
includes any devices or systems used in the collection,
storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of
municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature
and any sewers, pipes, or other conveyances which convey
wastewater to the treatment plant. The term also means
the municipality having jurisdiction over the industrial
user discharges to and the discharges from the treatment
works.
"POTW treatment plant" means that portion of the
POTW designed to provide treatment for wastewater.
"POTW sewer" includes POTW sewer main or
wastewater conveyance pipes, whether gravity or force
main flows, and owned and operated by the City.
"Sanitary sewer" or "sewer" means the pipe or
conduit system and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation, pumping, and treatment of sewage. This
definition shall also include the terms "public sewer,"
"sewer system," "POTW sewer" and "sewer."
"Service charge" means the basic assessment levied
on all users of the public sewer system whose wastes do
not exceed in strength the concentration values established
as representative of normal sewage.
"Sewage" see "Wastewater".
"Shall" and "will" are mandatory; "may" is
permissive.
"Single dwelling unit" means a building containing
one dwelling unit.
"State" means the State of Utah.
"Storm sewer" or "storm drain" shall mean every
pipe, culvert, flume, ditch, gutter, storm sewer, cistern,
tank, drain, lake, pond, stream, ravine, gully, or other
facility or natural feature, that contains, holds, transports,
diverts, channels, impounds, or drains water, into which
any naturally occurring stormwater runoff within the City
(March 28, 2017) 8-13
may seep, percolate, or flow; and every street, sidewalk,
alley, gutter, roof, parking lot, yard, field, driveway, patio,
and other surface within the City across which any
naturally occurring stormwater runoff may seep, percolate,
or flow.
"Stormwater" means any surface flow, runoff, and
drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of
natural precipitation and resulting from such precipitation,
including snowmelt.
"Subdivision" means the division of a tract, or lot, or
parcel of land into two three or more lots, plots, sites, or
other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, of sale or of building development or
redevelopment, provided, however, that divisions of land
for agricultural purposes or for commercial,
manufacturing, or industrial purposes shall be exempt.
Further, the above definition shall not apply to the sale or
conveyance of any parcel of land which may be shown as
one of the lots of a subdivision or which a plat has
theretofore been recorded in the office of the county
recorder. The word "subdivide" and any derivative thereof
shall have reference to the term "subdivision" as herein
defined.
"Surcharge" means an additional charge to an
industrial user whose discharge waste strength is in excess
of the Normal Domestic Strength Wastewater as defined
in this Section and Section 8-10.
"Total Suspended Solids" means the solids that float
on the surface of, or are suspended in, the water, sewage,
or other liquid, and which are removable by laboratory
filtering in accordance with procedures approved in 40
CFR Part 136, as amended.
"Utah Permit Discharge Elimination System
(UPDES)" is the State of Utah program for issuing,
conditioning, and denying permits for the discharge of
pollutants from point sources into waters of the State
pursuant to UAC R317-8 and Section 402 of the Clean
Water Act.
"User" means any person or entity which contributes,
causes, or permits the contribution of wastewater to a
POTW.
"Wastewater" or "sewage" means the liquid and
water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from
residences, dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial
facilities and institutions, together with any infiltrating
groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be
present, whether treated or untreated, which are
discharged to or allowed to enter the POTW.
"Waters of the State" means all streams, lakes, ponds,
marshes, water courses, waterways, wells, springs,
reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems,
and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or
underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which
are contained within, flow through or border upon the
State or any portion thereof.
"Wastewater strength" means the quality of
wastewater discharged as measured by its elements,
including its constituents and characteristics.
(2) Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall
have the following meanings:
BOD5 Biochemical Oxygen Demand
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
EPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
°F Fahrenheit
gpd gallons per day
gpm gallons per minute
mgd million gallons per day
mg/L milligrams per Liter
O&M Operation and Maintenance
POTW Publicly Owned Treatment Works
TSS Total Suspended Solids
UAC Utah Administrative Code
UPDES Utah Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System
U.S.C. United States Code
(Ord. 2015-17, 06-03-2015) (Ord. 1993-12, 09-20-1993)
8-5-4. Supervision.
The POTW shall be supervised and directed by the
Public Works Director or designee.
(Ord. 2015-17, 06-03-2015)
8-5-5. General provisions.
All sewage shall be discharged to public sewers
except as provided hereafter.
(1) No person shall discharge any sewage from any
premises within the POTW service area in and upon any
public highway, stream, water course, or public place, or
into any drain, cesspool, storm or private sewer, except as
provided for hereinafter.
(2) No person shall cause to be discharged or make
a connection which would allow any storm water, surface
drainage, groundwater, roof runoff, cooling water, or
other similar waters into any sanitary sewer. No person
shall cause any of the above-mentioned waters to be
mixed with that person's sewage in order to dilute that
sewage.
(3) No person shall discharge storm water, surface
drainage, subsurface drainage, groundwater, or roof runoff
to the POTW. Stormwater may be admitted to
specifically designated storm sewers which have adequate
capacity for the accommodations of such waters. No
person shall connect to and/or use sanitary sewers for the
above purposes without having first obtained written
authorization from the Public Works Director.
(4) No person shall contribute or cause to be
contributed directly or indirectly, any pollutant or
wastewater which will interfere with the operation or
performance of the POTW, including the following
pollutants:
(a) Liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of
their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either
alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire
or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the
POTW or to the operation of the POTW.
(b) Solid or viscous substances which may cause
obstruction to the flow in a sewer or interfere with the
operation of the wastewater treatment facilities.
(c) Malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which
either singly or by interaction with other wastes are
(March 28, 2017) 8-14
sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or
are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their
maintenance and repair.
(d) Any wastewater which causes a hazard to
human health or life or creates a public nuisance.
(Ord. 2015-17, 06-03-2015) (Ord. 1993-12, 09-20-1993)
8-5-6. Mandatory Connections.
In order to defray the cost of constructing,
reconstructing, maintaining, and operating the POTW and
the Water Reclamation Facility, and to protect the public
health and welfare:
(1) No property owner, agent, or other person having
charge of or occupying any property within 300 feet of a
POTW sewer shall maintain, use, or allow to exist any
privy vault, septic tank, or cesspool upon such property.
(2) No person shall erect or maintain any septic tank,
outhouse, or privy within the POTW boundaries.
(3) The City shall require the owner of any property
containing a building or structure approved, meant, or
used for human occupancy to connect to the POTW if:
(a) the property is situated within the POTW
boundaries;
(b) the property lies within 300 feet of an
existing POTW sewer, measured directly to the closest
point of the POTW sewer; and,
(c) capacity in the POTW exists.
(4) All costs for permitting, sewer lateral and other
construction, and connection to the POTW under this
Code shall be borne entirely by the property owner.
(5) Any City requirement for connection to the
POTW according to this Title shall:
(a) be in the form of a written notice issued to
the property owner by the City;
(b) be delivered to the property owner by
certified mail at the property address;
(c) identify a deadline not less than 90 days
from the date of the notice by which the connection to the
POTW must occur;
(d) identify the requirements of this Title under
which the notice is being issued;
(e) identify the potential penalties for failure to
comply with the requirements of the notice; and,
(f) identify the applicable standards and
specifications to be adhered to in order to effect the
connection to the POTW, or where those standards can be
found.
(6) Failure to connect to the POTW following a
properly issued notice to do so shall result in:
(a) a violation of the Tooele City Code for each
day of non-compliance with the properly issued notice of
the requirement to connect to the POTW, punishable as an
Infraction under Chapter 1-4;
(b) water service to the property being
terminated until such time as compliance with the notice
to connect to the POTW is completed; and,
(c) fines and fees in the combined amount of:
(i) criminal fines;
(ii) disconnection and reconnection fees for
water service;
(iii) permitting, inspection, and connection
fees for the connection to the POTW;
(iv) regular monthly charges for sewer utility
service, for not less than one month, for the time between
the deadline for connection and compliance with the
notice to connect to the POTW; and,
(v) payment of any and all outstanding
utility billing amounts.
(7) The City shall maintain, in its sole discretion, the
right to seek compliance with the terms of this Section,
including from a court of competent jurisdiction, which
may include:
(a) compliance with the terms of this Section;
(b) payment of required fees for permitting,
inspection, and connection to the POTW;
(c) payment of fines and fees outlined in this
Section; and,
(d) attorney's fees and costs.
(Ord. 2017-03, 02-01-2017)
(March 28, 2017) 8-15
CHAPTER 6. BUILDING SEWERS,
CONNECTIONS, AND REPAIRS.
8-6-1. Conformance to Utah Plumbing Code
required.
8-6-2. Application for permit.
8-6-3. Permit not to issue until sewer assessment
is paid.
8-6-4. Assessment to be in addition to fees.
8-6-5. Separate connections required.
8-6-6. Old building sewers.
8-6-7. Building sewer elevation.
8-6-8. Connection to lateral stub.
8-6-9. Installation expenses.
8-6-10. Failure to remedy defective work.
8-6-11. Revocation of permit.
8-6-12. Separation from other utilities.
8-6-13. Maintenance expense.
8-6-14. Survey stakes not to be removed.
8-6-15. Specifications for joint at point of
connection to POTW sewer.
8-6-16. Fee for replacing damaged junction pipe.
8-6-17. Lapsing of permit.
8-6-1. Conformance to Utah Plumbing Code
required.
All building sewers, connections, and repairs
shall conform to the Utah Plumbing Code as adopted.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015) (Ord. 1993-12, 09-20-
1993)
8-6-2. Application for permit.
Application for permits for sewer connections
must be made on an application blank furnished by
the POTW. Any permit issued shall be subject to the
Rules and Regulations of the POTW. The Permit
may be, in the City’s discretion, the building permit.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015) (Ord. 1993-12, 09-20-
1993)
8-6-3. Permit not to issue until sewer assessment
is paid.
(1) No permit for a sewer connection shall be
issued until the City has been paid any required
assessment or surcharge in addition to other
applicable fees.
(2) The City Engineer shall maintain a record of
the payment of the assessments and fees, together
with survey plats indicating the real property within
the POTW for which the sewer connection
assessments and fees have been paid, and these
records shall be open to public inspection during
regular hours of the POTW as allowed by law.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015) (Ord. 1993-12, 09-20-
1993)
8-6-4. Assessment to be in addition to fees.
The payment of any of the assessments or
surcharges required by the POTW shall not relieve
the owner of the payment of other fees required
herein.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015) (Ord. 1993-12, 09-20-
1993)
8-6-5. Separate connections required.
Each separate building or premise shall have a
separate connection to the POTW sewer, except when
deemed impracticable and so found in writing by the
Public works Director. Each owner will bear and pay
for the maintenance and repair of this building or
lateral sewer. Notwithstanding the above, where a
dwelling is in the rear of another building and on the
same building lot and owned by the same party, the
City may issue a sewer permit for a multiple
connection upon a showing by the building owners
that doing so will not adversely affect the public
health or the interests of any other property owner.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015) (Ord. 1993-12, 09-20-
1993)
8-6-6. Old building sewers.
Old building sewers may be used in connection
with new buildings only when they are found, on
examination and test by the POTW, to meet all
requirements herein; otherwise, a new building sewer
shall be installed and the old building sewers shall be
plugged at the user's expense upon discontinuance of
service. The plug in the old building sewer must be
approved and an inspection fee will be charged by the
POTW.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015) (Ord. 1993-12, 09-20-
1993)
8-6-7. Building sewer elevation.
In all buildings where the elevation is too low to
permit effective gravity flow to the POTW sewer,
sanitary sewage discharge from such a building shall
be lifted by a POTW approved means and discharged
to the POTW sewer. Such equipment designed to lift
the sanitary sewage to the POTW sewer shall be
operated and maintained by the user.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015) (Ord. 1993-12, 09-20-
1993)
8-6-8. Connection to lateral stub.
Where a building or lateral sewer stub exists
extending from a POTW sewer, connection thereto
may be made by a Utah licensed and bonded
contractor or plumber following application for and
the granting of a connection permit. The owner or
contractor requesting connection shall bear all
expenses associated with such connection, including
City inspections.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015) (Ord. 1993-12, 09-20-
1993)
8-6-9. Installation expenses.
All costs and expenses incidental to the
installation and connection of the building or lateral
sewer to the POTW sewer shall be borne by the user.
(March 28, 2017) 8-16
The user shall retain or employ a licensed and bonded
sewer contractor or plumber to install a building
sewer.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015) (Ord. 1993-12, 09-20-
1993)
8-6-10. Failure to remedy defective work.
No further permit shall be issued to any person
who has failed to remedy defective work to the
satisfaction of the Public Works Director after such
person has been notified in writing.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015) (Ord. 1993-12, 09-20-
1993)
8-6-11. Revocation of permit.
The Public Works Director may, at any time,
revoke a building permit because of defective work
which has not been corrected after written notice and
within the time specified therein by the Public Works
Director.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015) (Ord. 1993-12, 09-20-
1993)
8-6-12. Separation from other utilities.
All utility lines or conduits shall be separated
from the building sewer as required by State and local
law.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015) (Ord. 1993-12, 09-20-
1993)
8-6-13. Maintenance expense.
All building sewers, including the connection to
the POTW sewer, shall be maintained by the property
owner.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015) (Ord. 1993-12, 09-20-
1993)
8-6-14. Survey stakes not to be removed.
Survey stakes set for the sewer connection must
not be disturbed, removed, or covered.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015) (Ord. 1993-12, 09-20-
1993)
8-6-15. Specifications for joint at point of
connection to POTW sewer.
The connection of the "wye" onto the POTW
sewer shall be entirely surrounded with a collar of a
design specified by the POTW Construction
Standards. Connection work shall be done only by
the POTW. The trench shall not be backfilled until
the building or lateral sewer line has been connected,
tested, and approved by the POTW Inspector.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015) (Ord. 1993-12, 09-20-
1993)
8-6-16. Fee for replacing damaged junction pipe.
In case the junction pipe to the POTW sewer is
broken off or damaged, it must be replaced. The
installation of a new junction pipe will be made by
the POTW or its designee upon payment of a fee to
cover the cost of the work, unless the user, upon
approval of the POTW, performs the work. The City
may bill the user for unpaid amounts of this fee
through the City utility bill.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015) (Ord. 1993-12, 09-20-
1993)
8-6-17. Lapsing of permit.
All sewer connection permits shall lapse two
years from the date of issuance unless prior thereto
wastewater is put through the connection by the
applicant.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015) (Ord. 1993-12, 09-20-
1993)
(March 28, 2017) 8-17
CHAPTER 7. PUMP STATIONS.
8-7-1. Sewage pump station areas.
8-7-2. Withholding of approval.
8-7-3. Pump stations areas.
8-7-4. Construction of pumping stations.
8-7-5. Costs.
8-7-6. Method of payment.
8-7-7. Property of the POTW.
8-7-1. Sewage pump station areas.
Whenever any user makes application for any
permits, approvals, subdivision, zoning, or any other
actions relating to property situated in areas either within
or outside of the POTW which, when connected to the
POTW's sewer collection or disposal system, will require
the sewage to be pumped into the POTW system, the user
thereof shall be required to pay the City all of the costs of
the installation and maintenance of the required pumping
station in the manner and in the amounts provided in the
Tooele City Fee Schedule or as otherwise determined on
a time and materials basis.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015) (Ord. 1993-12, 09-20-1993)
8-7-2. Withholding of approval.
Notwithstanding the provisions of any other
ordinance or regulation of the POTW, the officers and
personnel of the POTW dealing with the applications
under Tooele City Code 8-8-1 shall withhold granting of
the requested applications pending payment, or entry by
the applicant into an agreement whereby payments will be
made, to the POTW in reimbursement for the costs of the
pumping stations as identified in Sections 8-7-3, 8-7-4,
and 8-7-5. The officers and employees of the POTW shall
not furnish sewer services to users until the agreements
are fully consummated and there has been reimbursement
and payment for all services and fees due and owing
thereunder.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015) (Ord. 1993-12, 09-20-1993)
8-7-3. Pumping station areas.
(1) The POTW may cause surveys or
engineering studies to be made for the purpose of
determining those areas either within or without the
POTW which would require the installation and operation
of pumping stations. The pumping station areas may
include areas outside of the POTW limits which might, by
annexation, become a part of the POTW or which might
require sewer services from the POTW for the purpose of
preserving the health and welfare of residents adjacent to
such areas. Nothing herein shall require the City to
provide sewage treatment outside of the City limits.
(2) Based upon such studies, the POTW
shall establish the pumping station areas and designate
their confines in such manner as to enable land owners or
users to determine whether or not they fall within the
areas requiring sewage pumping stations.
(3) Including pumping station areas located
outside the City limits in such studies shall not entitle
those areas to sewer treatment by the POTW and shall not
be interpreted to indicate the City's desire to annex such
areas or to take any other action.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015) (Ord. 1993-12, 09-20-1993)
8-7-4. Construction of pumping stations.
(1) The POTW may require the installation
of a pumping station in conjunction with developments
within the designated area or a portion thereof which will
require the construction of a sewage pumping station.
(2) The construction of the pumping
stations shall be of such size as the POTW may determine
will be necessary to provide pumping to the entirety of a
development project, including all phases, even though
pending applications before it involve only a portion of a
development project. All pump stations shall be planned,
designed, and constructed in accordance with applicable
State and local laws.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015) (Ord. 1993-12, 09-20-1993)
8-7-5. Costs.
(1) The costs of construction for pumping
stations shall include costs of land acquisition, easements,
legal services, direct labor and materials, costs of direct
supervision, and engineering services, plus an amount
equal to 10% of all of the foregoing costs for
administrative services by the POTW.
(2) The costs of construction shall be
allocated among the land owners and/or users of the
sewage pumping service area in the same proportion that
the total of each land owner's area bears to the total area
of land situated within the pumping service area.
(3) The foregoing method of allocation of
costs may be varied by action of the POTW when, in its
judgment, it finds that unusual topography or other
physical circumstances or the contemplated use or uses
require a different method of allocating costs. If the
pumping station is constructed prior to the filing of an
application by a land owner or user, the costs of
construction will be the actual costs expended. If the City
constructs the pumping station, the City may assess pro
rata costs for developments utilizing the pumping station
capacity plus a reasonable administrative cost of 10%.
(4) If the pumping station has been
constructed at the time the application is filed, then costs
shall be the costs estimated by the City Engineer or which
may be computed based upon contracts let to contractors
or subcontractors to perform the construction. The
estimated costs shall be used as the basis for establishing
the amount of any payments required in advance until
such time as construction is completed and actual costs
are determined, at which time the costs shall be
recomputed and allocated based upon the actual costs.
(5) Costs of operation and maintenance
shall be allocated among the users of the sewage pumping
service area.
(March 28, 2017) 8-18
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015) (Ord. 1993-12, 09-20-1993)
8-7-6. Method of payment.
At the time an application is made to the POTW,
the City shall require the applicant to enter into an
agreement with the City whereby the applicant will pay
his share of the sewage pumping station construction costs
at such time or times fixed by the City. The agreement
may require the applicant to pay a lump sum in cash or the
City may specify a payment schedule as may be
determined will best fit the needs of the City. The
agreement shall provide, in the event the applicant fails to
make the payments, as provided, the City may refuse to
provide services until such time as payments have been
made.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015) (Ord. 1993-12, 09-20-1993)
8-7-7. Property of POTW.
Regardless of the manner in which construction
of the sewer pumping station has been achieved, whether
by direct action upon the part of the POTW or by action
of any applicant, the pumping station shall be deemed the
property of the POTW. All maintenance after acceptance
shall be performed by the POTW or its designee.
Ownership of the pumping station shall be conveyed to
the City by deed and/or bill of sale, as applicable.
Pumping stations required by the City to remain under
private ownership shall remain privately owned, operated,
and maintained.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015) (Ord. 1993-12, 09-20-1993)
(April 3, 2017) 8-19
CHAPTER 8. SUBDIVISION.
8-8-1. Approval required before recordation.
8-8-2. Mobile park and subdivision connections
allowed.
8-8-3. Mobile home compliance required.
8-8-1. Approval required before recordation.
All persons, contractors, builders, operators,
subdividers and developers shall conform with this
ordinance and shall apply to the POTW office for
written approval of any proposed sewage collection
facilities for their mobile home parks, subdivisions, or
other developments prior to recordation of their plats
with the county recorder, and shall pay all required fees
in a timely manner.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015) (Ord. 93-12, 09-20-93)
8-8-2. Mobile park and subdivision connections
allowed.
Any mobile home park or subdivision hereafter
constructed having a sewage system and appurtenant
facilities acceptable to the POTW within the mobile
home park or subdivision, as the case may be, may, at
the user's sole expense upon payment of all required
fees and subject to any written extension or
reimbursement agreements which may be hereafter
executed with the POTW, connect such sewage system
and facilities directly with an existing POTW sewer at a
location designated by the POTW and (Ord. 2015-17,
June 3, 2015) under the POTW's direction. (Ord. 93-12,
09-20-93)
8-8-3. Mobile home compliance required.
All sewage collection systems and appurtenant
facilities for mobile home parks and subdivisions shall
be designed, constructed, and maintained in strict
accordance with all applicable provisions of the Rules
and Regulations adopted or amended.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015)
(April 3, 2017) 8-20
CHAPTER 9. POTW SEWER
CONSTRUCTION.
8-9-1. Sewer extension agreement.
8-9-2. Design and construction.
8-9-3. Construction.
8-9-4. Excavation safeguards for public.
8-9-5. Maintenance expense.
8-9-6. Inspection and approval.
8-9-1. Sewer extension agreement.
Any sewer extension shall be governed by an
extension agreement between the POTW and the
developer covering the requirements of this Title.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015) (Ord. 1993-12,
09-20-1993)
8-9-2. Design and construction.
The size, slope alignment, and materials of
construction of a POTW sewer, and the methods to be
used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing,
and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the
requirements set forth in the "Code of Waste Disposal
Regulations" adopted by the Utah State Board of
Health, the extension agreement, and other specific
requirements as set forth by the POTW.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015) (Ord. 1993-12,
09-20-1993)
8-9-3. Construction.
The actual construction of the POTW sewer
shall be conducted by a bonded sewer contractor
licensed in the State of Utah. Prior to construction, the
contractor must be approved by the POTW.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015) (Ord. 1993-12,
09-20-1993)
8-9-4. Excavation safeguards for public.
All excavations for POTW sewer installation
shall be adequately guarded by the contractor with
barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazards. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public
property disturbed in the course of the work shall be
restored by the contractor in a manner satisfactory to the
POTW.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015) (Ord. 1993-12,
09-20-1993)
8-9-5. Maintenance expense.
All POTW sewers in dedicated right-of-ways
shall be maintained by the POTW.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015) (Ord. 1993-12,
09-20-1993)
8-9-6. Inspection and approval.
All phases of the POTW sewer construction
shall be inspected and approved by the POTW. Failure
to obtain the necessary permits, inspections, and
approvals will result in the work being redone. All work
shall be completed in accordance with the construction,
testing, and acceptance standards of the POTW.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015) (Ord. 1993-12,
09-20-1993)
(April 3, 2017) 8-21
CHAPTER 10. FEES AND CHARGES.
8-10-1. Purpose.
8-10-2. Fees and charges.
8-10-3. Collection procedures.
8-10-1. Purpose.
Each user shall pay all fees and charges required by
the POTW. Surcharges, where applicable, will be
imposed. It is the purpose of this Chapter to provide for
the payment of all POTW maintenance and operation cost
from the users. The total annual cost of operation and
maintenance shall include labor, repairs, equipment
replacement, maintenance, necessary modifications,
power, sampling, laboratory tests, debt service and
reserves, and a reasonable contingency fund. The charges
will be based upon the quality and quantity of user's
wastewater, and also upon the POTW's capital and
operating costs to intercept, treat, and dispose of
wastewater. The applicable charges shall be set forth in
the Tooele City Fee Schedule. The charges shall be
adjusted from time to time to equitably apportion such
costs, including energy costs, among the users of the
POTW.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015) (Ord. 1997-16, 04-02-1997)
(Ord. 1993-12, 09-20-1993)
8-10-2. Fees and charges.
(1) Users of the POTW may be divided into various
classifications, including single dwelling units, duplexes,
multiple dwelling units, and nonresidential. Further
classifications may be established by the POTW for each
nonresidential user class or otherwise.
(2) The POTW may adopt fees which may include,
but are not to be limited to, the following fees for:
(a) POTW costs, including maintenance and
operation;
(b) reimbursement of costs of setting up and
operating the POTW's Pretreatment Program;
(c) monitoring, inspections and surveillance
procedures, to include but not be limited to laboratory
analysis;
(d) reviewing accidental discharge procedures
and construction;
(e) processing permit applications and issuing
industrial discharge permits;
(f) filing appeals;
(g) processing requests for the consistent
removal by the POTW of pollutants otherwise subject to
Federal Pretreatment Standards;
(h) connection to the sewer system;
(i) repairs and disconnection;
(j) inspections related to private sewer
connections to the POTW;
(k) development and expansion; and,
(l) other fees as the POTW may deem
necessary to carry out the requirements of this regulation.
(3) Sewer charges shall be established by Resolution
of the City Council.
(4) Metering of sewer lines will be allowed when the
user elects to have the sewage flow metered subject to the
following requirements:
(a) The charges for sewer service will be based
upon the actual sewer meter readings rather than upon the
average of the winter readings; and
(b) The user will furnish, install, and maintain
at user's expense a meter pursuant to the City's standards
and specifications.
(5) The City may provide for adjustments as needed
to ensure equitable sewer charges. Such adjustments may
be made where excessive quantities of culinary water pass
through the water meter, but are consumed on the
premises and do not enter the sewer system. In each such
instance, the user will have the burden of providing
evidence of such inequities by showing that the quantity
of water not entering the sewer, but passing through the
meter, exceeds 20% of the total flow in order to merit
such consideration by the City.
(6) The City may make adjustments under the
following conditions due to faulty inside plumbing:
(a) When defective plumbing has caused the
average winter water consumption to exceed the previous
year's average by 25% or more, there may be an
adjustment made on a pro rata basis. The customer must
provide to the City evidence of the plumbing repairs and
the period of time the problem existed, with a plumber's
invoice for repairs completed including the dates of final
repair.
(b) When the repairs are accomplished by the
customer rather than by a plumber, dated receipts for
supplies purchased to make the repairs must be submitted
together with a letter to the City.
(c) When neither a plumber's invoice nor a
receipt for supplies is available, the customer must
provide a notarized affidavit in letter form, outlining the
repairs made, who made them and when they were
completed. If the metered water consumption shows a
significant reduction after the repairs, and is comparable
to the usage for the same time of the two preceding years,
an adjustment may be made.
(d) All adjustments will be determined by the
sewer charge of the preceding year. When the charge for
the preceding year is not established on a winter average,
a minimum of ten units shall be charged.
(e) All adjustments shall be made at the
discretion of the Public Works Director upon a written
finding consistent with this Chapter.
(7) Where connections involve a POTW sewer
installed at the City's expense without assessment to the
property, an additional charge representing the user's
assessment shall be charged at the time of connection
based upon the property owner's frontage.
(8) Where the POTW provides culinary water, the
(April 3, 2017) 8-22
wastewater treatment charges may be combined for billing
purposes with charges for water services rendered.
(9) In the event POTW service to any building or
premises in the POTW is shut off, a fee to be set by the
POTW shall be charged for restoring sewer service.
(10) When a user's discharge causes an
obstruction or damage, or because of the nature of the
discharge, toxic pollutants increase the costs for managing
the effluent or the sludge of the POTW, the user shall pay
for the costs of removing the obstruction and repairing the
damage.
(11) The POTW shall review, as often as
deemed necessary by the Public Works Director or
Finance Director, the total cost of operation and
maintenance, as well as each user's discharge, and will
revise charges as necessary to assure equity and sufficient
funds to adequately operate and maintain the POTW,
which operation and maintenance cost includes debt
service and reserves. If a significant industrial user has
completed in-plant modifications which would
significantly change that user's discharge, the user can
present to the Public works Director such factual
information, and the POTW shall determine if the user's
charge is to be changed. (Ord. 97-16, 04-02-97)
(12) Each user will be notified, at least annually,
in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that
portion of the user charges which are attributable to
wastewater treatment services.
(13) Surcharges.
(a) All users discharging sewage into the POTW
shall be subject to a surcharge, in addition to other sewer
service charges, if these wastes have a concentration
greater than the following normal domestic strength
wastewater:
(i) BOD of 200 mg/L; or
(ii) TSS of 250 mg/L.
(b) The computation of the sewage surcharge
shall be determined by the following formulae:
SC = VS x 8.34(RBOD(BOD-200)) and SC = VS x
8.34(RSS(TSS-250))
(c) The components of the formulae given in
Subsection (2)(b) shall have the following meanings:
(i) SC means surcharge in dollars.
(ii) VS means volume of sewage in millions
of gallons for the billing period.
(iii) 8.34 is the conversion factor to convert
BOD and TSS from mg/L to pounds.
(iv) RBOD means the unit charge for BOD
in dollars per pound.
(v) RSS means the unit charge for TSS in
dollars per pound.
(d) The rates of the industrial waste surcharge
for each of the following constituents shall be as
contained in the Tooele City Fee Schedule.
(14) Users may discharge septic and holding tank
waste into the POTW only upon approval of the Public
works Directorr. Users who discharge septic and holding
tank waste into the POTW shall pay fees contained in the
Tooele City Fee Schedule
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015) (Ord. 1994-05, 01-01-1994)
(Ord. 1993-12, 09-20-1993)
8-10-3. Collection procedures.
(1) All fees and charges made for sewer services
shall be chargeable against and payable by the persons
making application for such services.
(2) The City shall cause billings for wastewater
treatment charges, and/or water, to be rendered
periodically at rates established in the Tooele City Fee
Schedule.
(3) Fees and charges levied in accordance with this
chapter shall be a debt due to the City. If this debt is not
paid within 30 days after billing, it shall, at the City's
option, be deemed delinquent and subject to penalties and
may be recovered by civil action, and the City shall have
the right to terminate sewer and/or water service and enter
upon private property for accomplishing such purposes.
(4) The City shall receive and collect the sewer fees
and charges levied under the provision of this Chapter. In
the event of partial payment, the City may apply the
payment to any sums due for water and/or sewer fees or
charges.
(5) Sewer service shall not be restored until all
charges, including the expense of termination and
restoration of service, shall have been paid.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015) (Ord. 1993-12, 09-20-1993)
(April 3, 2017) 8-23
CHAPTER 11. INDUSTRIAL PRETREAT-MENT
PROGRAM
8-11-1. Definitions and Abbreviations.
8-11-2. Applicability, Objectives, and Responsibility
of the City.
8-11-3. Wastewater Discharge Prohibitions and
Limitations.
8-11-4. National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards.
8-11-5. Pretreatment and Monitoring Facilities.
8-11-6. Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permits.
8-11-7. Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit
Conditions.
8-11-8. Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit
Modification.
8-11-9. Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit
Revocation.
8-11-10. Special Agreements and Contracts.
8-11-11. Recordkeeping.
8-11-12. Confidentiality Information.
8-11-13. Sample Collection and Analytical
Methods.
8-11-14. Right of Entry.
8-11-15. Reporting and Notification
Requirements.
8-11-16. Sector Control Programs.
8-11-17. Compliance and Enforcement.
8-11-18. Remedies Nonexclusive.
8-11-19. Regulation of Industrial Users from
Outside Jurisdictions.
8-11-20. Affirmative Defense – Prohibited Discharge
Standards.
8-11-21. Severability.
8-11-1. Definitions and Abbreviations.
(1) Definitions. In addition to definitions in Section
8-5-3 of the Toole City Code, the following words, terms,
and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the
meanings ascribed to except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
“Act” or “the Act” means the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as
amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.
“Approval Authority” means the Executive Director
of the Utah Department of Environmental Quality or their
authorized representative.
“Authorized Representative” or “Duly Authorized
Representative” of the Industrial User.
(a) If the Industrial User is a corporation:
(i) The president, secretary, treasurer, or a
vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal
business function, or any other person who performs
similar policy or decision making functions for the
corporation; or,
(ii) The manager of one or more
manufacturing, production, or operating facilities,
provided the manager is authorized to make management
decisions which govern the operation of the regulated
facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of
making major capital investment recommendations, and
initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure
long-term environmental compliance with environmental
laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary
systems are established or actions taken to gather
complete and accurate information for Industrial
Wastewater Discharge Permit requirements; and, where
authority to sign documents has been assigned or
delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate
procedures.
(b) If the user is a partnership or sole
proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor,
respectively.
(c) If the user is a limited liability company, the
principle or managing member or other duly authorized
member of the limited liability company.
(d) If the user is a federal, state, or local
government facility: A District or highest official
appointed or designated to oversee the operation and
performance of the activities of the governmental facility,
or their designee.
(e) The individuals described in paragraphs (a)
through (c), above, may designate another authorized
representative if the authorization is made in writing, the
authorization specifies the individual or a position
responsible for the overall operation of the facility from
which the discharge originates or having overall
responsibility for environmental matters for the company,
and the written authorization is submitted to the City.
“Best Management Practices” or “BMPs” means
schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices,
maintenance procedures, and other management practices
to implement the General and Specific Prohibitions listed
in Section 8-11-3 of this Chapter. BMPs may also
include, but are not limited to, treatment requirements,
operating procedures, and practices to control plant site
runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal or
drainage from raw material storage. BMPs shall be
considered Pretreatment Standards for the purposes of this
Chapter and UAC R317-8-8.5(7).
“Bypass” is the intentional diversion of wastestreams
from any portion of an Industrial User’s treatment facility
pursuant to UAC R317-8.8.15, and is hereby incorporated
by this reference.
“Categorical Industrial User” means an industrial user
who is subject to a Categorical Pretreatment Standard.
“Categorical Pretreatment Standard” or “Categorical
Standard” refers to any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with
Section 307 (b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. §1317) as
amended, which apply to a specific category of industrial
users and that appear in 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N,
Parts 405-471.
(April 3, 2017) 8-24
“City” means Tooele City.
“Composite sample” is a representative flowproportioned
sample generally collected within a twentyfour
(24) hour period and combined according to flow.
Time-proportional sampling may be approved or used by
the City where time-proportional samples are believed
representative of the discharge.
“Cooling water” means:
(a) Contact: Water used for cooling purposes
which comes in contact with any raw material,
intermediate product, waste product, or finished product.
(b) Noncontact: Water used for cooling
purposes which does not come in contact with any raw
material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished
product, and the only pollutant added is heat.
“Daily Maximum Discharge Limit” is the maximum
allowable concentration of a pollutant(s) that may be
discharged during a twenty-four (24) hour period or as
specified in an Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit.
Where daily maximum limitations are expressed in units
of mass, the discharge is the total mass discharged over
the sampling period.
“Director” means the Director of Community
Development/Public works who is designated by the City
to supervise the operation of the Publicly Owned
Treatment Works and who is charged with certain duties
and responsibilities under this Chapter, or their duly
authorized representative.
“Existing source” means any Indirect Discharge that
is not a New Source.
“Fats, Oils, and Grease’ or ”FOG” means nonpetroleum
organic polar compounds derived from animal
or plant sources such as fats, non-hydrocarbons, fatty
acids, soaps, waxes, and oils that contain multiple carbon
chain triglyceride molecules. These substances are
detectable and measurable using the approved method for
Hexane Extractable Materials in the analytical procedures
established in 40 CFR Part 136.
“Grab sample’ means a sample which is taken from
a wastestream on a one-time basis with no regard to the
flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to
exceed fifteen (15) minutes.
“Hazardous waste” is any waste designated as
hazardous under the provisions of UAC R315-2.
“Holding tank waste” refers to any wastewater from
holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers,
trailers, septic tanks, sealed vaults, and vacuum-pump
tank trucks.
“Indirect Discharge” means the discharge or the
introduction of nondomestic pollutants into the POTW
from any source regulated under Section 307(b), (c) or (d)
of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317), including holding tank waste
from a non-domestic user discharged into the POTW.
“Industrial User” means a source of Indirect
Discharge, a user that has the potential to discharge nondomestic
wastewater to the POTW or an industrial user
that has a sewer connection for domestic wastewater
discharge only.
“Industrial” or “non-domestic” wastes means the
liquid or solid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade or business activities producing nondomestic
or non-residential sewage as distinct from
domestic wastewater.
“Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit” means and
shall refer to a permit issued by the City to an Industrial
User that allows, limits and/or prohibits the discharge of
pollutants or flow to the POTW as set forth in this
Chapter.
“Instantaneous Discharge Limit” means the maximum
or minimum concentration or measurement for a pollutant
or pollutant property allowed to be discharged at any time
for any length of time and is determined by use of a grab
sample or a direct measurement.
“Interference” means a discharge which, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other
sources, both
(a) Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment
processes or operations or its sludge processes, use, or
disposal, and
(b) Therefore is a cause of a violation of the
City's UPDES permit (including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention
of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any
of the following statutory or regulatory provisions or
permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or
local regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste
Disposal Act (SWDA), including Title II commonly
referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state
sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D
of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the
Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection,
Research, and Sanctuaries Act.
“Local Limits” are any regulation containing
pollution discharge limits promulgated by the City in
accordance with UAC R317-8-8.5(4) and (5), which are
deemed to be Pretreatment Standards and contained in
Section 8-11-3(3) of this Chapter.
“Medical waste” means isolation wastes, infectious
agents, human blood and blood products, pathological
wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical
wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes,
pharmaceutical residues, and dialysis wastes.
“New Source” means
(a) Any building, structure, facility, or
installation from which there is or may be a Discharge of
pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the
publication of proposed Pretreatment Standards under
Section 307 (c) of the Act which will be applicable to
such source if such Standards are thereafter promulgated
in accordance with that section, provided that:
(i) The building, structure, facility, or
(April 3, 2017) 8-25
installation is constructed at a site at which no other
source is located; or
(ii) The building, structure, facility, or
installation totally replaces the process or production
equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an
existing source; or
(iii) The production or wastewater
generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or
installation are substantially independent of an existing
source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to
which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant,
and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the
same general type of activity as the existing source should
be considered.
(b) Construction on a site at which an existing
source is located results in a modification rather than a
New Source if the construction does not create a new
building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the
criteria of paragraphs (a)(ii) or (a)(iii) of this definition
but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process
or production equipment.
(c) Construction of a New Source as defined
under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or
operator has:
(i) Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a
continuous onsite construction program:
1. Any placement, assembly, or
installation, of facilities or equipment; or
2. Significant site preparation
work including clearing, excavation, or removal of
existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is
necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of
new source facilities or equipment; or
(ii) Entered into a binding contractual
obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment
which are intended to be used in its operation within a
reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which
can be terminated or modified without substantial loss,
and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design
studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under
this paragraph.
“Pass Through” means a discharge which exits the
POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or
concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of
a violation of any requirement of the City’s UPDES
permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration
of a violation).
“pH” means the intensity of acid or base condition of
the solution expressed as the logarithm (base 10) of the
reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions
expressed in moles per liter of solution and reported as
Standard Units (SU).
“Pollutant” means any dredged spoil, solid waste,
incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage,
sewage sludge, explosives, munitions, medical waste,
chemical wastes, corrosive substance, biological material,
biological nutrient, toxic substance, radioactive materials,
heat, malodorous substance, wrecked or discharged
equipment, rock, sand, slurry, cellar dirt, untreatable
waste, or industrial, domestic, or agricultural wastes and
certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g. pH,
temperature, TSS turbidity, color, BOD5, COD, toxicity
or odor) discharged into or with water.
“Pretreatment” means the reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of
the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less
harmful state prior to, or in lieu of, discharging or
otherwise introducing such pollutants into the POTW.
The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical
process, biological process, or by other process or means,
except as prohibited by 40 CFR Section 403.6(b).
Appropriate pretreatment technology includes control
equipment, such as equalization tanks or facilities, for
protection against surges or slug loadings that might
interfere with or otherwise be incompatible with the
POTW. However, where wastewater from a regulated
process is mixed in an equalization facility with
unregulated wastewater or with wastewater from another
regulated process, the effluent from the equalization
facility must meet an adjusted pretreatment limit
calculated in accordance with 40 CFR Section 403.6(e).
“Pretreatment Requirement” means any substantive
or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other
than a Pretreatment Standard, imposed on an Industrial
User.
“Pretreatment Standard”, “National Pretreatment
Standard” or “Standard” means any regulation containing
pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA, in
accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act, which
applies to industrial users. This term includes prohibitive
discharge limits, local limits and Best Management
Practices that are established by the City and pursuant to
UAC R317-8-8.5. In cases of differing Standards, the
more stringent shall apply.
“Sector Control Program” is a program designed to
control specific pollutants from industrial users with
similar operations, waste generation or treatment through
the implementation of Pretreatment Standards and
Requirements, including Best Management Practices.
These Sector Control Program requirements may be found
in Section 8-11-16 of this Chapter.
“Significant Industrial User” or “SIU” means:
(a) A Categorical Industrial User;
(b) An Industrial User that:
(i) Discharges greater than five percent
(5%) or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or
organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant;
(ii) Discharges more than an average of
twenty-five thousand gallons per day (25,000 gpd) of
process wastewater to the POTW (excluding noncontact
(April 3, 2017) 8-26
cooling, sanitary, and boiler blow down); or
(iii) Is designated as such by the Director on
the basis that the Industrial User has a reasonable
potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or
for violating any Pretreatment Standard or Requirement.
(c) The City, at its sole discretion, may
determine that an Industrial User subject to Categorical
Pretreatment Standards is a Non-Significant Categorical
Industrial User rather than a Significant Industrial User on
a finding that the Industrial User never discharges more
than one hundred gallons per day (100 gpd) of total
wastewater subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards
(excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler
blowdown wastewater, unless specifically included in the
Pretreatment Standard) and the following conditions are
met;
(i) The Industrial User, prior to the City’s
finding, has consistently complied with all applicable
Categorical Pretreatment Standards and Requirements;
(ii) The Industrial User annually submits
the certification statement as found in 40 CFR 403.12(g),
together with any additional information necessary to
support the certification statement; and
(iii) The Industrial User never discharges
any untreated concentrated wastewater.
(d) Upon a written finding by the Director that
an Industrial User meeting the criteria in paragraph (b) of
this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely
affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any
Pretreatment Standards or Requirement, the Director may
at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a
petition received from an Industrial User and in
accordance with UAC R317-8-8.8(6)(b)12, determine that
such Industrial User is not a Significant Industrial User.
“Slug Discharge” or “Slug Load” means any
discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could
cause a violation of the General or Specific Prohibitions
in Section 8-11-3. A Slug Discharge is any discharge of
a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited
to an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge,
or a discharge which exceeds the hydraulic or other design
of an Industrial User’s treatment system or any part of the
treatment unit, including a discharge which has a
reasonable potential to cause Interference or Pass Through
or in any other way violates an applicable Pretreatment
Standard or Requirement or an Industrial Wastewater
Discharge Permit issued by the City.
“Standard Industrial Classification” or “SIC” code
means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of
the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972,
as amended.
“Toxic pollutant” means any pollutant or combination
of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by
the Administrator of the EPA under Section 307(a) of the
Act or as otherwise listed in 40 CFR Part 122, Appendix
D.
“Upset” means an exceptional incident in which there
is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with
Categorical Pretreatment Standards because of factors
beyond the reasonable control of the Industrial User
pursuant to UAC R317-8-8-8.14, and is herein
incorporated by this reference.
(2) Abbreviations. The following abbreviations
shall have the designated meanings:
BMP Best Management Practice
BMR Baseline Monitoring Report
BOD5 Biochemical Oxygen Demand
ºC degrees Celsius
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
CIU Categorical Industrial User
COD Chemical Oxygen Demand
CWA Clean Water Act
EPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
°F F ahrenheit
FOG Fats, Oils and Grease
gpd gallons per day
gpm gallons per minute
GGI Gravity Grease Interceptor
HEM Hexane Extractable Material
HMGI Hydromechanical Grease Interceptor
IU Industrial User
mgd million gallons per day
mg/L milligrams per Liter
O&M Operation and Maintenance
POTW Publicly Owned Treatment Works
SIC Standard Industrial Classification
SIU Significant Industrial User
SNC Significant Noncompliance
§ Section
TSS Total Suspended Solids
UAC Utah Administrative Code
UPDES Utah Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
U.S.C. United States Code
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015)
8-11-2. Applicability, Objectives, and Responsibi-lity
of the City.
(1) Applicability. This Chapter sets forth uniform
requirements for all Industrial Users that discharge into
the Publicly-Owned Treatment Works (POTW) and
enables the City to comply with all applicable State and
federal laws including the Clean Water Act (33 United
States Code (U.S.C.) Section 1251 et seq.), the State of
Utah Pretreatment Regulations (UAC R317-8-8) and the
General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New
Sources of Pollution (40 CFR Part 403).
(2) Objectives. The objectives of this Chapter are
to:
(April 3, 2017) 8-27
(a) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into
the POTW which will interfere with the operation of the
POTW or contaminate the resulting sludge;
(b) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into
the POTW which will pass through the wastewater
facilities, inadequately treated, into the receiving waters
or the atmosphere, or otherwise be incompatible with the
POTW;
(c) Provide for and promote the general health,
safety, and welfare of both the general public and the
POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and
sludge in the course of their employment;
(d) Improve the opportunity to recycle and
reclaim wastewater and sludge from the POTW;
(e) Provide for fees for the equitable
distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and
improvement of the POTW; and,
(f) Enable the City to comply with its Utah
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit
conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any
other federal or state laws or regulations to which the
POTW is subject.
(3) Industrial Users. No industria l use r
shall discharge non-domestic wastewater to the POTW
unless done in compliance with the provisions of this
Chapter.
(4) Owner/Tenant Responsibility. Where an owner
of property leases a premises to a person as a tenant under
any rental or lease agreement, if either the owner or the
tenant is an Industrial User at the premises, both are
jointly and severally responsible for compliance with the
provisions of this Chapter.
(5) Authority of Director. Except as otherwise
provided, the Director shall administer, implement, and
enforce the provisions of this Chapter. Any powers
granted to or duties imposed upon the Director may be
delegated by the Director to other City personnel.
(6) Notification to Industrial Users. The Director
shall attempt to notify in writing any Industrial User
whom the City has reason to believe is subject to a
National Categorical Pretreatment Standard or
Requirement, or other applicable requirements
promulgated by the EPA under the provisions of Section
204(b) or 405 of the Act, or under the provisions of
sections 3001, 3004, or 4004 of the Solid Waste Disposal
Act. Failure of the City to so notify industrial users shall
not relieve said industrial users from the responsibility of
complying with applicable requirements. It is the
responsibility of Significant Industrial Users to apply for
and receive a permit prior to discharge, whether or not the
Industrial User has been identified and formally requested
to do so.
(7) Discharge by Industrial Users. If wastewaters
containing any pollutant, including excess flow, or as
otherwise defined in this Chapter, are discharged, have the
potential to discharge in the opinion of the Director, or are
proposed to be discharged to the POTW, the Director may
take any action necessary to:
(a) prohibit the discharge of such wastewater;
(b) require an Industrial User to demonstrate
that in-plant facility modifications will reduce or eliminate
the discharge of such substances in conformity with this
Chapter;
(c) require treatment, including storage facilities
or flow equalization, necessary to reduce or eliminate the
potential for a discharge to violate this Chapter;
(d) require the Industrial User making, causing,
or allowing the discharge to pay any additional cost or
expense incurred by the City for handling, treatment,
disposal, or remediation costs as a result of wastes
discharged to the wastewater treatment system;
(e) require the Industrial User to apply for and
obtain a permit, including a zero discharge permit;
(f) require timely and factual reports from the
Industrial User; and/or,
(g) take such other action as may be necessary
to meet the objectives of this Chapter.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015)
8-11-3. Wastewater Discharge Prohibitions and
Limitations.
(1) General Prohibitions. No Industrial User shall
contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or
indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which causes Pass
Through or Interference. These General Prohibitions and
the Specific Prohibitions in paragraph (2) apply to all
industrial users of the POTW whether or not the industrial
users are subject to other Pretreatment Standards or
Requirements.
(2) Specific Prohibitions. No Industrial User
shall contribute the following pollutants into the POTW:
(a) Any liquids, solids, or gases which, by
reason of their nature or quantity, are or may be sufficient,
either alone or by interaction with other substances, to
cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to
the wastewater facilities, including, but not limited to,
wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than
sixty degrees Celsius (60°C) or one hundred forty degrees
Fahrenheit (140°F) using the test methods specified in
UAC R315-2-1. The Director may require industrial
users with the potential to discharge flammable,
combustible, or explosive substances to install and
maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter or
explosion hazard meter. No two successive readings on
an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge shall
be more than five percent (5%), nor any one reading more
than ten percent (10%), of the Lower Explosive Limit
(LEL) of the meter;
(b) Solid or viscous substances which may cause
obstruction to the flow in the POTW resulting in
Interference;
(c) Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or
(April 3, 2017) 8-28
higher than 12.0, or wastewater having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard
to structures, equipment, or personnel of the wastewater
facilities;
(d) Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding
pollutants (BOD5, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow
rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause
Interference with the POTW;
(e) Heat in amounts which will inhibit
biological activity in the POTW resulting in Interference,
but in no case heat in such quantities that the temperature
at the POTW Treatment Plant exceeds 40 degrees (40°)
Celsius or one-hundred and four degrees (104°)
Fahrenheit unless EPA, upon request of the POTW,
approves alternate temperature limits;
(f) Any petroleum oil, non-biodegradable
cutting oil, or products of any mineral origin in amounts
that will cause Pass Through or Interference;
(g) Pollutants which result in the presence of
toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a
quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety
problems or pollutants which singly or cumulatively or by
interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a
public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to
prevent or interfere with entry into the sewers for their
maintenance and repair;
(h) Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at
discharge points designated by the Director;
(i) Stormwater drainage from ground resulting
in Infiltration and Inflow (I&I) through the Industrial
User’s service line(s) or surface, roof drains, catch basins,
unroofed area drains (e.g. commercial car washing
facilities), or any other source unless otherwise approved
by the Director. Specifically prohibited is the connection
of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway
drains, or other sources of surface runoff or ground water
to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to the POTW. No
Industrial User shall connect or discharge water from
underground drains, sump pump discharges, natural
springs and seeps, water accumulated in excavation or
grading, or any other water associated with construction
activities to the POTW;
(j) Any substance which may cause the
wastewater facilities' effluent, or any other product of the
wastewater facilities, such as residues, sludges, or scums,
to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere
with the reclamation process;
(k) Any substance which will cause the City to
violate its UPDES permit or applicable Water Quality
Standards;
(l) Any wastewater with objectionable color not
removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited
to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions;
(m) A Slug Discharge;
(n) Any wastewater containing any radioactive
wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as
may exceed limits established by the Director or other
regulations set forth by the State of Utah or that violates
any applicable state or federal regulations;
(o) Bulk, expired, outdated, or concentrated
prescription or non-prescription drugs;
(p) Wastewater or pollutants discharged directly
into a manhole or other opening to the POTW unless
specifically authorized by the Director or as otherwise
permitted under this Chapter. Prohibited is the opening of
a manhole or discharging into any opening in violation of
this Chapter;
(q) No chemicals, materials, or substances,
including but not limited to, paints, solvents, boiler or
water treatment chemicals, sludges, chemicals, or wastes
shall be stored in proximity to a floor drain or other sewer
openings unless secondary containment is provided or
there are physical barriers to entry to the wastewater
collection system. The storage of any chemicals,
materials, substances, or wastes that leak or have potential
to leak or discharge into the wastewater collection system
which may create an explosion hazard or in any way have
a deleterious effect to the POTW or constitute a nuisance
or a hazard to POTW personnel, the general public, the
environment, or the receiving stream shall be prohibited;
(r) Wastewater contaminated as a result of
discharge from aboveground and/or underground
gasoline, diesel fuels, fuel oil, kerosene, and jet fuel tanks,
tank accessories, and/or pipelines without applying for
and obtaining a permit prior to discharge;
(s) Liquid wastes from chemical toilets, trailers,
campers, or other recreational vehicles which have been
collected and/or held in tanks or other containers shall not
be discharged into the POTW except at locations
authorized by the City to collect such wastes;
(t) Sludges, screenings, or other residues from
the treatment of industrial wastes;
(u) Medical wastes that cause or contribute to
Pass Through or Interference;
(v) Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction
with other sources, the POTW effluent to fail a Whole
Effluent Toxicity (WET) test;
(w) Detergents, surfactants, and other surfaceactive
agents, or other substances which may cause
excessive foaming in the POTW or cause or contribute to
Pass Through or Interference;
(x) Discharge of Nonylphenol from the use of
bulk or concentrated Nonylphenol containing detergents
as employed by some industrial or commercial laundries,
car washes, or asphalt manufacturers or other industrial
users;
(y) Wastewater which contains grease or oil or
any other substances that will solidify or become
discernibly viscous at temperatures between thirty-two
degrees (32°) Fahrenheit (0° Celsius) and one hundred
fifty degrees (150°) Fahrenheit (65.5° Celsius);
(April 3, 2017) 8-29
(z) Wastewater containing free or floating oil
and grease, or any discharge containing animal fat or
grease by-product in excess of two hundred milligrams
per liter (200 mg/L). In lieu of this limit, a food service
establishment may install and properly operate and
maintain a Gravity Grease Interceptor, implement all
required BMPs, and does not violate a General or Specific
Prohibition pursuant to the Sector Control Program in
Section 8-11-16(2);
(aa) Wastewater generated as a result of
wastes pumped from gravity grease interceptors,
hydromechanical grease interceptors, grease traps, sandoil
separators, or other storage tanks or treatment units
back into the POTW, either directly or indirectly, without
approval of the Director;
(ab) Discharge of any wastewater containing
p e r ch lo r o e thylene (PCE) (also known as
Tetrachloroethene and Tetrachloroethylene) from any
industrial user involved in the dry cleaning business;
(ac) Any pollutant or wastewater containing
pollutants with UV (254 nm) absorbing substances which
causes interference with UV disinfection at the treatment
plant; or,
(ad) Any pesticides, herbicides or fungicides
that cause or contribute to Pass Through, Interference, or
other problems at the treatment works or in the receiving
waters. In no case, shall an Industrial User discharge
wastewater that is generated from the rinsing of any
container that contains or contained any concentrated or
formulated pesticide, herbicide, or fungicide.
(3) Specific Discharge Limitations.
(a) No Significant Industrial User shall
discharge or cause to be discharged wastewater that
exceeds the following limits:
Pollutant 1 Daily Maximum Discharge
Limit (mg/L)
Arsenic 0.12
Cadmium 0.14
Chromium 8.74
Copper 2.55
Lead 0.89
Mercury 0.046
Molybdenum 0.60
Nickel 2.32
Selenium 0.43
Zinc 9.48
5 - D a y
B i o c h e m i c a l
Oxygen Demand
(BOD5), lbs/day
2,3 2628
Total Suspended
Solids (TSS) ,
lbs/day 2,3 2744
Notes to Table.
1. All Pollutants shown in the table are Totals and in
mg/L unless otherwise specified.
2. These limits are the total mass in pounds per day
(lbs/day) that are available to allocate to all permitted
industrial users. Allocations are at the sole discretion of
the City.
3. Discharges containing BOD5 or TSS concentrations
over that of Normal Domestic Strength Wastewater shall
be surcharged.
(b) The City may, at its sole discretion,
implement local limits through allocation of the Maximum
Allowable Industrial Load (MAIL) to Significant
Industrial Users that correspond to the uniform
concentration local limits shown in the table above. The
MAILs that correspond to the Daily Maximum Discharge
Limits are hereby incorporated by reference.
(4) The following limits shall apply to wastewaters
that are discharged from the groundwater cleanup of
petroleum or gasoline underground storage tanks or other
remediation wastewaters containing these pollutants or in
other wastewaters where these pollutants are appropriate
surrogates. It shall be unlawful for any permitted
Industrial User to discharge or cause to be discharged any
waste or wastewater that exceeds the following limits, as
applicable.
Pollutant(c) Daily Maximum
Limit (mg/L)
Benzene(a) 0.050
BTEX(b) 0.750
(a) All pollutants shown in the Table are totals.
(b) BTEX shall be measured as the sum of
Benzene, Ethylbenzene, Toluene, and Xylenes.
(c) These limits are based upon installation of
air stripping technology as described in the EPA
document: “Model NPDES Permit for Discharges
Resulting from the Cleanup of Gasoline Released from
Underground Storage Tanks. June 1989.”
(5) The Director may establish more stringent
pollutant limits, additional site-specific pollutant limits,
Best Management Practices, or additional Pretreatment
Requirements when, in the judgment of the Director, such
limitations are necessary to implement the provisions of
this Chapter.
(6) Dilution is prohibited as a substitute for
treatment and shall be a violation of this Chapter. Except
where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable
Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, no Industrial User
shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any
other way attempt to dilute a Discharge as a partial or
complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve
compliance with a Pretreatment Standard or Requirement.
The City may impose mass limitations on industrial users
which are using dilution to meet applicable Pretreatment
(April 3, 2017) 8-30
Standards or Requirements or in other cases where the
imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
(7) State requirements and limitations on discharges
shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than
federal Pretreatment Standards and Requirements or those
in this Chapter.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015)
8-11-4. National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
(1) Users must comply with the categorical
Pretreatment Standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I,
Subchapter N, Parts 405–471.
(2) Where a Categorical Pretreatment Standard is
expressed only in terms of either the mass or the
concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the Director
may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in
accordance with 40 CFR Section 403.6.
(3) When the limits in a Categorical Pretreatment
Standard are expressed only in terms of mass of pollutant
per unit of production, the Director may convert the limits
to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of
pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for
purposes of calculating effluent limitations applicable to
individual Industrial Users.
(4) Any Industrial User operating under a permit
incorporating equivalent mass or concentration limits
calculated from a production-based Standard shall notify
the Director within two (2) business days after the User
has a reasonable basis to know that the production level
will significantly change within the next calendar month.
Any Industrial User not notifying the Director of such an
anticipated change will be required to meet the mass or
concentration limits in its permit that were based on the
original estimate of the long term average production rate.
(5) When wastewater subject to a Categorical
Pretreatment Standard is mixed with wastewater not
regulated by the same Standard, the Director shall impose
an alternate limit in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e).
(6) A Categorical Industrial User may obtain a
net/gross adjustment to a Categorical Pretreatment
Standard in accordance with UAC R317-8-8.13.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015)
8-11-5. Pretreatment and Monitoring Facilities.
(1) Treatment Required. An Industrial User shall
provide necessary wastewater treatment at the Industrial
User's expense as required to comply with this Chapter
and shall achieve compliance with all Pretreatment
Standards and Requirements within the time limitations
specified by the EPA or the City, whichever is more
stringent. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment
facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to
the Director for review and shall be acceptable before
construction of the facility. The review of such plans and
operating procedures will in no way relieve the Industrial
User from the responsibility of modifying the facility as
necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the City
under the provisions of this Chapter.
(2) The Industrial User shall at all times properly
operate and maintain all facilities and systems of
treatment and control (and related appurtenances) which
are installed or used by the Industrial User. This provision
requires the operation of back-up or auxiliary facilities or
similar systems which are installed by an Industrial User
when the operation is necessary to achieve or assure
compliance with the conditions of the permit.
(3) Monitoring Facilities. The City may require an
Industrial User to install, at the Industrial User’s expense,
suitable monitoring facilities or equipment that allow for
the representative sampling and accurate observation of
wastewater discharges. Whether constructed on public or
private property, the monitoring facilities shall be
constructed in accordance with the City's requirements
and all applicable construction standards and
specifications. Monitoring equipment and structures shall
be maintained in proper working order, calibrated as
required by manufacturer’s recommendations and kept
safe and accessible at all times to City personnel. The
monitoring equipment shall be located and maintained on
the Industrial User's premises outside of the building
unless otherwise approved by the City. When such a
location would be impractical, the City may allow such
facilities to be constructed in the public street or easement
area, with the approval of the agency having jurisdiction
over such street or easement, and located so that they will
not be obstructed by public utilities, landscaping or
parked vehicles. No Industrial User shall cover any
manhole, sewer cleanout, or other openings in the
wastewater collection system with earth or paving, or
otherwise render it inaccessible.
(4) Wastewater Discharge Control. The City may
require an Industrial User to restrict discharge during peak
flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be
discharged only into specified sewers, relocate and/or
consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage
wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such other
conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and
demonstrate the Industrial User’s compliance with the
requirements of this Chapter.
(5) Flow Equalization. The City may require any
Industrial User discharging into the POTW to install and
maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable
storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of
flow. An Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit may be
required to address only flow equalization.
(6) Multitenant Buildings. When more than one
Industrial User is able to discharge into a common service
line, the City may require installation of separate
monitoring equipment or structures for each Industrial
User.
(7) Flow, pH, LEL and other meters and equipment.
If the City determines an Industrial User is required to
(April 3, 2017) 8-31
measure and report (i) wastewater flow, (ii) discharge
process wastewaters necessitating continuous pH
measurement or (iii) discharge wastewater that may
contain flammable substances or other pollutants of
concern, the City may require the Industrial User to install
and maintain, at the Industrial User’s expense, approved
meters and equipment.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015)
8-11-6. Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permits.
(1) Permits Required. All Significant Industrial
Users proposing to connect to, or discharge into, any part
of the POTW shall apply for and obtain an Industrial
Wastewater Discharge Permit prior to commencing
discharge to the POTW. A separate permit may be
required for each Industrial User, building or complex of
buildings. Such Significant Industrial Users shall
immediately contact the City and obtain an Industrial
Wastewater Discharge Permit.
(2) New Industrial Users: Applying for an Industrial
Wastewater Discharge Permit. Any Industrial User
required to obtain an Industrial Wastewater Discharge
Permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging
into the POTW must apply for and obtain such permit
prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge.
The Industrial User shall file a permit application on
forms provided by the City containing the information
specified in subsection 8-11-6(6). The completed
application for the Industrial Wastewater Discharge
Permit must be filed at least ninety (90) days prior to the
date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence.
The City may issue a permit at any time after receipt of
the completed permit application.
(3) Existing Industrial Users: Applying for an
Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit Re-issuance.
(a) An Industrial User with an expiring
Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit shall apply for a
new permit by submitting a complete permit application
at least ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the
Industrial User’s existing discharge permit. The Industrial
User shall file a permit application on forms provided by
the City containing the information specified in subsection
8-11-6(6).
(b) An Industrial User with an existing permit
that has filed a complete and timely permit application
may continue to discharge, as approved in writing by the
City, through an administrative extension of the existing
permit if the delay in permit issuance is not due to any act
or failure to act on the Industrial User’s part.
(c) If a permit expires and the Industrial User
fails to submit a complete or timely permit application as
required, discharge into the POTW shall cease until a
complete permit application has been submitted to the
Director and a new Industrial Wastewater Discharge
Permit issued. Discharge by an Industrial User without
proper authorization shall be prohibited and a violation of
this Chapter.
(4) Other Industrial Users. The City may require
other industrial users to apply for and obtain wastewater
discharge permits or similar control mechanisms
necessary to carry out the purposes of this Chapter. The
City may issue an Industrial Wastewater Discharge
Permit, a zero discharge permit, or other control
mechanism as needed to prohibit the discharge of some or
all non-domestic process wastewater from an Industrial
User or to establish other Pretreatment Standards or
Requirements.
(5) Enforceability. Any violation of the terms and
conditions of an Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit,
failure to apply for a permit as required, or discharging
without a required permit shall be deemed a violation of
this Chapter and subjects the Industrial User to
enforcement by the City. Obtaining an Industrial
Wastewater Discharge Permit does not relieve a permittee
of its obligation to comply with all State and federal
Pretreatment Standards or Requirements.
(6) Permit Application Contents. In support of the
application, the Industrial User shall submit, in units and
terms appropriate for evaluation, the following
information:
(a) Name of business, address of the facility,
location of the discharge if different from the facility
address, and contact information for the owner, operator,
and the Authorized Representative of the Industrial User.
(b) Environmental Permits. A list of any
environmental control permits held by or for the facility.
(c) Description of Operations.
(i) A brief description of the nature and the
average and maximum rate of production (including each
product produced by type, amount, processes, and rate of
production);
(ii) T h e St a n d a r d In d u s t r i a l
Classification(s) of the operation(s) carried out by such
Industrial User;
(iii) A schematic process diagram, which
indicates all process tanks, process lines, treatment
systems, drains, and points of discharge to the POTW
from each regulated process and source of non-domestic
wastewater;
(iv) A listing of all non-domestic process
streams and the type(s) of wastes generated from each
process;
(v) A list of all raw materials and chemicals
used or stored at the facility;
(vi) Number of employees; and,
(vii) Hours of operation, and
proposed or actual hours of operation.
(d) Time and duration of discharges including
the date the industrial user first began discharge or plans
to discharge to the POTW.
(e) The location for sampling the wastewater
(April 3, 2017) 8-32
discharges from the Industrial User.
(f) Flow measurement. Information showing
the average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per
day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and
other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined
wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR Section 403.6(e).
For New Sources and new permittees not currently
discharging, an estimate of flows may be used for meeting
the requirements of the Baseline Monitoring Report
required in subsection 8-11-15(2).
(g) Measurement of Pollutants.
(i) The Pretreatment Standards applicable
to each regulated process;
(ii) The results of sampling and analysis
identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass of
regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated
process where required by the Standard or by the City;
(iii) Instantaneous, daily maximum,
and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where
required, shall be reported;
(iv) The sample shall be representative of
daily operations and shall be collected in accordance with
procedures set out in subsection 8-11-13(1) and (2).
Where the Standard requires compliance with a BMP or
pollution prevention alternative, the Industrial User shall
submit documentation as required by the City or the
applicable Standard to determine compliance with the
Standard;
(v) Analyses must be performed in
accordance with procedures set out in subsection 8-11-
13(3); and,
(vi) In cases where the Pretreatment
Standard requires compliance with a Best Management
Practice or pollution prevention alternative, the Industrial
User shall submit documentation as required by the
District or the applicable Standard to determine
compliance with the Standard.
(h) A list of hazardous waste(s) generated and
a description of the storage area and procedures for
handling and disposal of the wastes.
(i) A Slug Discharge Control Plan for
Significant Industrial Users as described in subsection 8-
11-15(5) shall be submitted as required by the City. Other
industrial users shall be required to submit a Slug
Discharge Control Plan on a case-by-case basis as
required by the Director.
(j) Compliance Schedule. If additional
pretreatment and/or Operation and Maintenance (O&M)
will be required to meet the Pretreatment Standards, the
shortest schedule by which the Industrial User will
provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable
Pretreatment Standard. The following conditions shall
apply to this schedule:
(i) The schedule shall contain increments
of progress in the form of dates for the commencement
and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment
required for the Industrial User to meet the applicable
Pretreatment Standards (e.g. hiring an engineer,
completing preliminary plans, completing final plans,
executing contract for major components, commencing
construction, completing construction, etc.). No such
increment shall exceed nine (9) months.
(ii) Not later than fourteen (14) days
following each date in the schedule and the final date for
compliance, the Industrial User shall submit a progress
report to the Director including, as a minimum, whether or
not it complied with the increment of progress to be met
on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to
comply with this increment of progress, the reason for
delay, and the steps being taken by the Industrial User to
return the construction to the schedule established. In no
event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between
such progress reports to the Director.
(k) Certification. A statement, reviewed by the
Authorized Representative of the Industrial User and
certified to by a qualified professional, indicating whether
Pretreatment Standards are being met on a consistent
basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and
maintenance (O&M) and/or additional Pretreatment is
required for the Industrial User to meet the Pretreatment
Standards and Requirements.
(l) Signatory Certification. All Industrial
Wastewater Discharge Permit applications and
certification statements must be signed by the Authorized
Representative of the Industrial User and contain the
applicable certification statement(s) in subsection 8-11-
15(8).
(m) Any other information as may be deemed by
the Director to be necessary to evaluate the permit
application.
(7) Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit
Issuance.
(a) Permits shall be issued for a specified time
period, not to exceed five (5) years. A permit may be
issued for a period of less than five (5) years at the City’s
discretion or may be stated to expire on a specific date.
(b) Where the City is issuing a permit
containing a permit specific Pretreatment Standard or
Requirement not otherwise contained in this Chapter, the
Pretreatment Standard or Requirement shall be noticed for
public comment for thirty (30) days in a newspaper of
general circulation that provides meaningful public notice.
(c) The City shall issue an Industrial
Wastewater Discharge Permit to the applicant if the City
finds that all of the following conditions are met:
(i) The applicant has provided a timely and
complete permit application to the City;
(ii) The proposed discharge by the applicant
is in compliance with the Pretreatment Standards and
(April 3, 2017) 8-33
Requirements established in this Chapter;
(iii) The proposed operation and discharge
of the applicant would permit the normal and efficient
operation of the POTW; and,
(iv) The proposed discharge by the applicant
would not result in a violation by the City of the terms and
conditions of its NPDES Permit or cause Pass Through or
Interference.
(d) If the City finds that the condition set out in
Subsection (2)(ii) of this Section is not met, the City may,
at their discretion, issue an Industrial Wastewater
Discharge Permit to the applicant if the conditions set out
in subsections (c)(i), (c)(iii) and (c)(iv) of this Section
have been met and if the applicant submits, and the City
approves, a compliance schedule setting out the measures
to be taken by the applicant and the dates that such
measures will be implemented to insure compliance with
applicable Pretreatment Standards and Requirements. At
no time shall a discharge be allowed to cause a violation
of any General or Specific Prohibition established in
Section 8-11-3 nor shall the final compliance date for a
Categorical Pretreatment Standard be extended.
(e) Any Industrial User may petition the
Director to reconsider the terms of an Industrial
Wastewater Discharge Permit within thirty (30) days of
the permit issuance. Failure to submit a timely petition
shall be deemed to be a waiver of further administrative
appeals. In its petition, the appealing party must indicate
the permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this
objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to
place in the Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit. The
effectiveness of the Wastewater Discharge Permit shall
not be stayed pending the appeal. If the Director does not
act on such appeal within sixty (60) days, a request for
reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions
not to modify a permit shall be considered final
administrative actions for purposes of judicial review.
Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final
administrative Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit
decision must do so by filing a complaint with a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(f) Denial by City to Issue a Wastewater
Discharge Permit.
(i) In the event the City denies an Industrial
User’s request for a permit to discharge, the Director shall
notify the applicant in writing of such denial. Such
notification shall state the grounds for such denial with
that degree of specificity which will inform the applicant
of the measures or actions which must be taken by the
applicant prior to issuance of a permit.
(ii) Upon receipt of notification of denial of
permit issuance, the applicant may request and shall be
granted a hearing to be held by an Administrative Hearing
Officer designated by the Mayor , provided the request is
submitted in writing to the Director within fourteen (14)
days of receipt of the Director’s original notification of
denial. At such hearing the applicant shall have the
burden of establishing that the conditions set out in
paragraph (c) of this Section have been met and that a
permit should be issued.
(iii) Except as provided in this Chapter, the
procedure for the hearing shall be as established in
Chapter 1-28.
(iv) Upon review of the evidence by the
Administrative Hearing Officer the Administrative
Hearing Officer shall make written findings of fact.
Thereupon, the Director may issue an Industrial
Wastewater Discharge Permit, or may direct that such
permit shall not be issued, or give such other or further
orders and directives as necessary and appropriate.
(v) The decision by the Administrative
Hearing Officer not to reconsider, issue, or reissue an
Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit, shall be
considered final administrative action for purposes of
judicial review. Aggrieved parties seeking judicial
review of the final administrative Industrial Wastewater
Discharge Permit decision must do so by filing a
complaint with a court of competent jurisdiction.
(8) Transferability. An Industrial Wastewater
Discharge Permit is issued to a specific Industrial User for
a specific operation. An Industrial Wastewater Discharge
Permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a
new owner, new Industrial User, different premises, or a
new or changed operation without the prior written
approval of the City. Any succeeding owner shall comply
with the terms and conditions of the existing permit until
a new permit is issued. The Permittee shall notify the City
at least thirty (30) days prior to any change of ownership.
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer or
assignment renders the Industrial Wastewater Discharge
Permit void as of the date of facility transfer and
discharge of wastewater prohibited and shall be a
violation of this Chapter.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015)
8-11-7. Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit
Conditions.
Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permits shall be
expressly subject to all provisions of this Chapter and all
other applicable regulations, user charges and fees
established by the City.
(1) Permits shall contain the following:
(a) A statement that indicates the permit’s
issuance date, expiration date, and effective date;
(b) A statement on permit non-transferability;
(c) Limits on the average and/or maximum
wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but
not limited to, effluent limits, including Best Management
Practices, based upon applicable Pretreatment Standards;
(d) Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting,
notification and record-keeping requirements including,
but not limited to, identification of the pollutants or BMPs
(April 3, 2017) 8-34
to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency,
and sample type, based on federal, state, and local law;
(e) Statements of applicable administrative,
civil and criminal penalties for the violation of
Pretreatment Standards and Requirements, the permit, this
Chapter, and any applicable compliance schedule; and,
(f) Requirements to control and report any slug
discharges and notify the City immediately of any changes
at its facility affecting potential for a Spill or Slug
Discharge and to notify the POTW immediately in the
event of a Slug Discharge, spill, or accidental discharge to
the POTW.
(2) Permits may also include, as appropriate:
(a) Applicable schedule of user charges and fees
for the wastewater to be discharged into a public sewer;
(b) Limits on average and maximum rate and
time of discharge or requirements for flow;
(c) Requirements for installation and
maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and
equipment;
(d) Best Management Practices (BMPs) to
control specific pollutants as necessary to meet the
objectives of this Chapter;
(e) Compliance Schedules;
(f) Requirements to apply for a new permit
prior to expiration of the existing permit;
(g) Requirements for the installation of
pretreatment technology, pollution control, or
construction of appropriate containment devices, designed
to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of
pollutants into the treatment works;
(h) Closure requirements for permitted facilities
undergoing partial or complete closure activities to ensure
that closure activities are completed, wastes have been
properly disposed of, and remaining access to sanitary and
storm sewers are protected; and,
(i) Other terms and conditions as deemed
appropriate by the Director to ensure compliance with all
applicable local, state, and federal rules and regulations.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015)
8-11-8. Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit
Modification.
The notification of an Industrial Wastewater
Discharge Permit modification does not stay any
wastewater discharge permit condition. The City may
modify an Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit for
good cause, including, but not limited to, the following
reasons:
(1) To incorporate any new or revised federal, state,
or local Pretreatment Standards or Requirements or to
reflect changes in applicable State or federal Standards;
(2) To address significant alterations or additions to
the Industrial User’s operation, processes, or wastewater
volume or character since the time of the Industrial
Wastewater Discharge Permit issuance;
(3) A change in the POTW that requires either a
temporary or permanent change in, reduction of, or
elimination of the authorized discharge;
(4) Information indicating that the permitted
discharge poses a threat to the POTW, City personnel, or
the receiving waters where the POTW discharges;
(5) Violation of any terms or conditions of the
Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit;
(6) Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all
relevant facts and circumstances in the Industrial
Wastewater Discharge Permit application or in any
required reporting;
(7) To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership
and/or operation to a new owner/operator;
(8) To correct typographical or other errors in the
Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit; or,
(9) Upon request of the Permittee, provided such
request does not result in a violation of any applicable
Pretreatment Standards or Requirements, or this Chapter.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015)
8-11-9. Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit
Revocation.
A violation of the conditions of a permit or of this
Chapter or of applicable State or federal regulations shall
be reason for revocation of such permit by the City. Upon
revocation of the permit, any wastewater discharge from
the affected Industrial User shall be considered prohibited
and discharge of such wastewater in violation of this
Chapter. Grounds for revocation of a permit include, but
are not limited to, one or more of the following:
(1) Failure of an Industrial User to accurately
disclose or report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of any discharge;
(2) Failure of the Industrial User to report significant
changes in operations or wastewater constituents and
characteristics as required;
(3) Refusal of access to the Industrial User's
premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring;
(4) Falsification of records, reports, or monitoring
results;
(5) Tampering with monitoring equipment;
(6) Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all
relevant facts and circumstances in the Industrial
Wastewater Discharge Permit application;
(7) Failure to pay fines or penalties;
(8) Failure to pay sewer charges, surcharges, or
pretreatment programs fees;
(9) Failure to meet compliance schedules;
(10) Failure to provide advance notice of the
transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility.
(11) Failure to provide required reports,
including but not limited to, a wastewater survey, baseline
monitoring report, 90-day compliance report, permit
application, self-monitoring report, or other permit
required reports or notifications within the timeframe
(April 3, 2017) 8-35
required by the City; or,
(12) Violation of any Pretreatment Standard or
Requirement, or any terms of the Industrial Wastewater
Discharge Permit or this Chapter.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015)
8-11-10. Special Agreements and Contracts.
No statement contained in this Chapter shall be
construed as prohibiting special written agreements
between the City and any Industrial User allowing
industrial waste or wastewater of unusual strength or
character to be discharged to the POTW, provided said
Industrial User compensates the City for any additional
costs of treatment. Such agreement, however, shall not
allow or cause:
(1) Any adverse effect to the POTW;
(2) A violation of the POTW UPDES permit;
(3) A violation of a General or Specific Prohibition;
(4) A Maximum Allowable Industrial Load (MAIL)
to be exceeded;
(5) A violation of State or federal law or regulation;
or,
(6) Provide any waiver to applicable Categorical
Pretreatment Standard.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015)
8-11-11. Recordkeeping.
(1) All Industrial Users shall retain, and make
available for inspection and copying, all records, reports,
monitoring or other data, applications, permits and all
other information and documentation required by this
Chapter including documentation associated with Best
Management Practices.
(2) Industrial users shall retain such records and
shall keep such records available for inspection for at least
three (3) years. This recordkeeping period shall be
extended automatically for the duration of any litigation
concerning the Industrial User's compliance with any
provision of this Chapter, or when the Industrial User has
been specifically and expressly notified of a longer
records retention period by the Director.
(3) Written reports will be deemed to have been
submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are
not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced
by the U.S. Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report
by the City shall govern.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015)
8-11-12. Confidentiality Information.
(1) All records, reports, data, and other information
supplied by any person or Industrial User as a result of
any disclosure required by this Chapter or information and
data from inspections shall be available for public
inspection except as otherwise provided in this Section,
40 CFR Section 403.14 and the Utah Government
Records Access and Management Act (Utah Code Title
63G, Chapter 2).
(2) These provisions shall not be applicable to any
information designated as a trade secret by the person
supplying such information. Materials designated as a
trade secret may include, but shall not be limited to,
processes, operations, style of work or apparatus or
confidential commercial or statistical data. Any
information and data submitted by the Industrial User
which is desired to be considered a trade secret shall have
the words, "Confidential Business Information," stamped
on each page containing such information. The Industrial
User must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City that
the release of such information would divulge
information, processes, or methods of production entitled
to protection as trade secrets of the Industrial User.
(3) Information designated as a trade secret pursuant
to this Section shall remain confidential and shall not be
subject to public inspection. Such information shall be
available only to officers, employees, or authorized
representatives of the City charged with implementing and
enforcing the provisions of this Chapter and properly
identified representatives of the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency and the State of Utah and as required
by law.
(4) Effluent data from any Industrial User, whether
obtained by self-monitoring, monitoring by the City, or
monitoring by any state or federal agency, shall not be
considered a trade secret or otherwise confidential. All
such effluent data shall be available for public inspection
as required by law.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015)
8-11-13. Sample Collection and Analytical
Methods.
(1) Sample Collection. Compliance determina-tions
with respect to prohibitions and limitations in this Chapter
may be made on the basis of either grab or composite
samples of wastewater as specified by the City. Such
samples shall be taken at a point or points which the City
determines to be suitable for obtaining a representative
sample of the discharge. Composite samples may be
taken over a twenty-four (24) hour period, or over a
longer or shorter time span, as determined by the City to
meet specific circumstances.
(2) Sample Type. Samples collected to satisfy
reporting requirements must be based on data obtained
through appropriate sampling and analysis performed
during the period covered by the report, and based on data
that is representative of conditions occurring during the
reporting period.
(a) Except as indicated in subparagraphs (b) and
(c) below, the Industrial User must collect representative
wastewater samples using twenty-four (24) hour flow
proportional composite sampling techniques, unless timeproportional
composite sampling or grab sampling is
required by the City. Where time-proportional composite
(April 3, 2017) 8-36
sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the City, the
samples must be representative of the permitted discharge.
(b) Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH,
cyanide, total phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic
compounds must be obtained using grab collection
techniques. Using protocols (including appropriate
preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and
appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples
collected during a twenty-four (24) hour period may be
composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide,
total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited
in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and
oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the
laboratory. Composited samples for other parameters
unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented
in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the
City, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be
required to show compliance with instantaneous local
limits, including pH.
(c) For sampling required in support of Baseline
Monitoring and 90-day Compliance reports required in
Section 8-11-15, a minimum of four (4) grab samples
must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and
grease, sulfide, and volatile organic compounds for
facilities for which historical representative sampling data
do not exist. Where historical data are available, the City
may authorize a lower minimum. The Industrial User is
required to collect the number of grab samples necessary
to assess and assure compliance with applicable
Pretreatment Standards and Requirements.
(3) Analytical Requirements. All pollutant analysis,
including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of
an Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit application,
report, permit or other analyses required under this
Chapter shall be performed in accordance with the
techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 and
amendments thereto, unless otherwise specified in an
applicable Categorical Pretreatment Standard. If 40 CFR
Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical
techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA
determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical
techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question,
sampling and analyses shall be performed by using
validated analytical methods or any other applicable
sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures
suggested by the City or other parties approved by the
EPA. All laboratory analyses shall be conducted by a
laboratory certified by the Utah Bureau of Laboratory
Improvements. If, for a specific pollutant, a laboratory is
not certified, the City or Industrial User may use a noncertified
laboratory after consultation with the Utah
Department of Environmental Quality, Division of Water
Quality.
(4) Records shall include for all samples:
(a) The date, exact place, method, and time of
sampling and the name of the person(s) taking the
samples;
(b) The date(s) and time analyses were
performed;
(c) The name of the person performing the
analyses;
(d) The analytical techniques/methods used,
including method detection limits and QA/QC sample
results;
(e) All chain-of-custody records; and,
(f) The results of such analyses.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015)
8-11-14. Right of Entry.
(1) Whenever it shall be necessary for the purposes
of this Chapter, the City may enter upon any Industrial
User’s facility, property, or premises subject to this
Chapter for the purposes of:
(a) Performing all inspection, surveillance, and
monitoring procedures necessary to determine,
independent of information supplied by industrial users,
compliance or noncompliance with applicable
Pretreatment Standards and Requirements by an Industrial
User. Compliance monitoring and inspection shall be
conducted at a frequency as determined by the City and
may be announced or unannounced;
(b) Examining and copying any records required
to be kept under the provisions of this Chapter or of any
other local, state, or federal regulation;
(c) The City may take photographs and
recordings in and out of any areas of the facility as
deemed necessary for carrying out the duties of the
industrial pretreatment program including, but not limited
to, documentation of the industrial user’s compliance
status and for reinforcement of required written reports.
The industrial user shall be allowed to review copies of
photographs and recordings for confidentiality claims.
(d) Inspecting any monitoring equipment or
method, pretreatment system equipment, and/or operation;
(e) Sampling any discharge of wastewater into
POTW; and
(f) Inspecting any production, manufacturing,
fabricating or storage area where pollutants, regulated
under this Chapter, could originate, be stored, or be
discharged to the POTW.
(2) As a condition of issuance of an Industrial
Wastewater Discharge Permit, the Industrial User
impliedly consents to the City’s right of entry as described
in this Section.
(3) The occupant of such property or premises shall
render all proper assistance in such activities. Where an
Industrial User has security measures in place which
require proper identification and clearance before entry
into its premises, the Industrial User shall make necessary
arrangements with its security personnel so that authorized
representatives of the City will be permitted to enter
(April 3, 2017) 8-37
without delay to perform their specified functions.
(4) The Director and other duly authorized agents
and employees of the City are entitled to enter all private
properties through which the City or any connecting
jurisdiction holds an easement or similar access or
occupancy right.
(5) Failure to allow entry or unreasonable delays: In
the event the City or other duly authorized representative
of the City is refused admission or unreasonably delayed,
such refusal or delay is a violation of this Chapter and
may result in enforcement action as allowed for under this
Chapter including revocation of the Industrial Wastewater
Discharge Permit and/or physical termination of the
discharge to the City.
(6) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe
and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or
sampled shall be promptly removed by the Industrial User
at the written or verbal request of the Director or
authorized designee and shall not be replaced. The costs
of clearing such access shall be borne by the Industrial
User.
(7) Search Warrants. If the City has been refused
access to a building, structure, or property, or any part
thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to
believe that there may be a violation of this Chapter or
that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program of the City
designed to verify compliance with this Chapter or any
permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall
public health, safety, and welfare of the community, the
Director may seek issuance of a search warrant from a
Court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015)
8-11-15. Reporting and Notification Requirements.
(1) Periodic Monitoring Reports – All Significant
Industrial Users.
(a) Any Significant Industrial User or other
Industrial User required by the City, subject to a federal,
state, or City Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, must
submit reports, at a frequency determined by the City but
no less than once per six (6) months, indicating the nature,
concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are
limited by Pretreatment Standards, and the average and
maximum daily flows for the reporting period. In cases
where the Pretreatment Standard requires compliance with
a Best Management Practices (BMPs) or pollution
prevention alternatives, the Industrial User must submit
documentation required by the City or the Pretreatment
Standard necessary to determine compliance status of the
Industrial User. All industrial monitoring reports must be
signed and certified in accordance with Section 8-11-
15(8).
(b) All wastewater samples must be
representative of the Industrial User’s discharge.
Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities
shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in
good working order at all times. The failure of an
Industrial User to keep its monitoring facility in good
working order shall not be grounds for the Industrial User
to claim that the sample results are unrepresentative of its
discharge.
(c) If an Industrial User monitors any regulated
pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more
frequently than required by the City, using the methods
and procedures prescribed in Section 8-11-13, the results
of this monitoring shall be included in the report.
(d) The sampling and analyses required for the
reporting outlined above may be performed by the City in
lieu of the permittee. Where the City itself makes
arrangements with the Industrial User to collect all the
information required for the report, the Industrial User
will not be required to submit the report.
(2) Baseline Monitoring Reports (BMR) –
Categorical Industrial Users.
(a) Within either one hundred eighty (180) days
after the effective date of a Categorical Pretreatment
Standard, or the final administrative decision on a
Category Determination under 40 CFR Section
403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing industrial users
currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the
POTW shall submit to the City a report which contains
the information listed in paragraph (b) below. At least
ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their
discharge, New Sources, and sources that become
Categorical Industrial Users subsequent to the
promulgation of an applicable Categorical Pretreatment
Standard, shall submit to the City a report which contains
the information listed in paragraph (b) below. A New
Source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends
to use to meet applicable Pretreatment Standards. A New
Source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and
quantity of pollutants to be discharged from regulated
process streams and other non-process streams.
(b) Industrial users described above shall submit
the information set forth below.
(i) All information required in subsection
8-11-6(6).
(ii) Measurement of pollutants.
1. The Industrial User shall take
a minimum of one (1) representative sample to compile
the data necessary to comply with the requirements of this
paragraph.
2. Samples shall be taken
immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if
such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated
process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are
mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment,
the Industrial User shall measure the flows and
concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined
wastestream formula in 40 Section CFR 403.6(e) in order
to evaluate compliance with the Pretreatment Standards.
(April 3, 2017) 8-38
Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been
calculated in accordance with 40 CFR Section 403.6(e)
this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be
submitted to the City.
3. Sampling and analysis shall be
performed in accordance with Section 8-11-13.
4. The City may allow the
submission of a BMR which utilizes only historical data
so long as the data provides information sufficient to
determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures.
5. The BMR shall indicate the
time, date, and place of sampling and methods of analysis,
and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is
representative of normal work cycles and expected
pollutant discharges to the POTW.
6. Signature and Report
Certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be
signed in accordance with subsection 8-11-15(8) and
signed by an Authorized Representative.
(3) 90-Day Compliance Reports – Categorical
Industrial Users.
(a) New Sources: All New Sources subject to
existing Categorical Pretreatment Standards shall submit
a report to the City within ninety (90) days from the date
of first discharge to the POTW demonstrating actual and
continuing compliance with those Standards.
(b) Existing Sources: All Existing Sources
required to comply with newly promulgated Categorical
Pretreatment Standards shall submit a report to the City
within ninety (90) days of the date on which compliance
is required with those Standards demonstrating that actual
and continuing compliance with such Standards has been
achieved.
(c) Such 90-day Compliance Report shall
contain at a minimum the information required in
subsection 8-11-6(6) paragraphs (e), (f), (g), (j), (k), (l)
and (m).
(4) 24 Hour Notice and 30 Day Re-sampling. If
sampling performed by an Industrial User indicates a
violation of this Chapter, the Industrial User shall notify
the City within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware
of the violation. The Industrial User shall also repeat the
sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat
analysis to the City within thirty (30) days after becoming
aware of the violation. The Industrial User is not required
to resample if the following occurs:
(a) The City performs sampling at the Industrial
User’s facility at a frequency of at least once per month.
(b) The City performs sampling at the Industrial
User’s facility between the time when the Industrial User
performs its initial sampling and the time when the
Industrial User receives the results of this sampling. It is
the sole responsibility of the Industrial User to verify if
the City has performed this sampling.
(5) Slug and Spill Discharges - Notification and Plan
Development.
(a) Each Industrial User shall provide protection
from spills and slug discharges of pollutants regulated
under this Chapter. Facilities to prevent the discharge of
spills or slug discharges shall be provided and maintained
at the Industrial User’s expense.
(b) Each permitted Industrial User shall report
all spills to the City that occur within the boundaries of
the User’s facility whether or not the spills result in a
discharge to the POTW.
(c) The City shall evaluate whether each
Significant Industrial User needs a Slug/Spill Discharge
Control Plan or other action to control spills and slug
discharges. The City may require an Industrial User to
develop, submit for approval, and implement a Slug/Spill
Discharge Control Plan or take such other action that may
be necessary to control spills and slug discharges.
(d) A Slug/Spill Discharge Control Plan shall
address, at a minimum, the following:
(i) Detailed plans (schematics) showing
facility layout and plumbing representative of operating
procedures;
(ii) Description of contents and volumes of
any process tanks;
(iii) Description of discharge practices,
including non-routine batch discharges;
(iv) Listing of stored chemicals, including
location and volumes;
(v) Procedures for immediately notifying
the City of any spill or Slug Discharge. It is the
responsibility of the Industrial User to comply with the
reporting requirements in subsection 8-11-15(6);
(vi) Procedures to prevent adverse impact
from any accidental or Slug Discharge. Such procedures
include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance
of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials,
loading and unloading operations, control of plant site
runoff, worker training, building of containment structures
or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and
equipment for emergency response; and,
(vii) Any other information as
required by the City.
(e) Notice to employees. A notice shall be
permanently posted on the Industrial User’s bulletin board
or other prominent place advising employees who to call
in the event of an accidental or slug discharge. Employers
shall ensure that all employees who work in any area
where an accidental or slug discharge may occur or
originate are advised of the emergency notification
procedures.
(6) Reports of Potential Problems – Slug Discharges.
(a) In the case of any changes at its facility
affecting potential for a Slug Discharge as defined in
Section 8-11-1(35), the Industrial User shall immediately
telephone and notify the City of the incident. This
notification shall include:
(April 3, 2017) 8-39
(i) Name of the facility
(ii) Location of the facility
(iii) Name of the caller
(iv) Date and time of discharge
(v) Date and time discharge was halted
(vi) Location of the discharge
(vii) Estimated volume of discharge
(viii) Estimated concentration of
pollutants in discharge
(ix) Corrective actions taken to halt the
discharge
(x) Method of disposal if applicable
(b) Within five (5) working days following such
discharge, the Industrial User shall, unless expressly
waived by the City, submit a detailed written report that
includes all of the information contained in paragraph
(6)(a) above and any other information describing the
cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by
the Industrial User to respond to the discharge and to
prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall
not relieve the Industrial User of any expense, loss,
damage, or other liability which might be incurred as a
result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any
other damage to person or property; nor shall such
notification relieve the Industrial User of any fines,
penalties, or other liability which may be imposed
pursuant to this Chapter.
(7) Reports for Other Significant Industrial Users.
If the City deems it necessary to assure compliance with
provisions of this Chapter, any Industrial User of the
POTW may be required to submit an Industrial
Wastewater Discharge Permit application, questionnaire,
or other reports and notifications in a format and
timeframe as specified by the City.
(8) Signatory Certification. All reports and other
submittals required to be submitted to the City shall
include the following statement and signatory
requirements.
(a) The Authorized Representative of the
Industrial User signing any application, questionnaire, any
report, or other information required to be submitted to
the City must sign and attach the following certification
statement with each such report or information submitted
to the City.
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction or
supervision in accordance with a system designed to
ensure that qualified personnel properly gather and
evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry
of the person or persons who manage the system or the
persons directly responsible for gathering the information,
the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge
and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that
there are significant penalties for submitting false
information, including the possibility of a fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations."
(b) If the Authorized Representative is no longer
accurate because a different individual or position has
responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or
overall responsibility for environmental matters for the
company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements
of this Section and meeting the definition in subsection 8-
11-15(8) must be submitted to the City prior to or together
with any reports to be signed by an Authorized
Representative.
(9) Compliance Schedules. Should any schedule of
compliance be established in accordance with the
requirements of this Chapter, the compliance schedule
shall be as specified in subsection 8-11-6(6)(j).
(10) Change in Discharge or Operations.
(a) Every permitted Industrial User shall file a
notification with the City a minimum of fourteen (14) days
prior to any planned significant change in operations or
wastewater characteristics. A significant change shall be
a change equal to or greater than twenty percent (20%) in
the mass of a pollutant or volume of flow discharged to
the POTW. In addition, this notification shall include
changes to:
(i) Adding or removing processing,
manufacturing, or other production operations;
(ii) New pollutants used which might be
discharged; and,
(iii) Changes in the listed or characteristic
hazardous waste for which the Industrial User has
submitted or is required to submit information to the City
under this Chapter and UAC R317-8-8.11(14)(d).
(b) Known or anticipated facility closure. The
Industrial User is required to notify the City at least thirty
(30) days prior to facility shutdown or closure which
might alter the character, nature, quality, or volume of its
wastewater.
(11) Notification of the Discharge of Hazardous
Waste.
(a) Any Industrial User shall notify the City, in
writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance
which, if otherwise disposed of, would be hazardous
waste under UAC R315-2. Such notification shall be
made to the City and shall be in addition to any other
notifications required in Section 8-11-15. Notification to
the City shall be immediate and written notification no
later than twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of
the discharge. Such notification must include:
(i) The name of the hazardous waste as set
forth at UAC R315-2;
(ii) The EPA hazardous waste number;
(iii) The type of discharge (continuous,
batch, or other);
(iv) An identification of the hazardous
constituents contained in the wastes;
(April 3, 2017) 8-40
(v) An estimation of the mass and
concentration of such constituents in the wastestream
discharged during that calendar month;
(vi) An estimation of the mass of
constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged
during the following twelve (12) months;
(vii) Certification that the Industrial
User has a program in place to reduce the volume and
toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has
determined to be economically practical; and,
(viii) Signatory certification as
required by subsection 8-11-15(8).
(b) Any Industrial User shall notify the EPA
Regional Waste Management Division Manager, and state
hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of the discharge
into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise
disposed of, would be hazardous waste under UAC R315-
2 and meets the reporting criteria specified at R317-8-
8.11(14)(d). Notification to the State and EPA is the
responsibility of the Industrial User and shall be made as
required under R317-8-8.11(14)(d). The Industrial User
shall copy the City on all notifications made to the State
and EPA.
(c) In the case of any new regulation adopted by
EPA or the Utah Solid and Hazardous Waste Board
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste
or listing any additional substance as hazardous waste, the
Industrial User must notify the City, the EPA Regional
Waste Management Waste Division Director, and state
hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such
substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of
such regulations.
(d) This provision does not create a right to
discharge any substance not otherwise allowed to be
discharged by this Chapter, a permit issued hereunder, or
any applicable federal or state law.
(12) Requests for Information.
(a) A permittee shall furnish to the City, within
the timeframe set by the Director, any information which
the City may request to determine whether cause exists for
modifying, revoking, reissuing, or terminating an
Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit, or to determine
compliance with the Industrial Wastewater Discharge
Permit or this Chapter. A permittee shall also, upon
request, provide to the City, within the timeframe required
by the Director, copies of any records that are required by
the Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit or this
Chapter.
(b) When requested by the City, any Industrial
User shall submit information to the Director regarding
industrial processes, nature and characteristics of wastes
and wastewaters generated at the industrial facility,
method of disposal of wastes, or other information
required by the Director to meet the responsibilities under
this Chapter, UAC R317-8-8 and 40 CFR Part 403.
Failure to provide information within the timeframe
specified shall be a violation of this Chapter.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015)
8-11-16. Sector Control Programs.
(1) General Requirements.
(a) Authority. The City may establish specific
sector control programs for industrial users to control
specific pollutants as necessary to meet the objectives of
this Chapter. Pollutants subject to these sector control
programs shall generally be controlled using Best
Management Practices (BMPs).
(b) Facility Identification and Compliance. The
City shall implement procedures to identify industrial
users for inclusion into applicable sector control
programs. Once identified and included into one or more
sector control program, the facility shall be required to
comply with the applicable sector control program
requirements.
(c) Management Review. The City shall review
new construction and existing facilities undergoing any
physical change, change in ownership, change in
operations, change in use, or other change that could
change the nature, properties, or volume of wastewater
discharge to ensure that current sector control program
requirements are incorporated and implemented.
(d) The Industrial User shall notify the City in
writing at least 30 days prior to:
(i) Sale or transfer of ownership of the
business;
(ii) Change in the trade name under which
the business is operated;
(iii) Change in the nature of the services
provided that affect the potential to discharge sector
control program pollutants; or,
(iv) Remodeling of the facility that may
result in an increase in flow or pollutant loading or that
otherwise requires the facility to submit plans or
specifications for approval through theDepartment, or any
other formal Tooele approval process.
(e) Inspections.
(i) The City may conduct inspections of
any facility with or without notice for the purpose of
determining applicability and/or compliance with sector
control program requirements.
(ii) If any inspection reveals noncompliance
with any provision of a sector control
program requirement, corrective action shall be required
pursuant to the applicable sector control program.
(iii) Inspection results will be provided in
writing to the facility upon request.
(f) Closure. The City may require closure of
plumbing, treatment devices, storage components,
containments, or other such physical structures that are no
longer required for their intended purpose. Closure may
include the removal of equipment, filling in and/or
cementing, capping, plugging, etc.
(April 3, 2017) 8-41
(g) Enforcement and Compliance.
(i) These requirements form a part of this
Chapter. Enforcement of this regulation is governed by
the express terms herein and the enforcement provisions
of this Chapter.
(ii) Any extraordinary costs incurred by the
City due to Interference, damage, Pass Through, or other
violation of this Chapter, or maintenance necessary in the
treatment and/or collection system shall be paid by the
Industrial User to the City. The direct costs of all labor,
equipment, and materials incurred in rectifying the
Interference or damage, including reasonable attorney’s
fees, shall be billed directly to the owner or the Industrial
User by the City, and such costs shall become part of the
total charges due and owing to the City and shall
constitute a lien on the Industrial User until paid in full.
(2) Fats, Oils, and Grease (FOG) and Sand/Oil
Separator Best Management Practices.
(a) Applicability: These Best Management
Practices (BMP’s) establish requirements for any facility
that has the potential to discharge Fats, Oils, and Grease
(FOG). These pollutants contribute to sewer blockages,
causing sanitary sewer overflows and backups into homes
and businesses and increasing the costs to the City to
maintain the collection lines. The requirements
established in this BMP shall apply to industrial users
where preparation, manufacturing, processing of food or
washing/sanitizing of dishes or equipment occurs and
includes, but are not limited to, restaurants, cafes, fast
food outlets, pizza outlets, delicatessens, sandwich shops,
coffee shops, schools, nursing homes, and other facilities
that prepare, service, or otherwise make foodstuff
available for consumption. These users shall install and
maintain a Gravity Grease Interceptor (GGI) within ninety
(90) days of being notified of such requirement.
(b) “Gravity Grease Interceptor” or “GGI” is an
in-ground tank containing at least one baffle in which
solids, greases, and oils are separated from wastewater,
located outside the Industrial User’s building and made
accessible by at least two manhole covers.
(c) “Hydromechanical Grease Interceptor” or
“HMGI” or “grease trap” is a small device hooked
directly to the outgoing drains of sinks located inside a
commercial food preparation facility that allows for the
separation of fats, oils, and grease of a non-petroleum
nature from wastewater prior to being discharged into the
POTW.
(d) A GGI that was legally and properly
installed at an industrial user’s facility prior to the
effective date of this Chapter shall be acceptable as an
alternative if such device is effective in removing
floatable and settleable material and is designed and
installed is such a manner that it can be inspected and
properly maintained. If the Director determines at any
time that such GGI is incapable of adequately retaining
the floatable and settleable material or if it was installed
in such a manner that it cannot be inspected and properly
maintained, the industrial user shall install a GGI that
complies with all City codes within ninety (90) days after
being notified in writing of such requirement.
(e) Implementation. These FOG require-ments
may be implemented by letter, order, or permit.
(f) Variance.
(i) A variance as to the requirements may
be granted by the Director in writing for good cause. The
facility has the burden of proof of demonstrating through
data and other information why a variance should be
granted. In no case shall a variance result in violation of
any Pretreatment Standard or Requirement specified in
this Chapter and applicable to the discharge. The granting
of any variance shall be at the sole discretion of the City
and may be revoked at the sole discretion of the City. A
variance decision is not a land use decision, does not
involve a protected property right, and may not be
appealed.
(ii) If a variance is granted, the facility shall
institute Best Management Practices and other mitigation
measures as specified by the Director. These BMPs may
include, but not be limited to:
1. Allow the installation of a
Hydromechanical Grease Interceptor (HMGI) or continue
to allow the use of an HMGI in lieu of installing a GGI
where the HMGI is shown to be effective. If a HMGI is
not shown to be effective, the City may require the
industrial user to install a GGI.
2. All sinks and drains which are
connected to the sanitary sewer shall be equipped with a
fixed or removable mesh or screen which shall catch
garbage and food debris and prevent it from entering the
sewer system.
3. Food grinders are prohibited
unless the industrial user installs and properly operates a
solids separator prior to discharge to the POTW.
4. Biological treatment or enzyme
treatment shall not be used. Use of enzymes or other
chemical or biological treatment or product that emulsifies
or acts to emulsify FOG is prohibited.
5. An employee training program
shall be instituted on a periodic basis and for all new
employees on FOG waste management.
6. Provide quarterly cleaning of
its private service line to prevent the buildup of oil,
grease, and solids or as otherwise specified.
7. Submit records of the private
service line cleaning as specified by the City.
8. Pay the costs incurred by the
City or other jurisdiction for accelerated sewer line
cleaning on the sewer line providing service to the
POTW, costs to the City for treating the excess strength
waste, and any costs for sampling and analysis. The City
believes that these costs will be comparable to costs
incurred by a user that installs and maintains a GGI.
(April 3, 2017) 8-42
(g) General Control Requirements.
(i) A GGI shall be required for the proper
handling of liquid wastes which may be harmful to, or
cause obstruction, in the wastewater collection system or
cause or contribute to Pass Through or Interference.
(ii) It shall be the responsibility of the
industrial user and owner of the property to contact the
City for the purpose of obtaining a plan review. The plan
review shall determine the need, size, location, and other
requirements of the interceptor required to control
discharges into the POTW. Written approval from the
City must be obtained prior to installation of the
interceptor. The review of such plans and operating
procedures shall in no way relieve the industrial user from
the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary
to produce a discharge acceptable to the City under the
provisions of this Chapter.
(iii) The design and sizing of GGIs shall be
in accordance with applicable City Building Codes and
the latest International Building Code. The GGI shall be
designed, sized, installed, maintained, and operated so as
to accomplish the intended purpose of intercepting
pollutants from the industrial user’s wastewater and
preventing the discharge of such pollutants to the City’s
wastewater collection system, including pollutants that
result in toxic, noxious or malodorous conditions that
create a public nuisance or unsafe working conditions
which endanger life or the environment. .
(iv) A sampling manhole shall be installed
for every GGI installed in Tooele City. The sampling
manhole shall be placed on the outgoing lateral line of the
interceptor prior to the sewer main line. The sampling
manhole shall be placed within six (6) feet of the
interceptor whenever possible and shall be extended to the
finished grade. All interceptors shall have at least a fourinch
(4”) inlet and a four-inch (4”) riser formed in the
baffle. Interceptor manholes shall have lids which remain
uncovered and unobstructed at all times, to enable
inspection.
(v) Upon change of ownership of any
existing facility which would be required to have an
interceptor under this Chapter, the applicant for sanitary
sewer service shall have the burden to demonstrate that a
properly sized and functioning GGI is installed.
(vi) Toilets, urinals, and similar fixtures
shall not waste through a GGI. Such fixtures shall be
plumbed directly into the building sewer and waste
system.
(vii) All sinks which are connected
to a GGI shall be equipped with a fixed or removable
mesh or screen which shall catch garbage and food debris
and prevent it from entering the GGI. Food grinders are
prohibited unless the industrial user installs and properly
operates a solids separator prior to the GGI.
(viii) The Industrial User must
ensure interceptors are easily accessible for inspection,
cleaning, and removal of FOG.
(ix) The Industrial User must maintain
interceptors at their expense and keep in efficient
operating condition at all times by the regular removal of
accumulated FOG.
(x) Each Industrial User shall submit a
report/manifest/trip ticket to the POTW each time a GGI
is cleaned, pumped or repaired, but in no case less
frequently than once per quarter. This record shall
include the date of cleaning, name of the company that
serviced the GGI, the amount of waste that was removed,
disposal location, and must be signed by the waste hauler.
The removed contents from any GGI shall be disposed of
in accordance with federal, state, and local regulations.
(h) Required Maintenance.
(i) GGIs shall be maintained by regularly
scheduled cleaning so that they will properly operate as
intended to efficiently intercept the fats, oils, and grease
from the facility’s wastewater and prevent the discharge
of said materials into the City’s wastewater collection
system. A GGI shall be serviced at a minimum of every
ninety (90) days. Interceptors must be cleaned whenever
the combined thickness of the floating greases and settled
solids is greater than 25% of the hydraulic working
capacity of the GGI.
(ii) The City may require more frequent
cleaning than that prescribed in paragraph (h)(i) above.
A variance from the requirement in paragraph 6, a. may be
obtained if the industrial user can demonstrate through
analytical data that less frequent cleaning is sufficient.
(iii) Maintenance of grease interceptors shall
be done only by a business/professional normally engaged
in the servicing of such plumbing fixtures.
(iv) In the event a GGI is not properly
maintained the City may authorize such maintenance work
to be performed on behalf of the industrial user. The
costs of such maintenance shall be billed directly to the
tenant/owner and shall become part of the charges due and
owing to the City and shall become part of the charges
due and owned to the City. The tenants and owners shall
be jointly and severally liable for these costs. All unpaid
costs shall become a lien on the property.
(v) Biological treatment or enzyme
treatment shall not be a substitute for the servicing of a
GGI. Use of enzymes or other chemical or biological
treatment or product that emulsifies or acts to emulsify
FOG is prohibited.
(vi) The industrial user must document each
pump-out with a waste manifest or trip ticket and these
records submitted to the Director within 15 days of the
pump-out. All records must be kept by the industrial user
on site for at least three (3) years.
(vii) The Industrial User must take
reasonable steps to assure that all waste is properly
disposed of in accordance with federal, state, and local
regulations (i.e. through a statement certifying proper
(April 3, 2017) 8-43
disposal by the hauler included on the waste manifest or
trip ticket for each load).
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015)
8-11-17. Compliance and Enforcement.
(1) Enforcement Response Plan. The City may
adopt policies and procedures as set forth in the City’s
Pretreatment Enforcement Response Plan for carrying out
the provisions of this Chapter, provided that such policies
and procedures are not in conflict with this Chapter or any
applicable state or federal law or regulation.
(2) Publication of Industrial Users in Significant
Noncompliance. The City shall publish annually, in a
newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful
public notice, a list of the Significant Industrial Users
which, at any time during the previous twelve (12)
months, were in Significant Noncompliance with
applicable Pretreatment Standards and Requirements. In
addition, any Industrial User found to be in Significant
Noncompliance with paragraphs (c), (d) or (h) below shall
also be published in the newspaper. The following
criteria shall be used to define Significant
Noncompliance:
(a) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge
limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six percent
(66%) or more of all of the measurements taken during a
six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric
Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, including
instantaneous limits;
(b) Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations,
defined here as those in which thirty-three percent (33%)
or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant
parameter taken during a six-month period equal or
exceed the product of the numeric Pretreatment Standard
or Requirement including instantaneous limits multiplied
by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats,
oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
(c) Any other violation of a Pretreatment
Standard or Requirement (daily maximum, long-term
average, instantaneous limit, or narrative Standard) that
the POTW determines has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, Interference or Pass
Through (including endangering the health of POTW
personnel or the general public);
(d) Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused
imminent endangerment to human health, welfare, or the
environment or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its
emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
(e) Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days after
the schedule date a compliance schedule milestone date
contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement
order for starting construction, completing construction,
or attaining final compliance;
(f) Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days
after the due date, required reports such as baseline
monitoring reports, compliance reports, periodic selfmonitoring
reports, and reports on compliance with
compliance schedules;
(g) Failure to accurately report noncompliance;
or,
(h) Any other violation or group of violations,
which may include a violation of Best Management
Practices, which the POTW determines may adversely
affect the operation or implementation of the local
pretreatment program.
(3) Administrative Enforcement Actions.
(a) Notice of Violation (NOV). Whenever the
Director finds that an industrial user has violated or
continues to violate, any provision of this Chapter, an
Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit or order issued
hereunder, or any other Pretreatment Standard or
Requirement, the Director may serve upon such industrial
user a written Notice of Violation. Within five (5)
working days of the receipt of such notice, an explanation
of the violation and a plan for satisfactory correction and
prevention of further violations shall be submitted to the
Director. Submission of such a plan in no way relieves
the industrial user of liability for any violations occurring
before or after receipt of the Notice of Violation. Nothing
in this Section shall limit the authority of the City to take
any action, including emergency actions or any other
enforcement action, without first issuing a Notice of
Violation.
(b) Administrative Order. When the City finds
that an industrial user has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this Chapter, an Industrial Wastewater
Discharge Permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, the City may issue
an Administrative Order to the Industrial User responsible
for the discharge directing that the industrial user come
into compliance within a specific time. If the industrial
user does not come into compliance within the time
provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless
adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related
appurtenances are installed and properly operated.
Compliance orders also may contain other requirements
to address the noncompliance, including additional selfmonitoring
and management practices designed to
minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the
POTW. An Administrative Order may not extend the
deadline for compliance established for a Pretreatment
Standard or Requirement, nor does a compliance order
relieve the Industrial User of liability for any violation,
including any continuing violation. Issuance of a
compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the
industrial user.
(c) Consent Order. The City may enter into a
Consent Order, assurances of voluntary compliance, or
other similar documents establishing an agreement with
any industrial user responsible for noncompliance. Such
documents shall include specific actions to be taken by the
(April 3, 2017) 8-44
Industrial user to correct the noncompliance within a time
period specified by the document. A Consent Order may
include penalties, supplemental environmental projects, or
other conditions and requirements as agreed to by the City
and the industrial user. A Consent Order shall have the
same force and effect as a Compliance Order and shall be
judicially enforceable.
(d) Show Cause Hearing.
(i) The Director may order an industrial
user which has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this Chapter, an Industrial Wastewater
Discharge Permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, to appear before
the Director and show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be
served on the user specifying the time and place for the
meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for
such action, and a request that the user show cause why
the proposed enforcement action should not be taken.
The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by
registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at
least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may
be served on any authorized representative of the
industrial user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar
against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against
the user.
(ii) After the Director has reviewed the
evidence, the Director may issue an order to the Industrial
User responsible for the discharge directing that,
following a specified time period, the sewer service be
discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices,
or other related appurtenances shall have been installed or
existing treatment facilities, devices or other related
appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and
directives as are necessary and appropriate to correct the
violation may be issued.
(e) Cease and Desist Order.
(i) When the Director finds that an
industrial user has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this Chapter, an Industrial Wastewater
Discharge Permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, or that the
industrial user's past violations are likely to recur, the
Director may issue a Cease and Desist Order to the
industrial user directing it to cease and desist all such
violations and directing the industrial user to:
1. Immediately comply with all
requirements; and,
2. Take such appropriate
remedial or preventive action as may be needed to
properly address a continuing or threatened violation,
including halting operations and/or terminating the
discharge.
(ii) Issuance of a Cease and Desist Order
shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any
other action against the industrial user.
(f) Administrative Fines.
(i) When the Director finds that an
industrial user has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this Chapter, an Industrial Wastewater
Discharge Permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, the Director may
fine such industrial user in an amount not to exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000). Such fines shall be assessed on
a per-violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly or
other long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be
assessed for each day during the period of violation.
(ii) Industrial users desiring to appeal such
fines must file a written request for the Director to
reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine
amount within thirty (30) days of being notified of the
fine. Such notice or appeal shall set forth the nature of the
order or determination being appealed, the date of such
order or determination, the reason for the appeal, and
request a hearing pursuant. Where a request has merit, the
Director may convene a show cause hearing on the matter.
In the event the Industrial User's appeal is successful, the
payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall
be returned to the industrial user.
(iii) Issuance of an administrative fine shall
not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the industrial user.
(g) Suspension of Service.
(i) Endangerment to Health or Welfare of
the Community: The City, through other than a formal
notice to the affected industrial user, may immediately and
effectively halt or prevent any discharge of pollutants into
any natural waterway, surface drainage within the City,
any area under jurisdiction of the City, the POTW of the
City or any wastewater system tributary thereto, by any
means available to them, including physical disconnection
from the wastewater system, whenever it reasonably
appears that such discharge presents an imminent
endangerment to the health or welfare of the community.
(ii) Endangerment to Environment or
Treatment Works: The City, after written notice to the
discharger may halt or prevent any discharge of pollutants
into any natural waterway, surface drainage within the
City, any area under jurisdiction of the City, the POTW,
wastewater system tributary thereto, by any means
available to them, including physical disconnection from
the wastewater system, whenever such discharge presents
or may present an endangerment to the environment or
threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW.
(iii) Any person notified of a suspension of
the wastewater treatment service and/or the Industrial
Wastewater Discharge Permit shall immediately stop or
eliminate the discharge. In the event of a failure of the
person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order,
the City shall take such steps as deemed necessary
including immediate severance of the sewer connection,
to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or
(April 3, 2017) 8-45
endangerment to individuals or the environment. The
City may reinstate the Industrial Wastewater Discharge
Permit and/or the wastewater treatment service upon proof
of the elimination of the non-complying discharge.
(iv) A detailed written statement submitted
by the Industrial User describing the causes of the
discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future
occurrence shall be provided to the City within five (5)
days of the date of occurrence. Suspension of Service
shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any
other action against the industrial user.
(h) Revocation of Industrial Wastewater
Discharge Permit. An Industrial Wastewater Discharge
Permit may be revoked by the City as specified in Section
8-11-9. Upon revocation of the permit, any wastewater
discharge from the affected Industrial User shall be
considered prohibited and discharge of such wastewater
in violation of this Chapter.
(4) Administrative Appeals. Appeals of
Administrative Enforcement Actions shall be to a Tooele
Administrative Hearing Officer.
(5) Judicial Enforcement Remedies.
(a) Injunctive Relief. When the City finds that
an industrial user has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this Chapter, an Industrial Wastewater
Discharge Permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, the City may
petition a court of competent jurisdiction for the issuance
of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate,
which restrains or compels the specific performance of the
Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit, order, or other
requirement imposed by this Chapter on activities of an
Industrial User. The City may also seek such other action
as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief,
including a requirement for the Industrial User to conduct
environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive
relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for,
taking any other action against an Industrial User.
(b) Civil Penalties.
(i) An Industrial User who has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this Chapter, an
Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other Pretreatment Standard or
Requirement shall be liable to the City for a maximum
civil penalty not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000)
per day per violation. In the case of a monthly or other
long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue
for each day during the period of violation.
(ii) The City may recover reasonable
attorneys’ fees, court costs, and other expenses associated
with enforcement activities, including sampling and
monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages
incurred by the City.
(iii) Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not
be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against an industrial user.
(c) Civil/Administrative Fine Pass Through. In
the event that an Industrial User discharges such
pollutants which cause the City to violate any condition of
its NPDES permit and the City is fined by the EPA or the
State for such violation, then such industrial user shall be
fully liable for the total amount of the fine assessed
against the City by the EPA and/or the State and the City
may use all legal means to collect such sums from the
Industrial User.
(d) Criminal Penalties.
(i) An Industrial User that knowingly or
recklessly violates any provision of this Chapter, any
orders or an Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit
issued hereunder, or any other Pretreatment Standard or
Requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000) for each violation and/or by
imprisonment up to ninety (90) days.
(ii) Any person who knowingly makes any
false statement, representation, or certification in any
application, record, report, plan, or other document filed
or required to be maintained pursuant to this Chapter, or
Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit, or who falsifies,
tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any
monitoring device or method required under this Chapter,
shall upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each violation and/or by imprisonment up
to ninety (90) days.
(iii) The City may refer violations that may
warrant criminal prosecution to the U.S. Attorney
General’s Office, State Attorney General, EPA Criminal
Investigation Division, or other appropriate agency. This
referral shall not preclude the City from taking a parallel
administrative or civil enforcement action.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015)
8-11-18. Remedies Nonexclusive.
The remedies provided for in this Chapter are not
exclusive of any other remedies that the City may have
under the provisions of Utah law. The City may take any,
all, or any combination of these actions against a
noncompliant industrial user. Enforcement of violations
under this Chapter will generally be in accordance with
the City's Pretreatment Enforcement Response Plan.
However, the City may take any other action against an
Industrial User when the circumstances warrant and may
take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant
industrial user.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015)
8-11-19. Regulation of Industrial Users from
Outside Jurisdictions.
(1) Outside Jurisdictions and Inter-Governmental
Agreements (IGA).
(a) In order for the City to effectively
(April 3, 2017) 8-46
implement and enforce Pretreatment Standards and
Requirements for all industrial users discharging to the
POTW and as required by 40 CFR Section 403.8(f), the
City may enter into Pretreatment inter-local agreements
with contributing jurisdictions. Prior agreements shall be
unaffected by these requirements until such time as the
City determines that modifications are necessary.
(b) Prior to entering into an IGA under this
Section the City shall seek to obtain the following
information from the contributing jurisdiction(s):
(i) A description of the quality and volume
of wastewater discharged to the POTW by the
contributing jurisdiction;
(ii) An inventory of all sources of Indirect
Discharge located within the contributing jurisdiction that
are discharging to the POTW; and
(iii) A requirement that the contributing
jurisdiction submit an updated user inventory on at least
an annual basis if such jurisdiction has non-domestic
users;
(iv) A requirement that the contributing
jurisdiction provide the City with access to all information
that the contributing jurisdiction obtains regarding
effluent quantity and quality from non-domestic users; and
(v) A report of any prior instances of Pass
Through or Interference at the contributing jurisdiction
POTW.
(vi) Other requirements as necessary for the
City to guarantee the effective administration and
enforcement of the Pretreatment Program.
(2) Industrial Users in Outside Jurisdictions with no
IGA In-Place. Until such time as the City and a
jurisdiction enter into an ILA for pretreatment program
delegation, the City shall have the option to exercise any
of the following options:
(a) Prohibit the discharge of non-domestic
wastewater from an Industrial User located in another
jurisdiction;
(b) Request the jurisdiction to issue a Permit or
Order to the Industrial User that is equivalent to the
Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit and all
Pretreatment Standards and Requirements required by the
City; and,
(c) Enter into a contract with the Industrial User
that binds the Industrial User to compliance with all
Pretreatment Standards and Requirements in an Industrial
Wastewater Discharge Permit issued by the City to the
Industrial User.
8-11-20. Affirmative Defense - Prohibited Discharge
Standards.
(1) An industrial user shall have an affirmative
defense to an enforcement action brought against it for
noncompliance with the General Prohibitions in
subsection 8-11-3(1) and the Specific Prohibitions in
Section 8-11-3, paragraphs (b), (d), (e), (f), or (g) of this
Chapter where the industrial user can demonstrate that:
(a) It did not know, or did not have reason to
know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with
discharges from other sources, would cause Pass Through
or Interference; and:
(i) A local limit designed to prevent Pass
Through and/or Interference, as the case may be was
developed for each pollutant in the industrial user's
discharge that caused Pass Through or Interference, and
the industrial user was in compliance with each such local
limit directly prior to and during the Pass Through or
Interference; or
(ii) If a local limit designed to prevent Pass
Through and/or Interference, as the case may be, has not
been developed for the pollutant(s) that caused the Pass
Through or Interference, the industrial user's discharge
directly prior to and during the Pass Through or
Interference did not change substantially in nature or
constituents from the user's prior discharge activity when
the POTW was regularly in compliance with the POTW's
NPDES permit requirements and, in the case of
Interference, applicable requirements for sewage sludge
use or disposal.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015)
8-11-21. Severability.
If any part, section, subsection, sentence, clause or
phrase of this Chapter is for any reason held to be invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect the validity of the
remaining sections of the Chapter. The City Council
hereby declares that it would have passed the Chapter in
each part, section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase
thereof, irrespective of the fact that one or more parts,
sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases be
declared invalid.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015)
(April 3, 2017) 8-47
CHAPTER 12. SUBDIVISIONS.
Renumbered and Repealed.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015)
(April 3, 2017) 8-48
CHAPTER 13. POTW SEWER
CONSTRUCTION.
Renumbered and repealed.
(Ord. 2015-17, June 3, 2015)
(April 3, 2017) 8-49
CHAPTER 14. NO-FAULT UTILITIES CLAIMS
8-14-1. Short title.
8-14-2. Purpose.
8-14-3. Definitions.
8-14-4. Administration and establishment of
regulations.
8-14-5. Reimbursement - Claims - Time limitations.
8-14-6. Claims - Investigation and recommendation.
8-14-7. Criteria for payment.
8-14-8. Maximum payments.
8-14-9. Payment does not imply liability - Release
Required.
8-14-10. Annual budget expenditures.
8-14-11. Claims from other governmental agencies.
8-14-1. Short title.
The ordinance codified in this Chapter shall be
known as the "No-fault Utilities Claims Ordinance."
(Ord. 88-34, 01-04-89)
8-14-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this Chapter to compensate
persons for loss sustained as the result of a break or
backup in a city-owned and maintained watermain or
sewer line, regardless of fault on the part of the City,
within the restrictions, limitations, and other provisions of
this Chapter.
(Ord. 2007-08, 04-18-2007); (Ord. 88-34, 01-04-89)
8-14-3. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise,
the following terms and phrases, as used in this Chapter,
shall have the meanings hereinafter designated:
(1) "City" means Tooele City Corporation, a
political subdivision of the state of Utah.
(2) "City Attorney" means the City Attorney or
his/her designee.
(3) "Person or applicant" means any individual,
partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation,
association, joint stock company, trust, estate, or any other
legal entity (except the United States Government or any
of its agencies, or the state of Utah and any of its political
subdivisions) or their legal representatives, agents, or
assigns.
(4) "Political subdivision" means any political
subdivision of the state of Utah, including state
departments and agencies, cities, towns, counties, and
school districts.
(Ord. 2007-08, 04-18-2007); (Ord. 88-34, 01-04-89)
8-14-4. Administration and establishment of
regulations.
The Mayor may establish regulations sufficient to
provide for the handling of such claims and disbursement
of those funds which are set aside for payment of claims
under this Chapter.
(Ord. 2007-08, 04-18-2007); (Ord. 88-34, 01-04-89)
8-14-5. Reimbursement - Claims -Time limitations.
All claims for reimbursement under this Chapter must
comply with the Governmental Immunity Act of Utah,
Utah Code Annotated §63-30d-101 et seq., as amended,
and be submitted to the City Recorder within thirty (30)
days after the incident giving rise to the loss occurs.
(Ord. 2007-08, 04-18-2007); (Ord. 88-34, 01-04-89)
8-14-6. Claims - Investigation and recommendation.
Claims received by the City Recorder shall be
referred to the Department of Public Works for
investigation and recommendation. The Department's
report shall be forwarded to the City Attorney for
determination under the criteria of this Chapter. All
payments authorized by the City Attorney shall be made
by the Director of the Department of Public Works.
(Ord. 2007-08, 04-18-2007); (Ord. 88-34, 01-04-89)
8-14-7. Criteria for payment.
(1) The determination as to whether to make
payment of a claim submitted pursuant to this Chapter
shall be based on the following criteria:
(a) Whether an eligible claimant suffered an
otherwise uninsured property loss, caused by breach or
backup of a City-owned water main or sewer line, under
circumstances where the claimant acted responsibly to
avoid the loss; and,
(b) If so, whether the extent of the loss has
been adequately substantiated.
(2) The following shall result in the denial of a
claim:
(a) Claim not timely submitted;
(b) Loss fully covered by private insurance;
(c) Claimant ineligible under the terms of this
Chapter;
(d) Loss caused by an irresponsible act of the
claimant, claimant’s agent, or member of claimant’s
business or household; or
(e) Loss or eligibility unsubstantiated.
(3) The following shall result in reduction of
payment:
(a) Loss partially covered by private insurance;
(b) Loss exceeds funding limits of this
Chapter;
(c) Verification of loss inadequate or
incomplete; or
(d) Claimant did not cause the problem but
failed to act responsibly to minimize the loss.
(Ord. 2007-08, 04-18-2007); (Ord. 88-34, 01-04-89)
8-14-8. Maximum payments.
(1) Payments under this Chapter shall not exceed
$10,000 per claim.
(2) For budgeting purposes, payments under this
Chapter shall not exceed $100,000 per fiscal year.
However, the City Council may, in its sole discretion and
without amendment to this Section, budget additional
funds in any given fiscal year by Resolution.
(Ord. 2007-08, 04-18-2007); (Ord. 88-34, 01-04-89)
(April 3, 2017) 8-50
8-14-9. Payment does not imply liability- Release
required.
(1) Any payment of a claim made under this
Chapter shall not be construed as an admission of, nor
does it imply, any negligence or responsibility on the part
of the City. Any payment made under this Chapter is
strictly voluntary on the part of the City.
(2) This Chapter shall not in any way supersede,
change, or abrogate the Government Immunity Act of
Utah, and its application to the City, or establish in any
person a right to sue the City under this Chapter.
(3) Any payment of a claim made under this
Chapter and accepted by the claimant shall constitute a
full and complete release of any and all claims against the
City, its officers, employees, and agents for any damage
or loss arising from the incident.
(4) Any payment of a claim made under this
Chapter shall be expressly conditioned upon the City first
receiving a written release of liability, signed and
notarized by the claimant, in a form acceptable to the City
Attorney.
(Ord. 2007-08, 04-18-2007); (Ord. 88-34, 01-04-89)
8-14-10. Annual budget expenditures.
The Department of Public Works is authorized to
provide for and include within its budget a fund from
which payment of claims may be made pursuant to this
Chapter.
(Ord. 2007-08, 04-18-2007); (Ord. 88-34, 01-04-89)
8-14-11. Claims from other governmental agencies.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter,
no claim shall be accepted from the United States or any
of its departments or agencies, or from the state of Utah or
any of its political subdivisions.
(Ord. 2007-08, 04-18-2007); (Ord. 88-34, 01-04-89)
(April 3, 2017) 8-51
CHAPTER 15. OUTDOOR SMOKING
8-15-1. Smoking prohibited in outdoor places of
public access.
8-15-2. Definitions.
8-15-3. Violation.
8-15-1. Smoking prohibited in outdoor places of
public access.
Within the Tooele City corporate boundaries,
smoking is prohibited within 25 feet of outdoor places of
public access, including, but not limited to, public
playgrounds, play pits, sporting areas, children and animal
venues, gathering places, concession stands, and
pathways; provided, however, that smoking is permissible
at the Oquirrh Hills golf course, in public parking areas,
and at other designated areas at such venues.
(Ord. 2013-14, 09-04-2013) (Ord. 2007-16, 04-18-2007)
8-15-2. Definitions.
As used in this Chapter:
(1) “Concession Stand” means any place intended for
the distribution of goods and services in a public area.
(2) “Gathering Place” means any public area where
people congregate or assemble, including, but not limited
to, boweries, pavilions, amphitheaters, picnic tables, and
booths.
(3) “Pathway” means any pathway located in a public
area intended for walking, jogging, or biking.
(4) “Play Pit” means any designated play area within
a public park for use by children, where the area is not
contained by a fence. The boundary of a play pit shall be
defined by the edge of the resilient surface of safety
material, such as concrete, wood, or other material
surrounding the play pit.
(5) “Playground” means any park or recreational area,
specifically designed to be used by children, that may
have play equipment installed, or any similar facility
owned or operated by Tooele City.
(6) “Public Park” means any park owned or operated
by Tooele City.
(7) “Smoking” means
(a) possessing any lighted or heated tobacco
product in any form,
(b) inhaling, exhaling, burning, or heating a
substance containing tobacco or nicotine intended for
inhalation through a cigar, cigarette, e-cigarette, pipe, or
hookah,
(c) using an electronic cigarette (or e-cigarette),
and,
(d) using an oral smoking device intended to
circumvent the prohibition of smoking in this Chapter.
(8) “Sporting Area” means any public area used for
sporting events, including, but not limited to, bleachers,
backstops, sports fields, ball diamonds, basketball courts,
tennis or volleyball courts, skateboard areas, and
swimming pools.
(9) “Tobacco” and “tobacco product” means
cigarettes, electronic cigarettes (or e-cigarettes), and
tobacco products as defined in Utah Code §59-14-102, as
amended.
(Ord. 2013-14, 09-04-2013) (Ord. 2007-16, 04-18-2007)
8-15-3. Violation.
Any person, association, or corporation, or any
officer of an association or corporation, who violates any
provision of this Chapter shall be:
(1) on the first violation, guilty of an infraction; and
(2) on the subsequent similar violation within two
years, guilty of a class C misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2007-16, 04-18-2007)
(April 3, 2017) 8-52
CHAPTER 16. SPECIAL EVENTS
8-16-1. Purpose.
8-16-2. Definitions.
8-16-3. Permit required - unlawful activity.
8-16-4. Exemptions from Chapter requirements.
8-16-5. Special event permit application - form.
8-16-6. Special event permit application - procedure
- fees.
8-16-7. Special event permit approval - conditions -
security - display.
8-16-8. Insurance - assumption of risk -
indemnification - deposit.
8-16-9. Special event permit denial.
8-16-10. Appeals.
8-16-11. Costs - repairs.
8-16-12. Disclaimer.
8-16-13. Spontaneous assembly.
8-16-14. Distributing items from vehicles.
8-16-15. Authority of Tooele City.
8-16-16. Penalty for violation - enforcement.
8-16-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish reasonable
and uniform regulations governing the time, place, and
manner of holding special events within a Tooele City
public right-of-way or on Tooele City public property,
such as, a public park, in order to promote and protect the
public health, safety, and general welfare, while honoring
constitutionally protected speech and assembly.
(Ord. 2016-16, 09-21-2016)
8-16-2. Definitions.
The following terms are hereby defined for purposes
of this Chapter.
Applicant - Both the person signing the special event
permit application on behalf of the sponsoring entity and
the sponsoring entity.
Block Party - A gathering of persons who live in the
same geographic area.
City Services, Additional - Those municipal-type
services deemed necessary in the sole discretion of Tooele
City, over and above basic city services, necessary to
protect the public convenience, health, safety, and general
welfare of special event staff, participants, spectators, and
others, including equipment, materials, and police, fire,
and city inspection services.
City Services, Basic - Those municipal-type services
generally provided to residents and businesses necessary
to protect the public convenience, health, safety, and
general welfare of special event staff, participants,
spectators, and others, including culinary water, sanitary
sewer, and garbage services.
Department - The department of Parks and
Recreation.
Director - The director of the department.
Event, Athletic - An organized competitive or recreational
activity or event in which a group of people engages in a
sport, a race, or a form of physical exercise entirely or
partially within a public right-of-way or on public
property, including running, jogging, walking, bicycling,
dancing, and skating.
Event, Entertainment - An organized activity or event
occurring entirely or partially within a public right-of-way
or on public property, having as its primary purpose the
entertainment or amusement of a group of people,
including a parade, carnival, fair, show, concert, pageant,
exhibition, ceremony, reunion, block party, and
neighborhood gathering.
Event, Filming - An organized activity or event
occurring entirely or partially within a public right-of-way
or on public property, having as its primary purpose
filming activities, such as, the making of a movie.
Event, Political - An organized activity or event
occurring entirely or partially within a public right-of-way
or on public property, having as its primary purpose the
exercise of expressive activities of a political nature,
including speech-making, picketing, protesting, marching,
demonstrating, debating, or addressing public or social
issues.
Event, Special - Any athletic event, entertainment
event, or political event, whether for profit, not for profit,
charitable, or other purposes. Also event.
Neighborhood Gathering - See block party.
Occur Entirely Or Partially Within A Public Right-ofway
- When any portion of a special event, including set
up and take down, takes place on a public sidewalk, park
strip, curb and gutter, or road. Does not include the mere
driving on a public right-of-way to, from, or as part of a
special event.
Permit - A special event permit.
Promoting Entity - That person or organization that
is paying, in whole or in majority part, the costs associated
with a special event.
Sponsoring Entity - That person or organization that
is organizing, promoting, conducting, funding, or
otherwise sponsoring a special event.
Spontaneous Assembly - A meeting, gathering, or
assembly, occurring entirely or partially within a public
right-of-way or on public property, that is neither planned,
organized, nor coordinated in advance but that occurs as
a spontaneous reaction to a special event or another
spontaneous assembly, and where the requirement to
obtain a special event permit would prohibit or
substantially limit constitutionally protected speech or
assembly.
(Ord. 2016-16, 09-21-2016)
8-16-3. Permit required - unlawful activity.
(1) Except as expressly exempted, all special events
require a Tooele City special event permit.
(2) Except as expressly exempted, all special events
are subject to the requirements of this Chapter.
(April 3, 2017) 8-53
(3) Except as expressly exempted, it shall be
unlawful for any individual, corporation, partnership,
association, or other person or entity to promote, sponsor,
advertise, manage, or conduct a special event without first
applying for and obtaining a Tooele City special event
permit, and paying the associated permit fee.
(4) It shall be unlawful for any person involved in a
spontaneous assembly:
(a) to disrupt vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian
traffic within a public right-of-way;
(b) to substantially disrupt the general public’s
lawful use of public property;
(c) to substantially disrupt a permitted special
event;
(d) to create a nuisance, generate prohibited
noise, or commit disorderly conduct, as defined by law;
or,
(e) to create any imminent threat to the public
health, safety, or general welfare.
(Ord. 2016-16, 09-21-2016)
8-16-4. Exemptions from Chapter requirements.
The following are exempt from the permit
requirements of this Chapter:
(1) Spontaneous assemblies engaged in
constitutionally protected speech or assembly.
(2) Events that occur entirely on private property and
that do not occur entirely or partially within a public rightof-
way or on public property.
(3) (a) Block parties or neighborhood gatherings
that do not require a public right-of-way to be closed.
(b) Block parties or neighborhood gatherings
that do not substantially interfere with vehicular, bicycle,
or pedestrian traffic within a public right-of-way.
(4) The activities of Tooele City acting within the
scope of its discretionary or governmental functions.
(5) Organized group picnics, dinners, and reunions
at public parks that involve less than 500 people.
(6) Public, private, charter, or home school activities
authorized and supervised by the respective school that do
not occur entirely or partially within a public right-of-way.
(7) Religious or church activities authorized and
supervised by the respective religious group or church that
do not occur entirely or partially within a public right-ofway.
(8) Graveside funerals or ceremonies.
(9) Youth athletic leagues utilizing city facilities
according to arrangements with the City and conforming
to city rules and regulations.
(Ord. 2016-16, 09-21-2016)
8-16-5. Special event permit application - form.
All applications for a special event permit shall be
made on a special event permit application form
prescribed by the department, and shall include the
following information:
(1) type of special event (e.g., athletic event);
(2) detailed description of the special event,
including event purpose;
(3) name of each sponsoring entity and its principal
place of business;
(4) name of the contact person for each sponsoring
entity, together with the person’s mailing address and 24-
hour telephone number; the contact person must have
sponsoring entity authority over the special event;
(5) name of each promoting entity and its principal
place of business;
(6) name of the contact person for each promoting
entity, together with the person’s mailing address and 24-
hour telephone number; the contact person must have
promoting entity authority regarding the special event;
(7) proposed special event date(s), together with
beginning and ending times;
(8) proposed special event location(s), together with
site plan and route maps;
(9) estimated number of special event staff,
participants, and spectators;
(10) estimated number of special event animals and
vehicles, as applicable;
(11) number, nature, location, and specifications of
any lighting and sound amplification devices or systems
anticipated to be used in the special event;
(12) number and location of portable restroom
facilities to be provided for the special event, and plan for
waste disposal;
(13) special event staff, participant, and spectator
parking and transportation plan, including barricade
requirements;
(14) special event emergency medical services plan;
(15) special event crowd control and safety plan;
(16) number and type of special event concessions
and vendors;
(17) special event set-up, take-down, and clean-up
plan;
(18) signature of applicant;
(19) if the special event is a block party or a
neighborhood gathering for which a public right-of-way
will be entirely or partially closed, a list of signatures
consenting to the closure from all residents whose
vehicular access to their property will be affected by the
closure;
(20) written property owner authorization for any use
of private property;
(21) a Tooele City building permit application where
required by adopted codes;
(22) a Tooele City sign permit application where
required by Chapter 7-25;
(23) a Tooele City business license where required by
Chapter 5-1;
(24) copies of required third-party agency permits
(e.g., health department) regarding noise, sanitation, food
handling, alcohol, mass gathering, and other matters; and,
(25) other information deemed reasonably necessary
by Tooele City in order to protect the public health,
(April 3, 2017) 8-54
safety, and general welfare based on the specific
circumstances of the proposed special event.
(Ord. 2016-16, 09-21-2016)
8-16-6. Special event permit application - procedure -
fees.
(1) (a) A completed special event permit
application for a special event that will not entirely or
partially occur within a public right-of-way must be
submitted to the department at least 10 calendar days
before the special event.
(b) A completed special event permit
application for a special event that will entirely or
partially occur within a public right-of-way must be
submitted to the department at least 30 calendar days
before the special event.
(c) An untimely special event permit application
shall be denied except with a written finding of
extraordinary circumstances by the department and
documenting that the special event:
(i) appears to be in the public interest; and,
(ii) is not anticipated to adversely affect the
public health, safety, or general welfare.
(2) Based on a completed special event permit
application and input from the various Tooele City
departments, the department will evaluate the following:
(a) the basic city services and the additional city
services anticipated to be required by the special event, as
well as the estimated costs to provide the additional city
services;
(b) the impact of the special event on vehicular,
bicycle, and pedestrian traffic in the public rights-of-way;
(c) the impact of the special event on public
property and on the use of public property by the general
public;
(d) the impact of the special event on other
permitted special events; and,
(e) the impact of the special event on the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
(3) A special event permit application fee shall be
established by resolution of the City Council. An
application shall not be considered complete until after the
payment of the application fee. The application fee is not
refundable should an application be withdrawn, left
incomplete, or denied.
(4) The use of certain public properties, such as,
pavilions in public parks, shall require the payment of
rental, reservation, or other user fees in addition to the
special event permit application fee.
(5) A special event permit application may be
submitted no earlier than 12 months in advance of the
proposed special event.
(6) Approval of applications for conflicting or
competing special events shall be determined based on
which application was the first completed application to
be submitted to the department, including the payment of
the permit application fee. Tooele City, however, may
invite applicants to consider alternate special event dates
and locations in order to resolve conflicts.
(Ord. 2016-16, 09-21-2016)
8-16-7. Special event permit approval - conditions -
security - display.
(1) The department shall approve all complete and
timely special event permit applications, and shall issue
special event permits pursuant to approved applications,
when the department has determined that, based upon the
representations contained in the application and made by
the applicant, the special event permit application
complies with the requirements of this Chapter and the
special event can be carried out in such a manner that:
(a) is not likely to disrupt the safe and orderly
movement of vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian traffic
within the public rights-of-way;
(b) is not likely to disrupt the movement of
police, fire, or ambulance vehicles within, or the provision
of police, fire, or ambulance services to, any area of the
City;
(c) is not likely to substantially disrupt other
permitted special events;
(d) is not likely to require the exclusive use of
an entire public property, such as, a public park, or to
substantially disrupt the general public’s lawful use of
public property;
(e) is not likely to create a nuisance, generate
prohibited noise, or constitute disorderly conduct; and,
(f) is not likely to create any imminent threat to
the public health, safety, or general welfare.
(2) Tooele City is hereby authorized to impose upon
a special event permit all conditions deemed reasonably
necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general
welfare. Tooele City representatives may inspect the
location of a special event at any time to verify
compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and with
the conditions of a special event permit.
(3) In order to protect the public health, safety, and
general welfare, the City may require the use of certified
Tooele City peace officers for special event traffic control
and security. The number of peace officers required shall
be determined by the police department upon
consideration of factors such as the following: dates and
times of the special event; estimated special event
duration; special event route locations and length; public
right-of-way closures required by the special event;
anticipated traffic and weather conditions; estimated
number of special event staff, participants, and spectators
at the special event; nature, composition, format, and
configuration of the special event; and, conflicting
permitted special events. The cost for peace officer
services shall be included in the definition of additional
city services. No private, non-certified, or non-Tooele
City peace officers may be utilized except with the written
authorization of the police department. It shall be a
violation of this Chapter to use traffic control or security
(April 3, 2017) 8-55
officers not authorized by the police department.
(4) A special event permit shall be maintained at all
times in the possession of the sponsoring entity contact
person or named designee at the site of the special event.
A special event permit shall be displayed at the request of
any Tooele City agent. It shall be a violation of this
Chapter to fail to so maintain or display the permit.
(Ord. 2016-16, 09-21-2016)
8-16-8. Insurance - assumption of risk -
indemnification - deposit.
(1) (a) Prior to the issuance of a special event
permit, the sponsoring entity shall provide to the
department proof of comprehensive general liability
insurance coverage, including for both property damage
and bodily injury/death coverage, naming Tooele City and
its agents as additional insureds. Coverage shall be
maintained for the duration of the special event.
Minimum coverage shall be $1,000,000 per occurrence
with a $2,000,000 general aggregate, for a total aggregate
of $3,000,000.
(b) A special event at which an inflatable toy is
utilized, such as, a bounce house, shall require a separate
liability insurance policy provided by the inflatable toy
vendor/provider, in the minimum per occurrence coverage
amount of $3,000,000, naming Tooele City and its agents
as additional insureds.
(c) A special event permit application shall not
be considered complete without sufficient evidence of
adequate liability insurance coverage, as required by this
Section.
(2) By signing a special event permit application, the
applicant and the sponsoring entity agree to assume the
entire risk of all damage and injury that may occur in
connection with or arising out of the permitted special
event.
(3) Prior to a permitted special event, the sponsoring
entity shall agree in writing, upon a form approved by the
City Attorney, to indemnify, hold harmless, and defend
Tooele City and its agents against any claim for loss,
damage, or expense sustained by any person in connection
with or arising out of a permitted special event.
(4) Prior to a special event, the City may require a
sponsoring entity to pay to the City a reasonable
refundable cash deposit to be used, in the City’s
discretion, to repair damage to the public rights-of-way or
public property upon which the special event is to occur.
(Ord. 2016-16, 09-21-2016)
8-16-9. Special event permit denial.
(1) The director may deny a special event permit
upon making a written finding of any of the following:
(a) the special event permit application was
incomplete, untimely, or untruthful;
(b) the special event applied for substantially
conflicts with a special event previously applied for;
(c) a reasonable belief that the special event
applied for cannot be carried out in the manner specified
in Section 8-16-7(1);
(d) a reasonable belief that no reasonable
conditions can be imposed upon the special event permit
under Section 8-16-7(2) that adequately will protect the
public health, safety, and general welfare;
(e) the applicant or sponsoring entity failed to
promptly reimburse Tooele City for invoiced additional
city services following a previously permitted special
event;
(f) the applicant or sponsoring entity conducted
a previous special event in Tooele City without obtaining
a special event permit;
(g) the applicant or sponsoring entity failed to
promptly reimburse Tooele City for damage to a public
right-of-way, public property, or other Tooele City
property occurring in connection with a previously
permitted special event;
(h) the applicant or sponsoring entity violated
one or more terms or conditions of a previously issued
special event permit;
(i) the applicant or sponsoring entity has failed
to fully satisfy criminal penalties associated with a
prosecution of a violation of any provision of this Chapter.
(2) The department shall send notice of permit denial
to the applicant by certified U.S. mail to the sponsor
contact mailing address provided on the permit
application.
(Ord. 2016-16, 09-21-2016)
8-16-10. Appeals.
(1) An applicant may appeal in writing to the Mayor
the department’s denial of a special event permit and
imposition of conditions upon the approval of a special
event permit within 5 business days of the denial or
imposition of conditions.
(2) An applicant may appeal to the Administrative
Hearing Officer the Mayor’s denial of a special event
permit and imposition of conditions upon the approval of
a special event permit.
(Ord. 2016-16, 09-21-2016)
8-16-11. Costs - repairs.
(1) Upon applying for, and as a condition of the
issuance of, a special event permit, the applicant and the
sponsoring entity shall pay in advance to the City all
anticipated costs for additional city services deemed by
Tooele City, in its sole discretion, to be necessary in order
to protect the public health, safety, or general welfare.
Costs for additional city services provided for the special
event but not paid in advance shall be paid promptly upon
invoice. Should the City determine, in its discretion, that
paid anticipated costs for additional city services exceed
actual costs, Tooele City will promptly refund the
difference, without interest.
(2) Tooele City will not charge an additional fee for
basic city services.
(April 3, 2017) 8-56
(3) The applicant shall leave the public rights-of-way
and public property utilized for a permitted special event
in as good a condition as when received. The applicant
and the sponsoring entity, if different, shall be jointly and
severally liable to reimburse Tooele City for any
documented costs incurred by the City to clean up and
make repairs that exceed the deposit and for payment of
costs for additional city services.
(Ord. 2016-16, 09-21-2016)
8-16-12. Disclaimer.
By issuing a special event permit, Tooele City makes
no guarantees and assumes no liabilities for the health,
safety, or welfare of special event staff, participants, or
spectators or the condition of their respective property.
(Ord. 2016-16, 09-21-2016)
8-16-13. Spontaneous assembly.
Tooele City may regulate the time, place, and manner
of speech of any spontaneous assembly so as to:
(1) minimize disruption to vehicular, bicycle, and
pedestrian traffic within a public right-of-way;
(2) minimize disruption to the general public’s
lawful use of public property;
(3) minimize disruption of a permitted special event;
(4) prevent or stop a nuisance, noise disturbance,
disorderly conduct, or other violation of law; and,
(5) prevent an imminent threat to, and otherwise
protect, the public health, safety, or general welfare.
(Ord. 2016-16, 09-21-2016)
8-16-14. Authority of Tooele City.
Tooele City is hereby authorized to do the following:
(1) to order that a permitted special event be
stopped, and persons gathered for the special event be
disbursed, if the special event is documented by Tooele
City to be in violation of its special event permit, in
violation of the law, or an imminent threat to the public
health, safety, or welfare. It shall be a violation of this
Chapter for persons attending a special event to fail to
disburse when lawfully ordered to do so by a Tooele City
peace officer;
(2) to use all legal means to cancel or stop a special
event upon the occurrence of a natural disaster or other
emergency that Tooele City finds, in its discretion, may
adversely affect the health, safety, or welfare of special
event attendees;
(3) to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles
within public rights-of-way constituting part of the route
of a special event. Prohibited or restricted parking areas
shall be posted with signage. It shall be a violation of this
Chapter to park a vehicle contrary to signed parking
restrictions;
(4) to reserve space and to erect and reserve seating
in a public right-of-way or on public property for
observation of a special event. Reserved space or seating
shall be signed, cordoned, or otherwise marked. It shall
be a violation of this Chapter for unauthorized persons to
utilize reserved space or seating; and,
(5) to take any other lawful act.
(Ord. 2016-16, 09-21-2016)
8-16-15. Penalty for violation - enforcement.
(1) A violation of any provision of this Chapter shall
be a class C misdemeanor.
(2) Tooele City may use all legal means to prevent
or to stop a special event conducted in violation of any
provision of this Chapter.
(Ord. 2016-16, 09-21-2016)
9-1 (October 20, 2016)
TITLE 9. SERVICES
Chapter 1. City Cemetery.
Chapter 2. Utilities billings.
Chapter 3. Repealed. (Ord. 1977-20, 10-6-1977)
Chapter 4. Water supply.
Chapter 5. Drinking Water Source Protection.
Chapter 6. Cross Connection Control-General Policy
Chapter 7. Reclaimed Water Supply.
CHAPTER 1. CITY CEMETERY
9-1-1. Name of cemetery.
9-1-2. Cemetery supervisor - Creation of office.
9-1-3. Cemetery supervisor - Registrar of burials -
Disinterment.
9-1-4. Lots reserved for indigent persons.
9-1-5. Cemetery supervisor - Charge of cemeteries -
Reports.
9-1-6. Fees.
9-1-7. Records of conveyances.
9-1-8. Right to burial.
9-1-9. Unused lots.
9-1-10. Opening graves - Superintending interments.
9-1-11. Cemetery supervisor - Enforce regulations -
Specifications listed.
9-1-12. Hedges, copings, monuments, etc. -
Maintaining.
9-1-13. Monuments, markers - Specifications.
9-1-14. Driving vehicles, animals through - Speed
limits - Defacing property.
9-1-15. Purchase of rights to burial - Maintenance -
Vaults.
9-1-16. Burials must be in cemeteries - Exception.
9-1-17. Days when burials are prohibited.
9-1-18. Cemetery curfew and regulations - Penalty.
9-1-19. Perpetual care defined.
9-1-20. Artificial flowers.
9-1-21. Double depth burials.
9-1-22. Notice of burials and purchases required.
9-1-23. East-west burials only permitted.
9-1-24. Animals prohibited.
9-1-1. Name of cemetery.
The burial ground of Tooele City, Utah shall be known
and designated by the name of "Tooele City Cemetery".
(Ord. 1993-09, 05-13-1993)
9-1-2. Cemetery supervisor - Creation of office.
There is hereby created the office of City cemetery
supervisor, which office shall be filled by the Mayor's
appointment. The cemetery supervisor shall be the
cemetery sexton.
(Ord. 2015-06, 12-16-2015) (Ord. 1993-09, 5-13-1993)
9-1-3. Cemetery supervisor - Registrar of burials -
Disinterment.
(1) The cemetery supervisor shall be the registrar of
burials for the City. Before burying any dead body in any
cemetery within the corporate limits of Tooele City, or
before disinterring for transportation beyond the corporate
limits of the City the body of any person who has been
buried therein, the relatives or other persons having
charge of the body shall be required to furnish in writing
to the cemetery supervisor a statement of the death, which
shall be recorded in a record kept in the records of the
cemetery . Such statement as well as the record shall
include, if known, the name of the deceased person, when
and where born, the date and place of death and the cause
thereof, names of the deceased person's parents and
spouse, and the name of the medical examiner, if any, also
the date of burial, as well as the name of the cemetery,
with the plat, lot, block, and grave number where said
person is to be buried, and if disinterred and transferred
beyond the corporate limits of Tooele City, the place of
destination.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to disinter any
body in the cemetery except under the direction of the
cemetery supervisor. Before disinterment, a permit shall
be required from the Tooele County Health Department,
with the exception of cremated remains and stillborn
babies. Before disinterment, the cemetery supervisor shall
require a written order from the owner of the burial right
authorizing such removal, which order shall be kept in the
records of the cemetery. All such removals shall be
recorded by the cemetery supervisor in a record kept for
that purpose.
(3) The City is empowered to exercise its discretion
with regards to approving or denying requests for
disinterment in light of the public health, safety, and
welfare. All disinterments shall comply with federal,
state, and local laws and regulations.
(a) Permitted. The City will honor a request
from the owner of the burial rights, subject to applicable
federal, state, and local laws, upon receiving a written
court order or a written request on a form provided by the
City, and upon a finding of the City that the disinterment
will not endanger the health, safety, or welfare of the
City’s employees or the public. The City may, on its own,
disinter human remains in instances where a natural or
human-caused disaster has exposed a grave and where
disinterment is necessary to protect the public health,
safety, or welfare.
(b) Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person to disinter the remains of a person who died from
a contagious disease within 2 years after the date of burial,
unless the body was buried in a hermetically sealed casket
or vault and is found to be so incased at the time of
disinterment.
(c) City’s duties. The cemetery supervisor shall
determine whether a disinterment poses a danger to the
health, safety, or welfare of City employees or the public.
The cemetery supervisor may refuse to authorize a
disinterment if he determines that there is a danger to the
health, safety, or welfare to City employees or the public.
The cemetery supervisor may also refuse to authorize a
disinterment upon determining that the disinterment would
9-2 (October 20, 2016)
disturb or damage an adjacent burial lot, casket, coffin, or
vault. The cemetery supervisor may make this
determination at any time during the disinterment process.
Upon a determination by the cemetery supervisor that a
disinterment poses no danger to the health, safety, or
welfare of City employees or the public, and that the
disinterment would not disturb or damage an adjacent
burial lot, casket, coffin, or vault, the City will facilitate the
disinterment by excavating and refilling the burial lot. The
City, however, shall have no obligation to remove or return
a vault or casket to or from a grave or lot. The City will
comply with a court order.
(d) Requester’s Duties. Absent a court order, and
at least 7 business days prior to a disinterment, the
requester shall submit a Tooele County Health Department
disinterment permit the City request of disinterment form,
and pay all applicable fees prior to the City commencing
any disinterment. The requester shall arrange for and pay
any associated costs for a funeral director to be present at
the disinterment. The requester shall arrange for and pay
any associated costs for a licensed vault company to
remove the vault and its contents from the burial lot. If the
burial lot does not contain a vault, or the cemetery
supervisor determines that the existing vault has
deteriorated to the point that it will not retain its structural
integrity during the disinterment, the requester shall replace
the deteriorated vault with a structurally sound vault at the
requester’s expense. The requester shall arrange to dispose
of any deteriorated vault at the requester’s cost and in a
manner meeting federal, state, and local laws.
(e) Liability. The City assumes no liability for
any property damage, including damage to a casket, vault,
marker, monument, etc., or for bodily injury sustained
during a disinterment, except those damages or injuries
arising from the sole negligence of the City. The City is
not liable for the acts or omissions of any third party for
any reason. The City is not liable for damage to the
contents of any caskets or vaults located in adjacent lots
caused during a disinterment. The City is not liable for
mental anguish, shock, or intentional or negligent infliction
of emotional distress arising from a disinterment. The City
request for disinterment form shall contain this liability
provision, and the requester shall sign the form
acknowledging the liability provision prior to any
disinterment.
(Ord. 2015-06, 12-16-2015) (Ord. 1993-09, 05-13-1993
9-1-4. Lots reserved for indigent persons.
Such lots in the cemetery as the Mayor shall from time
to time designate shall be reserved for and appropriated to
the burial of indigent persons. All of the remaining lots or
blocks in the cemetery shall be reserved for the use and
possession of such families and other persons as have
heretofore, or shall hereafter become the purchasers of a
right to burial according to the provisions of this Chapter,
to be used by them and their heirs or grantees forever as
places for the burial of the dead.
(Ord. 2015-06, 12-16-2015) (Ord. 1993-09, 05-13-1993)
9-1-5. Cemetery supervisor - Charge of cemeteries -
Reports.
(1) The cemetery supervisor, under the direction of
the director of parks and recreation and the Mayor, shall
have entire control and superintendence of all Tooele City
cemeteries. The cemetery supervisor shall perform such
duties in addition to those found in this Chapter in relation
to the cemeteries as may be provided by law.
(2) The cemetery supervisor shall dig or cause to be
dug all graves required for the burial of the dead.
(3) The cemetery supervisor shall make periodic
reports of the work performed to the Mayor as the Mayor
shall require.
(4) The cemetery supervisor shall keep in reasonable
repair the enclosure around the cemetery, and so far as is
reasonable prevent the destruction or defacing by the City
of any marker or monument placed or erected therein.
(5) The cemetery supervisor shall have charge of a
duplicate plat of the cemetery and shall, at the request of
any person wishing to purchase a right to burial, point out
any of the unoccupied lots or parts of lots in which rights
for burial may be sold. Upon the purchaser's payment to
the City of the price of the right to be buried, the cemetery
supervisor shall make and execute a certificate of right to
burial, signed by the Mayor and attested by the City
Recorder, a copy of which certificate shall be delivered to
the purchaser.
(Ord. 2015-06, 12-16-2015) (Ord. 1993-09, 05-13-1993)
9-1-6. Fees.
All fees shall be paid by the applicant for cemetery
services prior to cemetery services being rendered.
(Ord. 2016-07, 03-16-2016) (Ord. 2015-06, 12-16-2015)
(Ord. 1993-09, 05-13-1993)
9-1-7. Records of conveyances.
(1) The cemetery supervisor shall keep a record all
conveyances executed under the provisions of this
Chapter, stating the number of the plat, lot, block, and
grave to which the right to burial is conveyed, the date of
such conveyance, the name of the person to whom
conveyed, and the amount received for the same.
(2) By January 1 and July 1 of each year, the
cemetery supervisor will cause to be filed with the office
of the Tooele County Recorder a document evidencing the
burial rights approved by the City for the City Cemetery
during the preceding 6 months.
(Ord. 2015-06, 12-16-2015) (Ord. 1993-09, 05-13-1993)
9-1-8. Right to burial.
(1) Purchase of one or more rights to burial from the
City shall be evidenced by a certificate showing a
description thereof and stating the price paid therefor,
prepared under the direction of the cemetery supervisor.
The certificate shall be the sole evidence of such right
recognized by the City. The cemetery records office shall
keep an index book of all burial spaces to which
certificates have been issued and shall show any transfer
from the original purchaser to any subsequent owner, and
9-3 (October 20, 2016)
also shall index any probate or other judicial proceeding
which affects the ownership of a burial rights.
(2) The certificate shall be signed by the Mayor and
shall be attested by the City Recorder. The City Recorder
shall keep a copy of each certificate issued as part of the
records of the City Recorder's office.
(3) Transfer of a right to burial from the grantee on
the certificate shall be recognized only upon recordation
with the cemetery supervisor. When a right to burial is to
be transferred or reverts to the City, the original certificates
or deeds shall be filed with the cemetery supervisor, and
before certificates of the right to burial are issued covering
such graves, the original certificate or deed shall be
canceled or quit claim deed given and the record so
changed.
(4) All rights of burial are subject to the City's
reservation of the right of access over and across any lot or
burial space in the cemetery for repair of turf, installation
or maintenance of water pipes or water lines for the
improvement of the cemetery, for the opening and closing
of adjacent graves, and for other cemetery-related
purposes. The cemetery supervisor is responsible to see
that all the work is completed and the surface returned to
the original condition after such installation or maintenance
work.
(5) Upon payment of the purchase price for any right
to burial, the certificate issued by the cemetery supervisor
in the name of the purchaser shall vest in the purchaser the
right to use the burial space or lot for burial purposes only
and subject to all rules, regulations, limitations, and
conditions imposed by this Chapter and by the cemetery
supervisor as are necessary for efficient care of the
cemetery.
(Ord. 2015-06, 12-16-2015) (Ord. 1993-09, 05-13-1993)
9-1-9. Unused lots.
(1) If, for more than 60 years, a grantee or persons
claiming through the grantee have not used portions of the
lots or parcels for purposes of burial and have not provided
for the care of the lots or parcels beyond that uniformly
provided for all lots of the cemetery, and during the 60-
year period have not given the City written notice of any
claim or interest in the lots or parcels, then the City is
empowered to demand of the grantee or persons claiming
through the grantee that they file with the City a written
notice of claim or interest in and to the lots or parcels
recorded by evidence of their claim of ownership within 50
days after service of a copy of the notice of demand. If
either the grantee, or person claiming through the grantee,
fails to comply with the demand or notice, the City may
bring an action in the district court of the county in which
the cemetery is located against all parties who have not
responded to the notice for the purpose of terminating the
rights of the parties in the lots or parcels and restoring the
lots or parcels to the City free of any right, title, or interest
of the grantee, persons claiming through the grantee, their
heirs, or assigns.
(2) As an alternative, the City Council may pass a
resolution demanding that the owner of a lot, site, portion
of the cemetery, or burial rights, which have been unused
for burial purposes for more than 60 years, file with the
City recorder notice of any claim to the lot, site, or parcel.
The City Council shall then cause a copy of the resolution
to be personally served on the owner in the same manner
as personal service of process in a civil action. The
resolution must notify the owner that the owner must,
within 60 days after service of the resolution on the
owner, express interest in maintaining the cemetery lot
and submit satisfactory evidence of an intention to use the
lot for burial. If the owner cannot be personally served
with the resolution of the City Council, the City Council
must publish its resolution for three successive weeks in
a newspaper of general circulation within the county and
mail a copy of the resolution within 14 days after the
publication to the owner’s last known address, if
available. If, for 30 days after the last date of service or
publication of the City Council’s resolution, the owner or
person with a legal interest in the cemetery lot fails to
state a valid interest in the use of the cemetery lot for
burial purposes, the owner’s rights are terminated and that
portion of the cemetery shall be vested in the City.
(3) The owner, grantee, or person claiming though
the grantee shall have the right, on presentation of the
certificate of title or right to burial to the City, for any lot
or parcel which has been reverted to the City, at the option
of the City, to:
(a) be compensated for the lot or parcel at the
reasonable value of the lot or parcel as of the date the
certificate is presented to the City, in which case the
certificate or title shall be forfeited to the City and
considered cancelled; or
(b) receive a right to burial to another lot or parcel if
the right to burial or title to the lot or parcel has been sold
by the City, in which case a new certificate shall be issued
and the old certificate or title shall be forfeited to the City
and be considered cancelled; or
(c) receive the right to burial to the lot or parcel if the
City has not sold the right to burial to the lot or parcel, in
which case a new certificate shall be issued and the old
certificate or title shall be forfeited to the City and be
considered cancelled.
(Ord. 2015-06, 12-16-2015) (Ord. 2002-11, 06-29-2002)
(Ord. 1993-09, 05-13-1993)
9-1-10. Opening graves - Superintending interments.
(1) The cemetery supervisor shall open, upon
payment of the appropriate fee, the subject graves in the
cemetery upon application to the cemetery supervisor
being made by the person having the right to burial
therein. The cemetery supervisor shall superintend every
interment and shall fill up and neatly trim the grave
immediately after depositing the casket. The cemetery
supervisor shall fill up and trim all graves that settle.
(2) Oversized burials may be accommodated
provided they do not encroach on adjacent lots for which
burial rights have been purchased, or on nearby vaults or
caskets.
(Ord. 2015-06, 12-16-2015) (Ord. 1993-09, 05-13-1993)
9-1-11. Cemetery supervisor - Enforce regulations -
Specifications listed.
The cemetery supervisor shall enforce all rules in
9-4 (October 20, 2016)
regard to care of lots in the cemetery. The cemetery
supervisor shall keep the streets and walks in the cemetery
in reasonably good order and unobstructed so that free
access can be had to any lot. The cemetery supervisor shall
cause a suitable marker to be erected upon the corners of
each lot with the number of the lot inscribed thereon.
(Ord. 2015-06, 12-16-2015) (Ord. 1993-09, 05-13-1993)
9-1-12. Hedges, copings, monuments, etc. -
Maintaining.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain
any fence, corner post, coping, hedge, or boundary of any
kind upon any grave, lot, street, or walk in the cemetery, or
grade the ground or land thereof. The cemetery supervisor
shall, whenever required, furnish the true lines of the lots
according to official survey, and shall prevent and prohibit
any markings of the same save and except by official
landmarks, and shall prevent and prohibit any grading
thereof that might destroy or interfere with the general
slope of the land. It shall be unlawful for any person to
plant any shrubs, trees, lawns, etc., or place any monuments
or markers upon any lot or lots in the cemetery without a
written permit first had and obtained from the cemetery
supervisor, and unless the same is done under the direction
and supervision of the cemetery supervisor.
(Ord. 2015-06, 12-16-2015) (Ord. 1993-09, 05-13-1993)
9-1-13. Monuments, markers - Specifications.
(1) Monuments and markers shall be allowed as
established in an administrative policy approved by the
Mayor. Only in established areas of the cemetery where
there are already monuments and markers rising above the
level of the grass are vertical monuments or markers
permitted.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or
place any monument on any lot in the City cemetery, unless
the same shall be placed in accordance with City
specifications established in the administrative policy.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to place any
monument on any lot in the cemetery made of any material
other than granite, marble, or memorial bronze, or other
material allowed by administrative policy approved by the
Mayor.
(4) All markers placed in the cemetery shall be set in
accordance with City specifications established in the
administrative policy.
(5) Additional markers or monuments may be placed
on a grave with the consent of the owner of the burial rights
of the grave on which the marker or monument is placed,
if that owner is living, or of the heirs of the deceased buried
in the grave if that owner is not living.
(6) It shall be unlawful for any person to place more
than one marker or monument at the head of any one grave.
(7) Vases and flowers shall be allowed as established
in an administrative policy approved by the Mayor.
(8) It shall be unlawful to place any aboveground
marker or monument in the cemetery without first paying
a permit fee.
(9) It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any
rule or regulation set forth in this Chapter or any published
rules or regulations established respecting the City
cemetery.
(10) Persons owning a certificate of right to burial, or
relatives of deceased persons buried in said cemetery,
shall erect and maintain in a manner satisfactory to the
cemetery supervisor suitable monuments at the heads of
graves, with the names of the deceased plainly inscribed
thereon.
(a) Ownership and maintenance. All markers
and monuments within the cemetery are the personal
property of the owner of the burial rights of the grave on
which the marker or monument is placed, if that owner is
living, or of the heirs of the deceased buried in the grave
if that owner is deceased.
(b) Disclaimer. The City shall not be responsible
for scratches, chips, and other damage that may occur to
markers or monuments from routine maintenance of the
Tooele City Cemetery. All persons purchasing and
placing markers and monuments in the cemetery are
hereby on notice that such damages are a natural condition
of the privilege of placing markers and monuments in the
cemetery. The City shall not be responsible for any
damages to markers or monuments caused by vandalism,
weather, natural disasters, or the actions of persons or
wildlife.
(c) Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any
person to place or have placed any markers or monuments
upon any lot in the cemetery except under the direction of
the cemetery supervisor. All markers and monuments
require a permit, issued by the cemetery supervisor,
obtained by the monument company or other supplier. All
markers and monuments require an inspection performed
by the cemetery supervisor or designee for compliance
with the administrative policy. The inspection shall occur
at the cemetery prior to the marker or monument being
removed from the supplier’s delivery vehicle.
(d) Liability for damage. The City shall not be
liable for damage to markers or monuments except where
the City is solely negligent for that damage.
(e) Special service emblems. American Legion
and Veterans of Foreign Wars medallions are encouraged
for display and recognition. Such medallions must be
permanently affixed to the marker or monument in a way
that will not interfere with the mowing and maintenance of
the cemetery.
(f) Benches. Benches may be placed within the
cemetery in accordance with City specifications
established in an administrative policy approved by the
Mayor.
(11) The placing of all markers, monuments,
improvements, and other works of any nature or
description shall be done under the direction and control
of the cemetery supervisor.
(12) The cemetery supervisor may arrange and
maintain trees, shrubs, and other landscaping to enhance
the beauty of the cemetery. No tree, shrub, or other plant
may be planted in or removed from the cemetery without
the approval of the cemetery supervisor or Director of the
department of parks and recreation.
(Ord. 2015-06, 12-16-2015) (Ord. 1993-09, 05-13-1993)
9-1-14. Driving vehicles, animals through - Speed
9-5 (October 20, 2016)
limits - Defacing property.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to ride any
animal within the limits of the City cemetery except when
participating in a City-approved parade or as part of a
funeral procession.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any
motor vehicle within the limits of the cemetery at a rate of
speed greater than 15 miles per hour.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to injure or
deface any monument, marker, tree, shrub, or any other
property in the City cemetery.
(Ord. 2015-06, 12-16-2015) (Ord. 1993-09, 05-13-1993)
9-1-15. Purchase of rights to burial - Maintenance -
Vaults.
(1) Rights to burial in the cemetery shall be sold for
the prices and charges established by resolution of the City
Council.
(2) In addition to the purchase price, perpetual care of
cemetery lots shall be assumed by the City upon purchase
of rights to burial. Thereafter the City shall, at its expense,
care for and maintain lots and burial spaces.
(3) All lots and parts of lots in the cemetery shall be
exempt from execution and from taxation.
(4) It shall be unlawful for any person to be buried in
the cemetery without the casket being placed in a
permanent-type vault, which vault type must be approved
by the cemetery supervisor.
(5) Burial vaults must be made of concrete or similar
structurally-sound material, and constructed in such a
manner that the vault will not collapse or disintegrate at
any point. Burial vaults constructed of plastic or fiberglass
shall not be allowed. All vaults must have a properly
fitting lid. Lids must be sealed with appropriate materials
before a grave may be refilled. The cemetery supervisor is
authorized to reject a vault that does meet these
requirements or that places at risk the public health, safety,
or welfare.
(Ord. 2015-06, 12-16-2015) (Ord. 1993-09, 05-13-1993)
9-1-16. Burials must be in cemeteries - Exception.
It shall be unlawful for any person to bury the body of
a deceased person within the City limits, except in the
Tooele City Cemetery or another cemetery established
pursuant to law.
(Ord. 2015-06, 12-16-2015) (Ord. 1993-09, 05-13-1993)
9-1-17. Days when burials are prohibited.
No burials shall be allowed on the following days:
New Years Day, Presidents Day, Memorial Day, 4th of
July, Pioneer Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day ,
Christmas Day, other federal and state holidays, and
Sundays. However, a burial may be permitted on any of
those days if the deceased died of a contagious disease or
if required by law.
(Ord. 2015-06, 12-16-2015) (Ord. 1993-09, 05-13-1993)
9-1-18. Cemetery curfew and regulations - Penalty.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person
to be in the cemetery after 10 p.m. of any day or before 6
a.m. of any day. A person will be considered to be in the
cemetery if the person is within the perimeter of the
cemetery as established by a fence, or is upon any portion
of the property set aside as present or future cemetery
property as designated in the appropriate records of the
City and the county.
(2) Cemetery patrons only are allowed in the
cemetery. It shall be unlawful for any person to climb
over or crawl under the cemetery fence or to damage a
cemetery fence.
(3) Children under 12 years of age must be
accompanied at all times on the cemetery property by a
parent or some supervising adult 18 years of age or older.
(4) It shall be unlawful to engage in recreational
activities, other than walking, on the cemetery property.
Recreational walking shall be done only on the permanent
roadways and walkways.
(5) The cemetery supervisor, any person working for
the cemetery supervisor's office, or any peace officer is
empowered to enforce the provisions of this chapter and
to abate any vandalism or trespassing within the cemetery
property.
(6) Any violation of this Chapter is a class C
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2015-06, 12-16-2015) (Ord. 1993-09, 05-13-1993)
9-1-19. Perpetual care.
(1) The City shall provide perpetual care for all lots
in the cemetery.
(2) "Perpetual care" as used in this Section includes
upkeep provided by the City, including mowing grass at
reasonable intervals, sodding and reseeding, filling sunken
graves, sprinkler irrigating, trimming trees and shrubs as
reasonably necessary, removing decorations and wilted
flowers, edging around markers and monuments, and
other cleanup as directed by the cemetery supervisor. No
other service is provided. Perpetual care does not include
repairing or replacing markers, monuments, or other
personal property. .
(2) Charges shall be made for all other services
performed and improvements made agreed to by the
cemetery supervisor according to the fee schedules
established by the City Council. If no fee has been
established for specific special service as requested, and
which the cemetery supervisor has agreed to provide, a
reasonable sum based upon the cost to the City shall be
assessed by the cemetery supervisor.
(Ord. 2015-06, 12-16-2015) (Ord. 1993-09, 05-13-1993)
9-1-20. Artificial flowers.
For the protection of the workers and the beauty of the
cemetery grounds, artificial flowers will not be allowed
unless they are placed in the permanent vases attached to
the cement base during the mowing and maintenance
season, April 1 to November 1, inclusive, except for
Memorial Day decorations which must be removed within
5 days after Memorial Day.
(Ord. 2015-06, 12-16-2015) (Ord. 1993-09, 05-13-1993)
9-1-21. Double depth burials.
(1) Double depth burials shall not be permitted.
Notwithstanding, up to 4 stillborn babies and/or
9-6 (October 20, 2016)
cremations may be buried above any regular burial space.
(Ord. 2015-06, 12-16-2015) (Ord. 1993-09, 05-13-1993)
9-1-22. Notice of burials and purchases required.
(1) All persons in charge of bodies to be buried in the
City cemetery must make the necessary arrangements for
digging of the grave, time of arrival at the cemetery,
supplies for vaults, purchase of rights to burial, payment of
fees, and other pertinent matters at least 8 working hours
prior to such burial.
(2) The cemetery supervisor and the cemetery
supervisor's employees and co-workers will not be
responsible for any error or claimed error in opening
graves when orders are given by telephone or other than in
writing.
(Ord. 2015-06, 12-16-2015) (Ord. 1993-09, 05-13-1993)
9-1-23. East-west burials only permitted.
All burials shall be with the length of the casket and
vault on an east-west alignment.
(Ord. 2015-06, 12-16-2015) (Ord 1993-09, 05-13-1993)
9-1-24. Animals prohibited.
No animals shall be allowed in the Tooele City
Cemetery unless confined in a vehicle. It shall be unlawful
for any person having the charge, care, custody or control
of any animal to allow the animal to be within the
cemetery, except in a motor vehicle.
(Ord. 1993-09, 05-13-1993)
CHAPTER 2. UTILITIES BILLINGS.
9-2-1. Billing.
9-2-1.1 Owner responsible - indemnity.
9-2-2. Nonresidential estimated billing.
9-2-3. Residential estimated billing.
9-2-4. Payment of bills.
9-2-5. Late payment charge.
9-2-6. Returned check charge.
9-2-7. Disputed bill.
9-2-8. Billing adjustments.
9-2-9. Overbilling.
9-2-1. Billing.
Tooele City utilities include water, sewer, and
garbage service. Except where specifically stated, a
resolution adopted by the city council establishing fees
sets forth the rate for one billing month for City
utilities. However, local conditions, initial billings,
final billings, and seasonal readings may cause billings
on irregular intervals, in which case the bill may be
appropriately adjusted. Except as specifically provided
otherwise, the City's rates are based on continuing
service at each service location and the bill for utilities
service shall be calculated separately for each meter.
(Ord. 1994-06, 3-16-1994)
9-2-1.1 Owner responsible - indemnity.
(1) No City utility services shall be furnished to
any dwelling or other place or premises, regardless of
whether the services are for the use of the property
owner or of a tenant, unless the property owner signs a
written application agreeing to be responsible for and
pay for all utility service provided to the property.
Tenants may not sign for or obtain utility accounts.
(2) The property owner shall provide proof of
property ownership, in a form acceptable to the City, at
the time of application.
(3) Monthly charges for all city-provided utility
services shall be billed to the property owner of record
whether the property is owner occupied or renter
occupied.
(4) A person authorized by a property owner
power of attorney, by probate, or by a court order may
sign an application and shall thereafter be responsible
for and pay for city utility services.
(5) As an express condition of receiving city
utility services, the property owner agrees to, and shall,
indemnify, defend, and hold the City harmless against
any and all claims made against the City arising in any
way out of the property owner’s conduct or failure to
act with respect to any tenants, including the
termination of city utility services to leased premises at
the request of the owner or because of the owner’s
failure to pay for such services. This indemnity shall
include attorneys fees and costs.
(Ord. 2015-20, July 15, 2015)
9-2-2. Nonresidential estimated billing.
When any local condition makes it impractical to
read meters at regular intervals, the City may, at its
option, read such meters at irregular intervals but not
less frequently than once every 12 months. Under such
conditions, bills for water service will be rendered for
either the minimum monthly charge set forth in the
Tooele City Fee Schedule or for amounts based on the
City's estimate of the customer's use during the month.
When an actual meter reading is obtained, the City may
adjust each estimated billing which has occurred since
the last City meter reading was obtained.
(Ord. 2015-20, July 15, 2015) (Ord. 1994-06, 3-16-
1994)
9-2-3. Residential estimated billing.
Bills will be rendered regularly at monthly intervals
to permanent continuous nonseasonal customers. The
City at its option may use an estimated billing
procedure. If a meter reader is unable to gain access to
a meter for the purpose of making an actual reading, the
City shall take appropriate additional measures in an
effort to obtain an actual meter reading. These
measures shall include, but are not limited to,
scheduling of a meter reading at other than normal
business hours, making an appointment for meter
reading or providing a prepaid postal card with a notice
of instruction upon which an account holder may record
a meter reading. In addition, when mutually agreed
upon and at the customer's expense, a remote device
may be installed. If after two regular route visits access
has not been achieved, the City will notify the customer
that the customer must make arrangements to have the
meter read as a condition of continuing service. If, after
complying with these provisions, the City is unable to
make an actual meter reading within a two month
period, it may again render an estimated bill for the
current billing cycle.
(Ord. 1994-06, 03-16-1994)
9-2-4. Payment of bills.
All bills are payable by mail or in person at any
office, pay station, or collection center authorized by
the City, not later than the due date shown on the bill.
(Ord. 1994-06, 03-16-1994)
9-2-5. Late payment charge.
A late payment charge may be levied against any
account that is not paid in full each month. This charge
will be computed at a percentage specified in the
Tooele City Fee Schedule applied to the unpaid
9-7
delinquent balance brought forward on the subsequent
month's bill. All payments received prior to the
subsequent month's billing date will apply to the
customer's account prior to calculating the late payment
charge. Those payments applied shall satisfy the oldest
portion of the billing first, any other billings second,
and the current billing last.
(Ord. 2015-20, July 15, 2015) (Ord. 1994-06, 03-16-
1994)
9-2-6. Returned check charge.
A charge, as set forth by resolution of the city
council, may be assessed and collected by the City for
each returned check.
(Ord. 1994-06, 03-16-1994)
9-2-7. Disputed bill.
The director of finance is authorized to settle any
disputed charge contained on a utility bill. A final
appeal may be taken to the mayor within five days of
any written decision of the director of finance.
(Ord. 1994-06, 03-16-1994)
9-2-8. Billing adjustments.
(1) Definitions.
(a) A "backbill" is that portion of any bill,
other than a levelized bill, which represents charges not
previously billed for service that was actually delivered
to the customer during a period before the current
billing cycle.
(b) A "catch-up bill" is a bill based upon an
actual reading rendered after one or more bills based on
estimated or customer readings. A catch-up bill which
exceeds by 50 percent or more the bill that would have
been rendered under the City's standard estimation
program is presumed to be a backbill.
(2) Every backbill shall contain a written
explanation of the reason for the backbill that shall be
sufficiently detailed to apprise the customer of the
circumstances, error, or condition that caused the
underbilling, and, if the backbill covers more than a 24-
month period, a statement setting forth the reasons the
City did not limit the backbill under Subsection (4).
(3) The City shall not render a backbill more than
three months after the City actually became aware of
the circumstance, error, or condition that caused the
underbilling. This limitation does not apply to fraud or
theft of service.
(4) The City shall not bill a customer for service
rendered more than 24 months before the City actually
became aware of the circumstance, error, or condition
that caused the underbilling or that the original billing
was incorrect.
(5) In case of customer fraud, the City shall
estimate a bill for the period over which the fraud was
perpetrated. The time limitation of Subsection (4) does
not apply to customer fraud situations.
(6) The City shall permit the customer to make
arrangements to pay a backbill without interest over a
time period at least equal in length to the time period
over which the backbill was assessed, unless the City
has demonstrated that the customer knew or reasonably
should have known that the original billing was
incorrect or in the case of fraud or theft. Interest will be
accessed at the rate applied to past due accounts on all
amounts not timely paid in accordance with the
established arrangements.
(Ord. 1994-06, 03-16-1994)
9-2-9. Overbilling.
(1) Billing under any of the following conditions
constitutes overbilling:
(a) a meter registering more than two percent
fast, or a defective meter;
(b) incorrect service classification, provided
that the information supplied by the customer was not
erroneous or deficient;
(c) billing based on a switched meter
condition where the customer is billed on the incorrect
meter;
(d) meter turnover or billing for a complete
revolution of a meter which did not occur;
(e) incorrect meter reading or recording by
the City; and,
(f) incorrectly estimated billings by the City.
(2) The City shall not provide interest on customer
payments for overbilling.
(3) The City shall not refund or give a credit for
overpayments which occurred more than 24 months
before the customer submitted a complaint to the City,
or the City actually became aware of an incorrect
billing which resulted in an overpayment.
(4) The City shall not pay interest on
overpayments.
(Ord. 1994-06, 03-16-1994)
9-8
(March 28, 2006) 9-9
CHAPTER 3. SHADE TREES
9-3-1 through 9-3-8. Repealed. (Ord. 77-20, 10-6-77)
(October 20, 2016) 9-10
CHAPTER 4. WATER SUPPLY
9-4-1. Waterworks.
9-4-2. Fees and regulations adopted by resolution.
9-4-3. Written application for water.
9-4-4. Users to pay expense of installation.
9-4-5. Quality of service pipe, permit and fee.
9-4-6. Service Pipes to be kept in good repair.
9-4-7. Separate connections.
9-4-8. Fire hydrants.
9-4-9. Fire hydrant wrenches.
9-4-10. Use without payment prohibited.
9-4-11. City may shut off water, when, no liability.
9-4-12. Notice to water users, delinquency.
9-4-13. Turning on after being turned off prohibited.
9-4-14. Waste prohibited.
9-4-15. Water not be supplied to motors, irrigation.
9-4-16. Restriction of water use.
9-4-17. City’s jurisdiction over waterworks. Mayor
to have free access.
9-4-18. Unlawful to interfere with city officers.
9-4-19. Nuisance on watershed.
9-4-20. Unlawful to interconnect irrigation lines to
city culinary lines.
9-4-21. Irrigation outlets to be painted black.
9-4-1. Waterworks.
Tooele City shall have the power to construct,
maintain and operate a waterworks system including
storage reservoirs, streams, canals, ditches, water mains,
pipes, drains, services and fire hydrants or to authorize the
construction, maintenance and operation of the same by
others, or purchase or lease such works or systems from
any person or corporation, and they may sell and deliver
the surplus product or service capacity of any such works,
not required by the City or its inhabitants, to others
beyond the City limits. The waterworks constructed by
Tooele City Corporation or others upon authorization of
the City shall be designated and known as the Tooele City
Waterworks System and it shall be the property of Tooele
City.
(Ord. 1980-45, 12-4-1980)
9-4-2. Fees and regulations adopted by resolution.
(1) The Tooele City Council shall enact fees and
regulations by resolution regarding water connections,
water consumption and the inspection of water line
installations. Unless otherwise provided in the resolution,
all said regulations and fees shall take effect immediately
upon final adoption by the Council and approval by the
Mayor.
(2) All water connection permits issued by Tooele
City shall lapse two years from the date thereof unless
prior thereto a meter deposit is paid to Tooele City and
water is delivered by Tooele City through said connection.
(3) Water connection fees shall be payable with the
application for a water connection which application shall
be made where applicable with the building permit and no
building permit shall issue where water connection is
contemplated, prior to the payment of the water
connection fee.
(Ord. 79-32, 12-14-79; 78-22, 8- -78)
9-4-3. Written application for water.
Application for the use of water must be made on
printed forms, furnished by the Council and signed by the
applicant. The applicant shall state fully and truly the
purpose for which water is required, and shall agree to
conform to, and be governed by such rules and regulations
as may be prescribed by the Council for the control of the
water supply. Said applicant shall, in his application, state
the location and kind of building to be supplied.
Any person desiring to discontinue the use of water
supplied to any premises for a period of not less than one
month shall give notice in writing to the Mayor. No
reduction or abatement of water rates shall be made unless
such notice shall be given. No sprinkling will be allowed
unless premises are supplied through a meter. (Ord.
1967-3, 08-14-1967)
9-4-4. Users to pay expense of installation.
All water meters shall be installed at the expense of
the service owner or user, payable in advance. The
Council shall by resolution fix the amount of each service
installation charge and the terms and conditions thereof.
(Ord. 1967-3, 08-14-1967)
9-4-5. Quality of service pipe, permit and fee.
All service and other pipes used underground shall be
of such material as approved by the Tooele City Plumbing
Code, and the Utah State Department of Health, laid so
that the finished elevation shall provide not less than four
feet of cover material above said pipe, with the bedding of
said pipe to be approved by the Tooele City Building
Official or the City Engineer prior to installation, with all
pipe used to be approved by the National Sanitation
Foundation and approved by the Tooele City Building
Official or the City Engineer prior to installation as to
class, type and size. All new construction or replacement
of existing water lines shall meet the requirements of the
Tooele City Building and Construction codes, and all
backfill density shall meet or exceed 95% of maximum
laboratory density as determined by AASHO Designation
T-99, Method D. Building permits shall be acquired prior
to any such construction or replacement. Each separate
dwelling structure shall have a separate service lateral
connected to the City water main.
Each service lateral shall have a corporation stop at
the junction of the main and service lines.
No consumer shall be permitted to conduct water
pipes across lots or buildings to adjoining premises,
without permission from the Mayor, and a stop-cock and
key-box shall be attached at the junction of such service
pipe.
(Ord. 1975-3, 4-28-1975)
9-4-6. Service pipes to be kept in good repair.
All water users shall keep their sprinklers, hydrants,
faucets, valves, hoses, connections, fixtures and other
apparatus and service pipes, except service pipes running
from the main line to the meter, in good condition at their
own expense. Tooele City shall maintain the service pipe
(October 20, 2016) 9-11
from the main line to and including the water meter and
other apparatus within the meter box. The water user
shall maintain all other service pipes and other fixtures or
apparatus, on the outlet side of the meter box to the
service location. Whenever service pipes or fixtures or
apparatus, other than the service line from the main line to
and including the meter box, and the fixture therein, are
broken or not in a serviceable condition, the consumer
shall, upon written notice make the necessary repairs or
replacements at his expense. Should he fail to do so water
shall be turned off or service limited and not turned on
again until said replacement or repairs are made.
No person, except under the direction of the Mayor
and in compliance with the provisions of Title 4, Chapter
9 of this Code, shall dig into the street, sidewalk, right of
way or other public place within the limits of Tooele City,
for the purpose of laying, removing or repairing any
service pipe. (Ord. 1983-02, 6-4-1983)
9-4-7. Separate connections.
It shall be unlawful for two (2) or more separate
water users to be connected onto one water meter or
service line connection, unless the premises of all such
water users are owned by the same owner. In all such
cases where any one property owner has two (2) or more
separate water users connected onto the City main by
means of one water meter or service connection, the
property owner shall in all cases be primarily liable to the
City for all water used on all such premises.
(Ord. 1967-3, 08-14-1967)
9-4-8. Fire hydrants.
(1) Fire hydrants shall be of the compression or gate
type conforming to AWWAC 502 specifications, and
shall be of a make that has been adopted by the City for
standard use. Fire hydrants shall be placed on all water
mains at least every four hundred feet (400').
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person not duly
authorized by the mayor or his designated representative
to open or operate any fire hydrant or to tamper or
interfere with or attempt to draw water therefrom or in any
way to obstruct the approach thereto.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere
with, tamper with, or injure, break, damage or destroy any
water meter, fire hydrant, or any other attachment
pertaining to the water works system of Tooele City.
(Ord. 2016-13, 07-06-2016) (Ord. 1977-22, 11-19-1977)
9-4-9. Fire hydrant wrenches.
It shall be unlawful to have a fire hydrant wrench.
The Mayor upon application shall furnish wrenches for
fire hydrants to the Chief of the Fire Department for the
use of the Department, and to such other persons as may
be duly authorized.
It shall be unlawful for any person without due
authority to have in his possession, any wrench for a fire
hydrant.
It shall be unlawful for any person having lawful
charge of any hydrant wrench to permit the same to be
taken from him, or from place of deposit, or to permit
such wrench to be used for any purpose other than that
authorized by the Mayor.
(Ord. 1967-3, 08-14-1967)
9-4-10. Use without payment prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person by himself, family,
servants, or agents to use the water coming through the
water mains without first paying therefor as hereinafter
provided, or without authority to open any stop-cock or
other fixture attached by the system of water supply, or to
in any way injure, deface or to cast anything into any
reservoir or tank belonging to said waterworks.
(Ord. 1967-3, 08-14-1967)
9-4-11. City may shut off water, when, no liability.
The City reserves the right at any time without notice,
to shut off the water from its mains for the purpose of
making repairs or extension or for other purposes, and no
claims shall be made against the City, by reason of the
breakage, stoppage, or interruption of any service pipe or
service cock, or for any other damage that may result from
the shutting off of water for repairing, laying or relaying
mains, hydrants or other connections.
(Ord. 1967-3, 08-14-1967)
9-4-12. Notice to water users, delinquency.
The Mayor shall cause to be mailed or delivered to each
water user, a notice stating the amount of water rates
assessed against him and date when payment is due. If
payment is not received within thirty (30) days from the
date due, the Mayor may mail or deliver to the water user,
a notice stating that if the payment is not received within
15 days the water will be turned off. This notice must
explain that any disputes may be taken to the City
Department of Finance, who has the authority to settle
such disputes. The notice shall also state that if the water
is turned off, a fee in addition to the delinquent payment
must be paid before the water will be turned on, such fee
being adopted by Resolution as part of the Tooele City
Fee Schedule.
(Ord. 1997-44, 06-04-1997); (Ord. 1980-42, 10-2-1980)
9-4-13. Turning on after being turned off prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, after the water has
been turned off from his premises on account of
nonpayment of rates or other violation of the rules and
regulations pertaining to the water supply, to turn on or
allow the water to be turned on, or use, or allow the water
to be used without authority from the Mayor.
(Ord. 1967-3, 08-14-1967)
9-4-14. Waste prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any water taker to waste
water, or to allow it to be wasted by imperfect stops,
valves, leaky joints, faucets, or stops, or through basins,
water closets, urinals, sinks or other apparatus or to use
(October 20, 2016) 9-12
the water for purposes other than those for which he has
paid, or to use water in violation of the rules and
regulations for controlling the water supply, the the
provisions of this Chapter.
(Ord. 1967-3, 08-14-1967)
9-4-15. Water not to be supplied to motors, irrigation.
No water shall be supplied form the pipes of the City
waterworks for the purpose of driving any motor, syphon,
turbine, or other wheels, or any hydraulic engines, or
elevators, or for driving or propelling machinery of any
kind whatsoever, nor shall any license be granted or
issued for any such purpose except by special permission
of the Mayor.
(Ord. 2002-08, 04-17-2002); (Ord. 1967-3, 08-14-1967)
9-4-16. Restriction of water use.
(1) In time of water shortage, whenever it shall in the
judgment of the mayor be necessary, the mayor shall, by
proclamation and without prior approval of the City
Council, limit the use of water within the limits of Tooele
City or as supplied by the Tooele City culinary
distribution system to such an extent as may be necessary
for the public good. Those nonessential purposes which
may be restricted or curtailed absolutely shall include, but
shall not be limited to the following:
(a) Using hoses, sprinklers, or other means of
sprinkling or irrigation for watering shrubbery, trees,
lawns, grass, plants, vines, gardens, vegetables, flowers,
or other vegetation.
(b) Washing automobiles, trucks, trailers, trailer
houses, or other types of mobile equipment.
(c) Washing streets, driveways, parking lots,
service station aprons, office buildings, exteriors of
homes, sidewalks, apartments, or other exterior surfaces
of buildings or structures.
(d) Operating ornamental fountains or other
structures making a similar use of water and not
employing water conservation equipment or subject to
excess evaporation as determined by the city engineer.
(e) Filling swimming and wading pools.
(f) Operating any water-cooled comfort air
conditioning equipment which does not have water
conserving features satisfactory to the city engineer.
(2) Whenever the mayor shall determine that an
emergency exists requiring the implementation of the
provisions of this section, he shall give public notice
thereof by proclamation either printed in a newspaper of
general circulation within Tooele City or published by
other means reasonably calculated to notify the public of
restricted watering schedules. The proclamation shall
become effective immediately upon such publication or
notification.
(3) Whenever more serious water restrictions than
those initially instituted by the proclamation are deemed
by the mayor necessary to be imposed, the mayor shall
meet with the City Council to formulate a plan for
instituting appropriate restricted watering schedules,
conservation measures, rationing or other measures.
(4) The mayor may, upon recommendation of county
health officers, permit reasonable use of water in any case
necessary to maintain adequate health sanitation
standards.
(5) Violations. A violation of the proclamation of
the mayor or other restrictions, conservation measures,
rationing, or other measures established by the mayor and
City Council shall be a civil infraction, punishable as
follows:
(a) a first violation during the calendar year:
written warning;
(b) a second violation during the calendar year:
$25 fine;
(c) a third violation during the calendar year:
$100 fine;
(d) a fourth or subsequent violation during the
calendar year: $250 fine.
In addition to these civil penalties, the City may cause a
violator's water to be shut off or disconnected. In the
event a violator’s water is shut off or disconnected, the
violator shall pay a reconnect fee of $50 before service is
reestablished.
(6) Notice of Violation; service. City Finance
Department and Police Department employees are hereby
authorized to issue a Notice of Violation for violations of
this Section or for violations of the restricted watering
schedules established under authority of this Section. A
Notice of Violation shall be served upon the violator, if
possible, but if the violator is unavailable or unknown, the
citation shall be posted at the violating premises. This
Section presumes that the water account owner at the
location of the violation is the violator. Fine amounts
unpaid prior to the next water billing cycle shall be
included in the account owner’s water bill. Delinquent
fine payments shall be invoiced in the same manner, and
pursuant to the same procedures, as delinquent water bill
payments, and may include water shutoff, reconnection
fees, and referral to collections.
(7) Appeals. Appeal of a Notice of Violation shall
be to the Administrative Hearing Officer.
(Ord. 2013-07, 04-17-2013); (Ord. 2006-02, 01-04-2006);
(Ord. 2002-08, 04-17-2002); (Ord. 1989-15, 09-06-1989)
9-4-17. City's jurisdiction over waterworks, Mayor to
have free access.
Tooele City shall have the power to construct or
authorize the construction of waterworks within or
without the Tooele City limits, and for the purpose of
maintaining and protecting the same from injury and the
water from pollution, Tooele City's jurisdiction shall
extend over and the City shall have free access to all
territory occupied by such works, and over and to all
reservoirs, streams, canals, ditches, water mains, pipes,
drains, services, and fire hydrants used in and necessary
for the construction, maintenance and operation of the
Tooele City Waterworks System. The City shall also have
free access at all reasonable hours, to all places supplied
(October 20, 2016) 9-13
with water from the Waterworks System, to examine the
apparatus, the amount of water used, the manner of its use
and to make all necessary "shut-offs" for vacancy,
delinquency and violations of this Chapter. Any water
taker violating any of the rules and regulations controlling
the water supply shall forfeit the right to the use of the
water.
(Ord. 1980-45, 12-4-1980)
9-4-18. Unlawful to interfere with city officers.
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with,
molest, hinder, or obstruct the Mayor, or any of his
agents, servants, or employees while in the performance
of the duties imposed by the foregoing Sections.
(Ord. 1967-3, 08-14-1967)
9-4-19. Nuisance on watershed.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to construct,
use or maintain any closet, privy, outhouse, cesspool,
urinal or sewage disposal system or any public bathhouse,
swimming tank or swimming pool at any place within the
watershed area of said City unless such closet, privy,
outhouse, cesspool, urinal or sewage disposal system,
public bathhouse, or swimming tank is provided with
effective germ destroying appliances and without first
having obtained from the Mayor and Health
Commissioner a permit for the construction, use and
maintenance of same.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to do or
permit to be done any of the things hereinafter described
in any canyon or along any stream of water used by the
inhabitants of the City for their supply anywhere within
the watershed area of said City.
(a) To construct or maintain any corral, sheep
pen, pig pen, chicken coop, stable, or any offensive or
contaminating yard or outhouse.
(b) To deposit, pile, unload or leave any manure
or offensive rubbish or carcass of any dead animals at any
place within said watershed area, except at a garbage
disposal plant designed by the Health Commission and
Superintendent of Waterworks.
(c) To permit any loose cattle, horses, sheep,
hogs or any other animals to run at large except where
such livestock are more than three hundred feet (300')
from any stream or source of water supply within said
watershed area.
(d) To stake or graze horses, cattle, sheep, hogs
or other animals within three hundred feet (300') of the
bank of such stream, except that such horses or cattle may
be staked or corralled within such three hundred feet
(300') at such place and under such conditions as may be
designated by the Health Commissioner and Mayor of the
City. The person obtaining such permit must keep the
premises whereon said animals are kept in good condition
as may be required by the Health Commission and the
Mayor and said permit may be revoked at any time by
said officer upon failure of the permittee to comply with
such reasonable sanitary regulations as are prescribed by
said officer.
(e) To permit any horses, cattle, sheep, hogs, or
other animals to water directly from the stream.
(f) To permit any horses, cattle, sheep, hogs or
other animals to remain in or near or to pollute any such
stream of water.
(g) To throw or deposit any garbage or other
deleterious matter of any kind anywhere within said limits,
except at a garbage disposal plant designated by the
Health Commission and Superintendent of Waterworks.
(h) To permit any dog to run at large.
(i) To throw or break bottles or glass.
(j) To spread or eat lunch or picnic within one
rod of the bank of such stream.
(k) To wade or bathe in the stream.
(l) To wash dishes or other articles in the
stream.
(m) To commit any nuisance whatsoever.
(Ord. 1967-03, 08-14-1967)
9-4-20. Unlawful to interconnect irrigation lines to
city culinary lines.
It shall be unlawful for any person in interconnect
irrigation water lines of whatever source to Tooele City
culinary water lines without the express written
permission of the Mayor of Tooele City or any agent
designated by the Mayor, all pursuant to the laws of the
State of Utah regarding culinary water quality.
(Ord. 1980-16, 4-10-1980)
9-4-21. Irrigation outlets to be painted black.
All irrigation water fire hydrants, risers, or other
discharge outlets shall be painted black so as to identify
said hydrants and risers as being for the discharge of nonpotable
irrigation water.
(Ord. 2009-06, 05-06-09) (Ord. 1980-16, 4-10-1980)
(March 28, 2006) 9-14
CHAPTER 5. DRINKING WATER SOURCE
PROTECTION.
9-5-1. Short Title and Purpose.
9-5-2. Definitions.
9-5-3. Establishment of Drinking Water Source
Protection Zones.
9-5-4. Permitted Uses.
9-5-5. Prohibited Uses.
9-5-6. Drinking Water Source Protection
Requirements.
9-5-7. Administration.
9-5-1. Short Title and Purpose.
(1) This ordinance shall be known as the "Drinking
Water Source Protection Ordinance."
(2) The purpose of this ordinance is to ensure the
provision of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply to the
residents of Tooele City who receive water for culinary and
domestic use from the City by the establishment of drinking
water source protection zones surrounding the wellheads
and springs for all wells and springs used by the City and by
the designation and regulation of property uses and
conditions that may be maintained within such zones.
(Ord. 2000-12, 08-02-2000)
9-5-2. Definitions
(1) When used in this ordinance the following words
and phrases shall have the meanings given in this Section:
(a) "Design Standard" means a control that is
implemented by a potential contamination source to prevent
discharges to the groundwater. Spill protection is an
example of a design standard.
(b) "Drinking Water Source Protection (DWSP)
Zone" means the surface and subsurface area surrounding a
groundwater source of drinking water supplying a public
water system through which contaminants are reasonably
likely to move toward and reach such groundwater source.
(c) "Groundwater Source" means any well, spring,
tunnel, adit, or other underground opening from or through
which groundwater flows or is pumped from subsurface
water-bearing formations.
(d) "Pollution source" means point source
discharges of contaminants to groundwater or potential
discharges of the liquid forms of "extremely hazardous
substances" which are stored in containers in excess of
"applicable threshold planning quantities" as specified in
SARA Title III. Examples of possible pollution sources
include, but are not limited to, the following: storage
facilities that store the liquid forms of extremely hazardous
substances, septic tanks, drain fields, class V underground
injection wells, landfills, open dumps, land filling of sludge
and septage, manure piles, salt piles, pit privies, drain lines,
and animal feeding operations with more than ten animal
units.
(i) The following definitions clarify the
meaning of "pollution source:"
(A) "Animal feeding operation"
means a lot or facility where the following conditions are
met: animals have been or will be stabled or confined and
fed or maintained for a total of 45 days or more in any 12
month period, and crops, vegetation forage growth, or
post-harvest residues are not sustained in the normal
growing season over any portion of the lot or facility. Two
or more animal feeding operations under common
ownership are considered to be a single feeding operation
if they adjoin each other, if they use a common area, or if
they use a common system for the disposal of wastes.
(B) "Animal unit" means a
unit of measurement for any animal feeding operation
calculated by adding the following numbers; the number of
slaughter and feeder cattle multiplied by 1.0, plus the
number of mature dairy cattle multiplied by 1.4, plus the
number of swine weighing over 55 pounds multiplied by
0.4, plus the number of sheep multiplied by 0.1, plus the
number of horses multiplied by 2.0.
(C) "Extremely hazardous
substances" means those substances which are identified in
the Sec. 302(EHS) column of the "TITLE III LIST OF
LISTS - Consolidated List of Chemicals Subject to
Reporting Under SARA Title III," (EPA 560/4-91-011). A
copy of this document may be obtained from: Section 313
Document Distribution Center, P.O. Box 12505. Cincinnati,
OH 45212.
(e) "Potential contamination source" means any
facility or site which employs an activity or procedure
which may potentially contaminate groundwater. A
pollution source is also a potential contamination source.
(f) "Public water system" means a system, either
publicly or privately owned, providing water for human
consumption and other domestic uses, which:
(i) Has at least 15 service connections, or
(ii) Serves an average of at least 25
individuals daily at least 60 days out of the year.
Such term includes collection, treatment, storage and
distribution facilities under control of the operator and used
primarily in connection with the system. Additionally, the
term includes collection, pretreatment or storage facilities
used primarily in connection with the system but not under
such control.
(g) "Sanitary Landfill" means a disposal site where
solid wastes, including putrescible wastes, or hazardous
wastes, are disposed of on land by placing earth cover
thereon.
(h) "Sanitary sewer line" means a pipeline that
connects a residence or other building with a sanitary
sewer.
(i) "Septic tank/drain-field system" means a
system which is comprised of a septic tank and a drain field
which accepts domestic wastewater from buildings or
facilities for subsurface treatment and disposal. By their
design, septic tank/drain field system discharges cannot be
controlled with design standards.
(j) "Spring" means the ground surface outlet of a
natural underground spring including Spring collection and
control boxes, valves, piping and other attachments.
(k) "Storm water infiltration structure" means a
structure that is intended to discharge storm water so that it
infiltrates groundwater.
(l) "Underground storage tanks" means
underground tanks used for the storage of gas, oil, or other
hazardous substances.
(March 28, 2006) 9-15
(m) "Wellhead" means the physical structure,
facility, or device at the land surface from or through which
groundwater flows or is pumped from subsurface,
water-bearing formations.
(Ord. 2000-12, 08-02-2000)
9-5-3. Establishment of Drinking Water Source
Protection Zones.
(1) There is hereby established the following four use
districts to be known as drinking water source protection
zones one, two, three, and four:
(a) ?Zone one" is the area within a 100-foot radius
from the wellhead or margin of the collection area.
(b) "Zone two" is the area within a 250-day
groundwater time of travel to the wellhead or margin of the
collection area, the boundary of the aquifer(s) which
supplies water to the groundwater source, or the
groundwater divide, whichever is closer.
(c) "Zone three" is the area within a 3-year
groundwater time of travel to the wellhead or margin of the
collection area, the boundary of the aquifer(s) which
supplies water to the groundwater source, or the
groundwater divide, whichever is closer.
(d) "Zone four" is the area within a 15-year
groundwater time of travel to the wellhead or margin of the
collection area, the boundary of the aquifer(s) which
supplies water to the groundwater source, or the
groundwater divide, whichever is closer.
(Ord. 2000-12, 08-02-2000)
9-5-4. Permitted Uses.
(1) In Zones One, Two, Three, and Four, each use
established before the effective date of this Ordinance, and
uses incidental and accessory to such use, may be continued
in the same manner thereafter, provided that such use is not
determined by any court of competent jurisdiction to be a
nuisance under the provisions of federal, state, and/or local
laws or regulations.
(2) In addition to the uses permitted under 9-5-4(1)
herein, the following uses, including uses incidental and
accessory to that use, shall be allowed within the respective
drinking water source protection zones:
(1) Zone One.
(a) No uses in addition to that allowed
under 9-5-4(1) herein are allowed in Zone One.
(2) Zone Two.
(a) Use of single or multiple-family
residential dwellings, commercial, or institutional uses
established on or after the effective date of this Ordinance,
provided that such uses are connected to a sanitary sewer
system.
(3) Zone Three.
(a)Use of single or multiple-family residential
dwellings, commercial, or institutional uses established on
or after the effective date of this Ordinance.
(4) Zone Four.
(a) Use of single or multiple-family
residential dwellings, commercial, or institutional uses
established on or after the effective date of this Ordinance.
(b) The tilling of the soil and the raising
of crops, provided that the use of fertilizers and pesticides is
accomplished within applicable federal, state, and/or local
requirements.
(c) The pasturing of livestock, provided
all forage is raised on the pastured area.
(d) In addition to the permitted uses
specified in 9-5-4(1) and (2) herein, certain of the uses
prohibited in Zones Two, Three, and Four pursuant to 9-5-5
herein may be allowed in Zones Two, Three, and Four,
respectively, if design standards are implemented for the
specific use that will prevent contaminated discharges to
groundwater.
(Ord. 2000-12, 08-02-2000)
9-5-5. Prohibited Uses.
(1) Subject to 9-5-4(d) herein, the following uses are
prohibited within the following drinking water source
protection zones:
(a) Zone One. All uses that fall within the
definition in this Ordinance of "pollution source" or
"potential contamination source," including the following,
are prohibited in Zone One:
(i) Surface use, storage, or dumping of
hazardous waste or material, expressly including industrial
or commercial uses of agricultural pesticides (except when
such pesticides are used in farming applications within
strict compliance of the manufacturer's recommendations of
use, subject to inspection by local officials).
(ii) Sanitary landfills.
(iii) Hazardous waste or material disposal
sites.
(iv) Septic tanks/drain field systems
(v) Sanitary sewer lines within 150 feet of
a wellhead or spring collection area.
(vi) Underground storage tanks.
(vii) Storm water infiltration structures.
(viii) Any pollution source as defined herein
or in Rule 309-113-101, as amended, of the Division of
Drinking Water's drinking water source protection
regulations.
(ix) Agriculture industries including but not
limited to intensive feeding operations such as feed lots,
dairies, fur breeding operations, poultry farms, etc.
(b) Zone Two.
(i) Surface use, storage, or dumping of
hazardous waste or material, expressly including industrial
or commercial uses of agricultural pesticides (except when
such pesticides are used in farming applications within
strict compliance of the manufacturer's recommendations of
use, subject to inspection by local officials).
(ii) Sanitary landfills.
(iii) Hazardous waste or material disposal
sites.
(iv) Septic tanks/drain field systems
(v) Sanitary sewer lines within 150 feet of
a wellhead or spring collection area.
(vi) Underground storage tanks.
(vii) Storm water infiltration structures.
(viii) Any pollution source as defined herein
or in Rule 309-113-101, as amended, of the Division of
Drinking Water’s drinking water source protection
regulations.
(March 28, 2006) 9-16
(ix) Agriculture industries including but not
limited to intensive feeding operations such as feed lots,
dairies, fur breeding operations, poultry farms, etc.
(c) Zone Three.
(i) Surface use, storage, or dumping of
hazardous waste or material, expressly including industrial
or commercial uses of agricultural pesticides (except when
such pesticides are used in farming applications within strict
compliance of the manufacturer's recommendations of use,
subject to inspection by local officials).
(ii) Sanitary landfills.
(iii) Hazardous waste or material disposal
sites.
(iv) Agriculture industries including but not
limited to intensive feeding operations such as feed lots,
dairies, fur breeding operations, poultry farms, etc.
(d) Zone Four.
(i) Surface use, storage, or dumping of
hazardous waste or material, expressly including industrial
or commercial uses of agricultural pesticides (except when
such pesticides are used in farming applications within strict
compliance of the manufacturer's recommendations of use,
subject to inspection by local officials).
(ii) Sanitary landfills.
(iii) Hazardous waste or material disposal
sites.
(Ord. 2000-12, 08-02-2000)
9-5-6. Drinking Water Source Protection
Requirements
Following the effective date of this Ordinance, no
building permit or other form of approval from the City to
develop or use real property within the City shall be issued
until the applicant establishes that its proposed development
or use of real property complies with the requirements of
this Ordinance.
(Ord. 2000-12, 08-02-2000)
9-5-7. Administration
The policies and procedures or administration of any
drinking water source protection zone established under this
ordinance, including without limitation those applicable to
nonconforming uses, variances and exceptions, and
enforcement and penalties, shall be the same as provided in
the existing zoning ordinance for Tooele City, Utah, as the
same is presently enacted or may from time to time be
amended.
(Ord. 2000-12, 08-02-2000)
(March 28, 2006) 9-17
CHAPTER 6. CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL -
GENERAL POLICY
9-6-1. Purpose of Ordinance.
9-6-2. Responsibility: Drinking Water Purveyor.
9-6-3. Responsibility: Consumer.
9-6-4. Requirements. Policy.
9-6-5. Violations of this Policy.
9-6-1. Purpose of Ordinance:
(1) The purpose of this ordinance is:
(a) to protect the quality of water within the
public drinking water supply of Tooele City from the
possibility of contamination or pollution, and
(b) to comply with the State of Utah Public
Drinking Rules, Section R309-102-5; and,
(c) to promote the reasonable elimination or
control of cross connections in the plumbing fixtures and
industrial piping system(s) of the consumer, as required by
the plumbing regulations to assure water system safety; and,
(d) to provide for the administration of a
continuing program of backflow prevention which will
systematically examine risk and effectively prevent the
contamination or pollution of the drinking water system.
(Ord. 2000-11, 06-21-2000)
9-6-2. Responsibility: Drinking Water Purveyor
(1) Tooele City shall be responsible for the protection
of the drinking water system from the conditions leading to
the possible contamination or pollution of the drinking water
system due to the backflow of contaminants or pollutants
into the drinking water supply.
(2) Drinking water system surveys/inspections of the
consumer’s water distribution system(s) shall be conducted
or caused to be conducted by individuals deemed qualified
by and representing Tooele City. Survey records shall
indicate compliance with the State of Utah administrative
rules. All such records will be maintained by Tooele City.
(3) Tooele City shall schedule and notify in writing, all
consumers of the need for the periodic system survey to
insure compliance with existing applicable minimum health
and safety standards.
(4) The appropriate backflow will not be restored until
such conditions or defects are corrected. Low prevention
devices shall be identified as a result of the system survey.
(Ord. 2000-11, 06-21-2000)
9-6-3. Responsibility: Consumer
(1) To comply with this ordinance as a term and
condition of water supply and consumer’s acceptance of
service is admittance of his/her awareness of his/her
responsibilities as a water system user.
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the consumer to
purchase, install, and arrange and pay for testing and
maintenance of any backflow prevention device/assembly
required to comply with this ordinance. Failure to comply
with this ordinance shall constitute grounds for
disconnection of service.
(3) If Tooele City deems it necessary to protect
distribution system against possible backflow or cross
connection with dual check valve device at meter set it will
be consumers responsibility to protect themselves against
possible thermal expansion.
(Ord. 2000-11, 06-21-2000)
9-6-4. Requirements. Policy.
(1) No water service connection to any premises shall
be installed or maintained by the water purveyor unless the
water supply is protected as required by State laws,
regulations, codes, and this ordinance. Service of water to
a consumer found to be in violation of this ordinance shall
be discontinued by the water purveyor after written
notification of violation and an appropriate time interval of
days for voluntary compliance, if:
(a) A backflow prevention assembly required by
this ordinance for the control of backflow and cross
connections is not installed, tested, and maintained, or
(b) If it is found that a backflow prevention
assembly has been removed or bypassed, or
(c) If an unprotected cross connection exists on
the premises, or
(d) If the periodic system survey has not been
conducted.
(2) The customer’s system(s) shall be open for
inspection at all reasonable times to authorized
representatives of the water purveyor to determine whether
cross connections or other structural or sanitary hazards
exist (including violation of this ordinance), and to audit the
results of the required survey (Utah Administrative Code
R309-102-5).
(3) Whenever the public water purveyor deems that a
service connection’s water usage contributes a sufficient
hazard to the water supply, an approved backflow
prevention assembly shall be installed on the service line of
the identified consumer’s water system, at or near the
property line or immediately inside the building being
served; but, in all cases, before the first branch line leading
off the service line.
(4) The type of protective assembly required under
Subsection (3) shall depend upon the degree of hazard
which exists at the point of cross connection (whether
direct or indirect), applicable to local and state requirements
or resulting from the required survey.
(5) All presently installed backflow prevention
assemblies which do not meet the requirements of this
section but were approved assemblies for the purposes
described herein at the time of installation and which have
been properly maintained, shall, except for the inspection
and maintenance requirements under Subsection (2), be
excluded from the requirements of these rules so long as the
water purveyor is assured that they will satisfactorily
protect the public water system. Whenever the existing unit
is moved from the present location, or requires more than
minimum maintenance, or when the water purveyor finds
that the operation of this assembly constitutes a hazard to
health, the unit shall be replaced by an approved backflow
prevention assembly that meets all local and state
requirements.
(6) It shall be the responsibility of the consumer at any
premises where backflow prevention assemblies are
installed to have certified surveys/inspections and tests at
(March 28, 2006) 9-18
a more frequent interval. It shall be the duty of the surveyor
to see that these tests are made according to the standards set
forth by the State Department of Environmental Quality,
Division of Drinking Water.
(7) All backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested
within ten (10) working days of initial installation.
(8) No backflow prevention assemblies shall be
installed so as to create a safety hazard. Example: Installed
over an electrical panel, steam pipes, boilers, or above
ceiling level.
(Ord. 2000-11, 06-21-2000)
9-6-5. Violations of this Policy:
If violations of this ordinance exist or if there has not
been any corrective action taken by the consumer within ten
(10) days of the written notification of the deficiencies noted
within the survey or test results, then the water purveyor
shall deny or immediately discontinue service to the
premises by providing a physical break in the service line
until the consumer has corrected the condition(s) in
conformance with all state and local regulations and statues
relating to plumbing, safe drinking water suppliers, and this
ordinance.
(Ord. 2000-11, 06-21-2000)
9-19 (October 1, 2002)
CHAPTER 7. RECLAIMED WATER SUPPLY
9-7-1. Authority and intent.
9-7-2. Definitions.
9-7-3. Connection to reclaimed water system.
9-7-4. Authority to adopt rates, fees, and charges.
9-7-5. Discontinuing service by the District.
9-7-6. Interruption of service by the District.
9-7-7. Prohibition of water wastage.
9-7-8. Permits.
9-7-9. Priorities for extending reclaimed water
service.
9-7-10. Potable water wells.
9-7-11. Right to service.
9-7-12. Service within municipalities.
9-7-13. Permitted uses of reclaimed water.
9-7-14. Prohibited uses of reclaimed water.
9-7-15. Service application requirements.
9-7-16 Meter requirements.
9-7-17 Cross connection control.
9-7-18 Construction specifications.
9-7-19 Proper maintenance by the customer.
9-7-20 Extent of District maintenance.
9-7-21 Common service lines.
9-7-22 Easement dedication.
9-7-23 Public easements.
9-7-24 Easement requirements.
9-7-25 Ownership of reclaimed water facilities.
9-7-26 Means of appeal.
9-7-27 Appeals to the Board.
9-7-28 Transfer of reclaimed water.
9-7-29 Enforcement.
9-7-1. Authority and intent.
(1) Pursuant to the authority granted to the Tooele
City Water Special Service District (hereafter referred to
as “the District”), by the City of Tooele and the laws of
the State of Utah, as amended , it is the intent of the
District to make reclaimed water available for irrigation
purposes, and other authorized uses, within the service
area of the District, where the District determines that the
construction, operation and maintenance of a reclaimed
water distribution system is practical and economical.
(2) The reclaimed water distribution system shall be
constructed in a manner deemed appropriate by the
District to provide reclaimed water service pursuant to the
terms and conditions set forth herein.
(3) It is further the intent of the District to establish
a reclaimed water system which complies with the rules
and regulations set forth by Utah Division of Water
Quality, which rules appear in Chapter R317-1-4, Utah
Administrative Code.
(4) Compliance of the District with the requirements
of the Utah Division of Water Quality shall be
demonstrated by adherence to these regulations and to the
District’s Policies, and the District’s Construction Manual,
as promulgated by the District and approved by the Utah
Division of Water Quality.
(Ord. 2002-18, 08-07-2002)
9-7-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of these regulations, certain terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings
as given below. Words stated in the present tense include the
future; words stated in the masculine include the feminine and
neuter; the singular number includes the plural and the plural
the singular. Where terms are not defined through the
methods of this section, such terms shall have ordinarily
accepted meanings such as the context implies. Unless the
context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms
and phrases, as used in this regulation, shall have the
meanings hereinafter designated:
(1) Administrator. See “Reclaimed water service
administrator.”
(2) As-built drawings. See “Record drawings.”
(3) Available reclaimed water. A functioning reclaimed
water distribution line located within 100 feet of the property
applying for reclaimed water service, with sufficient capacity
to meet the expected demands from the applicant’s property.
(4) Backflow prevention device shall mean an approved
device installed on the customer’s potable water service, to
prevent the flow of any actual or potential pollution or
contamination into the public potable water system.
“Backflow prevention device” shall also mean any approved
device installed on the reclaimed water service to prevent the
backflow of any actual or potential pollution or contamination
into the reclaimed water system.
(5) Board. The Board of Commissioners of the Tooele
Water Special Service District.
(6) Buffer Zone. A setback distance of at least 50 feet
as more specifically set forth in R317-1-4.3.
(7) Construction Manual. The District’s “Construction
Manual for the Construction of Reclaimed Water Facilities,”
as amended from time to time, which contains the District’s
construction standards.
(8) Construction standards. The general construction
requirements and specifications adopted by the District for
installation of reclaimed water facilities.
(9) Cross connection. Any physical connection or
arrangement whereby any part of a potable water system or
reclaimed water system is connected, directly or indirectly,
with any other water supply system, sewer, drain, conduit,
pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture, or other device
which contains, or may contain contaminated water, sewage
or other waste, or substance of unknown or unsafe quality
which may be capable of imparting contamination to the
public potable water supply or the reclaimed water supply as
a result of backflow. Bypass arrangements, jumper
connections, removable sections, swivel or changeable
devices, and other temporary or permanent devices through
which, or because of which, backflow could occur are
considered to be cross-connections.
9-20 (October 1, 2002)
(10) Customer. The applicant, actual user, water
account owner or the owner(s) of the property being
served by the reclaimed water.
(11) Delivery point. The point of connection of the
District’s Reclaimed Water System to the Customer’s
private system. This is the point of acceptance of the
reclaimed water by the Customer for the intended reuse.
(12) Director. The Public Works Director of the
Tooele City Water Special Service District or, if none,
Tooele City Corporation.
(13) District. The Tooele City Water Special
Service District.
(14) Distribution mains. Those conduits used to
supply reclaimed water service lines.
(15) Hose bibb. A water spigot, faucet or similar
device to which a common garden hose can readily be
attached. Hose bibbs are prohibited on reclaimed water
systems, unless of a type that can be secured to prevent
access by unqualified persons.
(16) Offsite facilities. Facilities under the control of
the District including but not limited to reclaimed water
pipelines, reservoirs, pumping stations, fire hydrants,
manholes, valves, connections, treatment facilities, and
other appurtenances and property up to the point of
connection with the customer’s facilities.
(17) Onsite Facilities. Facilities under the control of
the applicant, owner, or customer including but not
limited to residential, commercial, and industrial building
reclaimed water systems, landscape irrigation systems,
and agricultural irrigation systems. For water and
reclaimed water service. Onsite facilities shall be those
downstream of the water service connection, which shall
normally be the downstream end of the meter tailpiece.
(r) Onsite system. See “Onsite facilities.”
(19) Qualified person. A person familiar, and
trained, in the operating practices, nature and nonpotability
of the reclaimed water.
(20) Reclaimed water. The treated effluent, filtered
and disinfected to Type I reuse water standards as defined
by The State of Utah Department of Environmental
Quality, Division of Water Quality’s “Wastewater Reuse
Rules”.
(21) Reclaimed water service administrator. The
individual responsible for the technical and operational
activities of the reclaimed water system, or his designee.
See also “Administrator.”
(22) Reclaimed water system. Those conduits,
valves, fittings, equipment and appurtenances required to
deliver reclaimed water to the property line and delivery
point for use by the customer.
(23) Record drawings. Drawings that accurately
show the completed facilities as constructed or modified.
See also “As-built drawings.”
(24) Recycled water. An interchangeable term for
“Reclaimed water.”
(25) Reuse site. The real property on which a
customer may choose to reuse the reclaimed water.
(26) Service. Those components including service line,
meter box, meter setter and related equipment that comprise
the delivery point of the reclaimed water by the District to the
customer.
(27) Service line. That conduit for reclaimed water from
the distribution main to the property line.
(28) Shall. As used by these Regulations, “shall” and
“will” are mandatory; “may” is permissive.
(29) Spray irrigation. An application of reclaimed water
to crops, or to maintain or support the growth of vegetation by
applying reclaimed water from sprinklers or orifices in piping.
Spray irrigation does not include drip irrigation.
(30) State. The State of Utah.
(31) System. See “Reclaimed water system.”
(32) UDEQ. The State of Utah Department of
Environmental Quality, Division of Water Quality. The State
regulatory agency responsible for oversight of wastewater
reuse programs within the State of Utah.
(33) Use area. An area of recycled water use with
defined boundaries, that may contain one or more reuse sites,
buildings or structures..
(34) User. Any person or entity which contributes,
causes or permits the use of reclaimed water supplied by the
District.
(Ord. 2002-18, 08-07-2002)
9-7-3. Connection to reclaimed water system.
(1) General. Customers in designated service areas
shall connect to the reclaimed water system when service is
available and upon submission of the proper application and
compliance with all other District policies and requirements.
(2) Mandatory Connection.
(a) Existing Buildings. Owners (customers) of
primary buildings which have received a certificate of
occupancy prior to the effective date of this Chapter shall
connect to the system in accordance with this Chapter within
sixty (60) days of the date of notice, mailed to the customer
at the address of record, that reclaimed water is available.
Thereafter, the customer shall not be permitted to connect to
the potable water supply for the purpose of any use that can
be adequately met by the available reclaimed water.
(b) New Buildings. Where reclaimed water is
available, owners (customers) of primary buildings which
receive a certificate of occupancy after the effective date of
this Chapter shall not be permitted to connect to the potable
water supply for the purpose of any use that can be adequately
met by the available reclaimed water.
(Ord. 2002-18, and amendment 08-07-2002)
9-7-4. Authority to adopt rates, fees, and charges.
The Board shall have the authority, by resolution duly
adopted in a public meeting, to establish rates, fees, and
charges for the reclaimed water system and to provide terms
and conditions for the payment and collection of the same.
(Ord. 2002-18, 08-07-2002)
9-21 (October 1, 2002)
9-7-5. Discontinuing service by the District.
The District may discontinue reclaimed water service
to any customer due to a violation of the terms of this
Ordinance or any other District policy or regulation, nonpayment
of bills, tampering with any service, plumbing of
cross-connections with another water source, or the
undertaking of any other activity that may be detrimental
to the reclaimed water system. The District shall have the
right to cease service until the condition is corrected and
all costs due the District are paid. These costs may
include delinquent billings and fees, connection charges,
payment for any damage caused to the System, and other
related costs. Should discontinued service be restored
without authorization, then the District shall have
authority to remove the service and make such additional
charges as are established by administrative policy.
(Ord. 2002-18, 08-07-2002)
9-7-6. Interruption of service by the District.
The District reserves the right to temporarily
discontinue service to any portion of, or the entire
reclaimed water system, as deemed necessary by the
Director. The Director shall have the authority to
establish schedules which restrict the use of the reclaimed
water system at certain times in order to reduce maximum
pressure demands on the system and to regulate usage
during periods of limited reclaimed water availability.
(Ord. 2002-18, 08-07-2002)
9-7-7. Prohibition of water wastage.
(1) Application. The provisions of this section
shall apply to all persons using reclaimed water,
regardless of whether any person using reclaimed water
shall have a contract for such service, and shall apply to
all reclaimed water supplied by the District.
(2) General Prohibitions. The following
prohibitions are in effect at all times, regardless of
whether any declared shortage condition is in effect.
(a) Gutter Flooding. No person shall cause or
permit any water furnished to any property served by the
District to run or to escape from any hose, pipe, valve,
faucet, sprinkler, or irrigation device into any gutter, or
otherwise to runoff the property if such can reasonably be
prevented.
(b) Leaks. No person shall permit leaks of
reclaimed water that the person has the authority to
eliminate.
(c) Waste. No person shall cause or permit
reclaimed water under that person’s control to be wasted.
(Ord. 2002-18, 08-07-2002)
9-7-8. Permits.
The District shall obtain and fulfill all necessary
permits and approvals for the initial construction and
operation of the reclaimed water distribution facilities
constituting the District’s reclaimed water system. Once
service is available, any additional permits or approvals
required for service to any particular customer, for the
customer’s benefit, shall be obtained at the sole expense of
said customer.
(Ord. 2002-18, 08-07-2002)
9-7-9. Priorities for extending reclaimed water service.
The Board shall determine priorities for reclaimed water
line extensions within the guidelines established in the
“Facilities Phasing Plan” as incorporated into the District’s
Capital Improvement Plan and the “Reuse Project Plan,”
submitted to the Utah State Division of Water Quality.
(Ord. 2002-18, 08-07-2002)
9-7-10. Potable water wells.
As mandated by the Utah State Division of Water
Quality, the District shall not provide reclaimed water service
where wells are used as a source of potable water and where
buffer zone requirements cannot be maintained. It shall be
unlawful and an offense against the District to install a well
intended for use as a potable water supply within UDEPmandated
buffer zone requirements of existing or known
proposed reuse sites.
(Ord. 2002-18, 08-07-2002)
9-7-11. Right to service.
No payment of any costs, submittal of any application or
petition, or undertaking any other act to receive reclaimed
water service shall guarantee such service. The District,
through the Director, shall have the right, at all times, to
refuse to extend service on the basis of a use detrimental to
the system, inadequate supply of reclaimed water, lack of
payment of required fees, or for any other reason which, in
the judgement of the Director, will cause the extension not to
be beneficial to the District.
(Ord. 2002-18, 08-07-2002)
9-7-12. Service within municipalities.
Reclaimed water service may be provided to all eligible
users within the District. Service may be provided to users
outside the District, if the supply of reclaimed water is
adequate, at the discretion of the Board.
(Ord. 2002-18, 08-07-2002)
9-7-13. Permitted uses of reclaimed water.
(1) Allowed Uses Regulated. Reclaimed water shall be
used in accordance with the rules for such usage as provided
in the applicable federal, State, and District regulations.
Reclaimed water may be used for:
(a) Residential landscape irrigation, including
irrigation at individual houses.
(b) Urban uses, which include landscape irrigation,
golf course irrigation, non-residential toilet flushing, and fire
protection.
(c) Agricultural irrigation, including irrigation of
9-22 (October 1, 2002)
food crops.
(d) Landscape and recreational impoundments
of reclaimed water.
(e) Construction and industrial process water.
(f) Flushing gravity and force mains.
(g) Cooling water. Use for cooling towers
which produce aerosols must have specific, written
District approval.
(2) Other Uses Prohibited. Uses not listed above
are considered prohibited uses of reclaimed water.
(3) Special Use Permits. The District may grant
special use permits to other uses with similar potential for
human exposure, only if it can be clearly demonstrated to
the District that all of the State and District regulations
can be met. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant.
(Ord. 2002-18, 08-07-2002)
9-7-14. Prohibited uses of reclaimed water.
(1) Reclaimed water shall not be:
(a) Used for consumption by humans.
(b) Connected to a dwelling for toilet flushing
or other household uses.
(c) Interconnected with any other water sources.
(d) Used for filling swimming pools
(e) Connected to the interior of, or within, food
preparation establishments.
(f) Connected to, or available from, above
ground hose bibbs, faucets, or quick couplers accessible
to unqualified persons.
(g) Connected to, or available from, hose bibbs
or faucets at individual residences.
(Ord. 2002-18, 08-07-2002)
9-7-15. Service application requirements.
(1) Application Required. Reclaimed water service
shall be applied for in the District offices by completing
and signing an application form.
(2) Drawings Required. Applications for all
reclaimed water services within any City, County, or State
maintained rights-of-way shall include a dimensional plan
showing the location of the requested service line relative
to the nearest street intersection, etc., as required by the
City, the County, or the State Department of
Transportation. All drawings shall comply with the
specifications contained in the Construction Manual.
(3) Approved Onsite System Required. Before an
application for reclaimed water service will be approved,
the customer must have a suitable onsite system. The
onsite system to be provided by the customer shall meet
the District’s Construction Standards, as specified in the
District’s Construction Manual.
(4) Cross Connections Prohibited. No system with
a cross connection to the potable water system will be
considered for connection to the reclaimed water system.
Temporary systems will not be considered for connection.
(5) Hose Bibbs Prohibited. Onsite systems shall
not include hose bibbs, above ground faucets, or other
devices or connections (unless of a type that can be secured
to prevent access by unqualified persons) that could permit
reclaimed water to be used for any purpose other than the
approved uses as specified in 2.1.13 above.
(6) Compliance with District Construction Standards.
All onsite systems constructed in areas where the District has
determined to make reclaimed water available shall be
constructed in accordance with all Federal, State, and District
specifications and regulations, including, specifically, the
regulations contained in the District’s Construction Manual,
and those of R317, Utah Administrative Code. The owner of
the onsite system shall provide the District with a schematic
drawing of the irrigation system before receiving service.
(Ord. 2002-18, 08-07-2002)
9-7-16. Meter requirements.
The District shall have the authority to establish metering
policies as it deems appropriate.
(Ord. 2002-18, 08-07-2002)
9-7-17. Cross connection control.
(1) Water Supply to Be Protected. At all reuse sites
where reclaimed water service is provided, the public or
private potable water supply shall be protected by an
approved backflow prevention device. All devices and
materials installed for backflow prevention shall be approved
by the District and shall be installed in accordance with the
Construction Manual and other applicable District
regulations. Where any cross connection is found, it shall be
disconnected. Before reconnection of that service, the
potable water system shall be protected against the possibility
of future cross connections, and additional devices may be
required as specified by the Administrator or Director and
installed at the customer’s expense.
(2) District’s Right to Enter. To determine the
presence of any potential hazards to the public potable water
system and for the purposes of perpetual maintenance and
repair of the reclaimed water system appurtenances, the
District shall have the right to enter upon the premises of any
customer receiving reclaimed water. Each customer of
reclaimed water service shall be deemed, by application, to
give written consent to such entry upon said premises.
(Ord. 2002-18, 08-07-2002)
9-7-18. Construction specifications.
(1) Pipe shall meet or exceed standards set by the
American Water Works Association, UDEP, and the
District’s Construction Manual, whichever is stricter.
(2) Mains in the public rights-of-way shall be located
a uniform distance from the curb and in a location approved
by the Administrator and Director.
(3) Vertical and horizontal clearances from potable
water lines and sewage lines shall be as specified in the
District’s Construction Manual, or as specified by UDEP
rules, whichever is stricter.
9-23 (October 1, 2002)
(4) All valves and approved hose bibbs shall be
placed in tamper-proof boxes.
(5) All onsite systems shall include backflow
prevention devices directly downstream of the reclaimed
water meter.
(6) Where reclaimed water mains are to be turned
over to the District, the customer shall submit such
documents as are normally required for the dedication of
public facilities.
(7) “As-built” drawings shall be submitted to the
Administrator upon completion of the onsite system.
(8) The Construction Manual may contain
additional specific requirements.
(Ord. 2002-18, 08-07-2002)
9-7-19. Proper maintenance by the customer.
(1) Customer Responsible for Onsite Maintenance.
The customer shall be responsible for the proper
maintenance of all onsite reclaimed water facilities,
including valves, backflow devices, irrigation lines, spray
heads and appurtenances on the property served by the
District.
(2) Cause for Discontinuance of Service by District.
Failure to maintain the onsite facilities in a proper manner,
shall be construed as just cause for the District to
discontinue service until such time as the District is
satisfied that the required maintenance has been
performed.
(3) Customer Responsible for Special Equipment.
Should the customer desire reclaimed water at different
pressures, or different quality, or in any way different
from that normally supplied by the District, the customer
shall be responsible for the necessary devices to make
these adjustments and for obtaining approval by the
Administrator. Such devices, and the repair thereof, shall
be the sole responsibility of the customer.
(4) Tampering Prohibited. No person shall tamper
with, modify, or connect any unauthorized hose, fitting, or
fixtures to the reclaimed water service, distribution
facilities, or the customer’s onsite system.
(5) Tampering Cause for Suspension of Service.
Tampering shall be cause for notification, suspension, or
revocation of reclaimed water usage permit. The District
or Director shall immediately notify with written notice
any person, firm, corporation, association, or agency
found to have tampered with, modified, or connected any
unauthorized hose, fitting, or fixtures to the reclaimed
water service, distribution components, or the customer’s
onsite system.
(Ord. 2002-18, 08-07-2002)
9-7-20. Extent of District maintenance.
(1) Accepted Facilities Property of District. All
facilities that have been accepted by the District, through
District resolution pursuant to the procedures of Tooele
City Code Chapter 7-19, as amended, shall become the
property of the District and shall be maintained and operated
by the District.
(2) No Reimbursement for Unauthorized Work. No
person shall do any work nor be reimbursed for any work, or
in connection with any work, on any portion of the system
unless written authorization from the District is received prior
to the work being accomplished.
(3) No Liability for Damage. The District shall make
a reasonable effort to inspect and keep its facilities in good
repair, but assumes no liability for any damage caused by the
system that is beyond the control of normal maintenance or
due to situations not previously reported to the District. This
shall include damage due to breaking of pipes, poor quality of
water caused by unauthorized or illegal entry of foreign
material into the system, faulty operation of the facilities, or
other reasons.
(Ord. 2002-18, 08-07-2002)
9-7-21. Common service lines.
The Director may approve one service line to connect
two or more customers pursuant to the specifications of the
District’s Construction Manual.
(Ord. 2002-18, 08-07-2002)
9-7-22. Easement dedication.
The applicant shall dedicate land or shall grant perpetual
easement to the District for reuse transmission and
distribution facilities as are required to provide reclaimed
water service. In cases deemed appropriate, the Director may
accept a license or permit in lieu of an easement.
(Ord. 2002-18, 08-07-2002)
9-7-23. Public easements.
For reclaimed water lines and appurtenances which are
installed by a person or entity other than the District, said
lines and appurtenances shall not be accepted by the District
for maintenance unless the facilities are within a dedicated
public right-of-way or easement and have been accepted by
the District pursuant to the procedures of Tooele City Code
Chapter 7-19, as amended. Any easement submitted for
acceptance by the District must meet the requirements
specified below.
(Ord. 2002-18, 08-07-2002)
9-7-24. Easement requirements.
(1) Minimum Width of Easement Required. No
District owned facilities shall be installed under the
provisions outlined herein and accepted by the District for
maintenance unless located in a dedicated easement or a
dedicated public right-of-way. Any new easement shall have
a minimum width of ten (10) feet.
(2) Obstructions Within Easements Prohibited. No
obstruction of whatever kind shall be planted, built, or
otherwise created within the limits of the easement or rightof-
way without written permission of the Administrator.
(3) Easement Acceptance Requirements. All
9-24 (October 1, 2002)
easements shall be in a form acceptable to the District and
not subject to outstanding obligations to relocate such
facilities, to deeds of trust, or to any other encumbrance,
except in instances where such is determined by the
Director to be in the best interests of the District.
(Ord. 2002-18, 08-07-2002)
9-7-25. Ownership of reclaimed water facilities.
All reclaimed water facilities and appurtenances,
other than on-site plumbing, when constructed or accepted
by the District, shall become and remain the property of
the District. No person shall by payment of any charges
provided herein, or by causing any construction of
facilities accepted by the District acquire any interest or
right in any of these facilities, or any portion thereof, other
than the privilege of having their property connected
thereto for reclaimed water service in accordance with this
Ordinance, District Regulations and any amendments
thereof. A warranty provided pursuant to Section 7-19-12
of the Tooele City Code, as amended, shall not be
construed to diminish the District’s ownership.
(Ord. 2002-18, 08-07-2002)
9-7-26. Means of appeal.
(1) Right to appeal decision. Any person aggrieved
by any refusal by the Administrator to grant service, or
any other decision made by the Administrator pursuant to
this Ordinance or the District’s policies and regulations,
shall have the right to appeal a decision of the
Administrator to the Director. An application for appeal
shall be based on a claim that the policies or rules of the
District:
(a) Have been incorrectly interpreted,
(b) Do not fully apply, or
(c) An equally good or better method of
construction is proposed.
(2) Written appeal required. The appellant shall
file the application for appeal on a form obtained from the
District’s office within 20 days after notice of the
Administrator’s decision was mailed to the appellant.
(3) Director’s Decision. The Director shall uphold,
modify, or reverse the decision of the Administrator.
(a) Written Decision. The written decision of
the Director shall be mailed to the appellant and the
Administrator within 5 days from the date of the decision.
(b) Administration. The Administrator shall
take prompt action in accordance with the appeal decision
of the District Director.
(4) Review of Director’s Decision. Any person
aggrieved by the Director’s decision regarding an appeal
shall have the right to have the Board review the
Director’s decision. The review of the Director’s decision
shall follow the procedure under Section 7-9-27, herein.
(5) Basis of Board’s Review. The Board’s review
of the Director’s decision regarding an appeal shall be
limited to a review of the evidence initially presented by
the appellant to the Director, and to the minutes and written
records of the original appeal. No new evidence may be
submitted or brought forward at the review by the Board.
(Ord. 2002-18, 08-07-2002)
9-7-27. Appeals to the Board.
(1) Right of Appeal. Any person aggrieved by any
refusal by the Director to grant service, or any other decision
made by the Director pursuant to this Ordinance or the
District’s policies and regulations, shall have the right to
appeal to the Board, in open session, for a final and binding
decision.
(2) Basis of Appeal. An application for appeal shall be
based on a claim that the policies or rules of the District:
(a) Have been incorrectly interpreted,
(b) Do not fully apply, or
(c) An equally good or better method of
construction is proposed.
(3) Written Appeal Required. The appellant shall file
the application for appeal on a form obtained from the
District’s office within 20 days after notice of the Director’s
decision was mailed to the appellant.
(4) Notice of meeting. The Board shall meet upon
notice from the chairman, within ten days of the filing of an
appeal, or at stated periodic meetings.
(5) Open appeals hearing. All appeal hearings before
the Board shall be open to the public. The appellant, the
appellant’s representative, the Director, and any person whose
interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be
heard.
(6) Appeal Hearing Procedure. The Board may adopt
and make available to the public through the District office,
procedures under which an appeal hearing shall be conducted.
The procedures need not strictly comply with State of Federal
court rules of evidence, but shall mandate that only relevant
and reasonably reliable information be received.
(7) Board Decision. The Board shall uphold, modify,
or reverse the decision of the Director by a concurring vote of
two-thirds of the Board. Failure to achieve a two-thirds vote
shall result in the Director’s decision being upheld without
modification.
(a) Resolution. The decision of the Board shall be
by resolution. Copies shall be mailed to the appellant and the
Director within 5 days from the date of the vote on the
resolution.
(b) Administration. The Director shall take prompt
action in accordance with the appeal decision of the Board.
(Ord. 2002-18, 08-07-2002)
9-7-28. Transfer of reclaimed water.
It shall be unlawful and an offense against the District for
any person or entity to sell, barter, trade, or otherwise transfer
reclaimed water to any other person or entity, after having
initially received said reclaimed water from the District,
without express written authorization from the Director upon
approval of the Board.
9-25 (October 1, 2002)
(Ord. 2002-18, 08-07-2002)
9-7-29. Enforcement.
The District shall determine and implement
enforcement policies and procedures through separate
administrative policy.
(Ord. 2002-18, 08-07-2002)
10-1 (January 13, 2005)
TITLE 10. TRAFFIC CODE
Chapter 1. Repealed.
Chapter 2. Miscellaneous provisions.
Chapter 3. Stopping, Standing and Parking.
Chapter 4. Low Profile Motorized Vehicles.
CHAPTER 1. PARKING
Repealed. (Ord. 90-10, 06-14-90)
(May 8, 2020) 10-2
CHAPTER 2. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
10-2-1. Utah Code motor vehicle provisions adopted
by reference.
10-2-2. Improper lookout.
10-2-3. Unlawful acceleration. (Repealed)
10-2-4. Funeral processions.
10-2-5. Ordinances enforceable at Tooele High
School.
10-2-6. Violations.
10-2-7. Large vehicle and vehicles with dangerous
load regulations - Truck routes.
10-2-1. Utah Code Annotated motor vehicle
provisions adopted.
The following sections of the Utah Code Annotated,
1953 as amended, are hereby adopted by reference in their
entirely as if fully set forth in this city code: Sections 41-
1a-101 et seq.,, 41-6a-101 et seq., 41-8-1, 41-12a-101 et
seq., 41-21-1 et seq., and 41-22-1 et seq., and 53-3-101 et
seq., save and except sections 41-6a-1404, 41-6a-1405,
41-6a-1401, and 41-6a-1402, and such sections the
violation of which constitutes class A misdemeanors other
than 41-6a-503(2), 41-6a-517, 41-6a-510, 41-6a-520, 76-
5-207, or felonies. Subsequent amendments by the Utah
State legislature to those sections adopted hereby are also
hereby expressly adopted by this reference.
(Ord. 2020-18, 05-06-2020) (Ord. 1994-48, 08-17-1994)
10-2-2. Improper lookout.
No person shall drive a vehicle on a roadway without
keeping a reasonable and proper lookout for other traffic,
pedestrians or impediments to safe travel.
(Ord. 1988-12, 03-16-1988)
10-2-3. Unlawful acceleration. (Repealed)
(Ord 2020-18, 05-06-2020) (Ord. 1988-12, 03-16-1988)
10-2-4. Funeral processions.
(1) For purposes of this Section, “funeral
procession” means an organized or formal group of two or
more vehicles traveling in close formation to or from a
mortuary, funeral home, or memorial service,
accompanying the body or the cremated remains of a
deceased person.
(2) It shall be unlawful for a funeral procession or
any participant in a funeral procession to block vehicular
traffic, to close or limit access to a public right-of-way, or
to violate the traffic laws of the state of Utah.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to block
vehicular traffic or to close or limit access to a public
right-of-way for a funeral procession.
(4) Any violation of Subsections (2) or (3) of this
Section shall be a class C misdemeanor.
(5) Notwithstanding the above, Tooele City, in its
sole discretion, may block vehicular traffic and may close
or limit access to public rights-of-way, using Tooele City
peace officers and other peace officers under Tooele
City’s control, for funeral processions involving the
following:
(a) fallen police officers;
(b) fallen firefighters;
(c) fallen soldiers;
(d) elected or appointed officials who die in
office;
(e) individuals who have served Tooele City
with distinction, such as, former elected officials; and,
(f) other individuals in the discretion of the
Mayor or, in the Mayor’s temporary absence, the
Chairperson of the City Council.
(Ord. 2019-16, 06-05-2019) (Ord. 2016-22, 12-07-2016)
(Ord. 1988-12, 03-16-1988)
10-2-5. Ordinances enforceable at Tooele High
School.
The Ordinances of Tooele City are declared to be
enforceable upon the premises of Tooele High School.
(Ord. 1988-12, 03-16-1988)
10-2-6. Violations.
Violations of this chapter are Class "B"
misdemeanors unless specifically indicated otherwise.
(Ord. 1988-12, 03-16-1988)
10-2-7. Large vehicle and vehicles with dangerous
load regulations - Truck routes.
(1) It is hereby declared necessary in order to safely
move traffic in, out, and through the city, to regulate the
movement and parking of large vehicles and vehicles with
dangerous loads. The regulations in this Section apply to:
(a) all trucks licensed or actually used with a
gross weight in excess of 19,000 pounds;
(b) trucks rated for one and one-half tons or
larger under standard practices of the State of Utah; and,
(c) all explosive, corrosive and flammable
liquid carriers capable of carrying in excess of 3,000
gallons or licensed for a gross weight in excess of 9,000
pounds.
(2) Any vehicle or truck as defined in this Section
shall use only those routes specified in Subsection (3) or
such additional temporary routes as shall be established by
the chief of police, either by written permission upon
application to deviate from the truck route or by the
posting of temporary road signs during the period of
temporary or alternate truck routing.
(3) The following are designated truck routes:
(a) State Road 36 (Main Street);
(b) State Road 112;
(c) Tooele Boulevard (1100 West Street);
(d) Droubay Road;
(e) Pine Canyon Road;
(f) other streets as designated by express written
permission of the police chief, subject to such necessary
regulations as are set forth in the written permission in
order to accommodate necessary deviation of truck traffic
from designated truck routes.
(May 8, 2020) 10-3
(4) The truck routes identified in Subsection (3) shall
not apply to emergency vehicles, school busses, Utah
Transit Authority busses, city, county and state service
vehicles, utility service vehicles, trucks making
neighborhood deliveries or pick-ups or traveling to a
business located in the immediate neighborhood, or to
construction trucks delivering to or returning from
construction sites where it is not possible to use a
designated truck route.
(5) (a) The parking of vehicles regulated by this
Section on the public rights-of-way shall be regulated by
Section 10-3-25.1.
(b) The parking of a vehicle regulated by this
Section on a public right-of-way shall be presumptive
evidence of it being operated on the right-of-way on
which it is parked.
(6) The driver or owner of any vehicle regulated by
this Section that is driven or parked in violation of this
Section shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2019-34, 12-04-2019) (Ord. 2014 -11, 08-06-2014)
(Ord. 1994-51, 10-25-1994)
10-4 (May 8, 2020)
CHAPTER 3. STOPPING, STANDING AND
PARKING
10-3-1. Regulation of parking - Definitions.
10-3-2. Signs and color markings.
10-3-3. Angle parking.
10-3-4. Parallel parking.
10-3-5. Parking not to obstruct traffic.
10-3-6. Snow Event Parking Restrictions - Removal
of Vehicles - Penalty.
10-3-7. Parking for certain purposes prohibited.
10-3-8. Parking at Tooele High School. (Repealed.)
10-3-9. Application of provisions.
10-3-10. Provisions not exclusive.
10-3-11. Vehicles - Registration and plates.
10-3-12. Parking signs required.
10-3-13. Approaching a parking space.
10-3-14. Procedure for leaving vehicle unattended.
10-3-15. Lights on parked vehicles.
10-3-16.Handicap parking - Public property.
10-3-17.Handicap parking - Private property.
10-3-18. Parking lots owned by the city.
10-3-19. Loading zones and restricted parking -
Designation and signs.
10-3-20. Freight curb loading zones.
10-3-21. Restricted parking zones.
10-3-22. Parking in alleys.
10-3-23. Double parking, standing or stopping.
10-3-24. Stopping or parking - Roadways without
curb.
10-3-25. Stopping standing or parking prohibited in
certain areas.
10-3-25.1. Large Vehicle Parking.
10-3-26. Parking between curb and property line
prohibited.
10-3-27. Using public rights-of-way for storage
prohibited.
10-3-28. Presumption of liability.
10-3-29. Parking violation - Owner's responsibility.
10-3-30.Moving illegally parked vehicles - Police
authority.
10-3-31. Violations - Penalties.
10-3-32. Parking violations - Appeal procedure.
10-3-33. Using parking lots and vacant lots to display
used vehicles for sale.
10-3-1. Regulation of Parking - Definitions.
(1) The chief of police is authorized to prohibit,
restrict, and regulate the parking, stopping, and standing
of vehicles, including towing authority, as set forth in this
Chapter:
(a) on any public right-of-way;
(b) on any off-street parking facility or property
which Tooele City owns or operates; and,
(c) as otherwise authorized by federal, state, or
local law.
(2) Definitions.
“Alley” means a public right-of-way of the type
described in Section 4-8-2.
“Angle parking” means the parking of a vehicle
in a manner other than parallel to the street edge.
Includes diagonal parking.
"Emergency use areas” means those areas:
(a) in a public right-of-way designated by red
curb markings (also known as "red zones");
(b) designated as ambulance zones, fire hydrant
zones, or fire lanes, whether on public or private property;
and,
(c) any other designated area of the city posted
as restricted for emergency vehicles or emergency use.
“Highway”–see Street.
“Park” “stand” and “stop” (as well as their
variants) shall have the same meaning, and mean a
vehicle’s complete cessation of movement upon or within
a public right-of-way or other property under subsection
(1). If any portion of a parked vehicle protrudes into the
public right-of-way, the vehicle is deemed to be parked
within the public right-of-way.
“Parking space” means that area of a right-ofway
designated by street markings or signage for the
parking of a single vehicle.
“Public right-of-way” means the surface of, and
the space above and below, any public highway, roadway,
street, sidewalk, alley, curb and gutter, park strip,
shoulder, or other public way of any type whatsoever,
now or hereafter existing as such within Tooele City. A
public right-of-way extends across its cross-section from
property line to property line. A public right-of-way can
be created through dedication by plat, dedication by deed,
conveyance by deed, prescriptive use, or other method
recognized by Utah law.
“Roadway”–see Street.
“Street” means the portion of a public right-ofway
paved and utilized for vehicular traffic. Includes
highway and roadway.
“Shoulder” means:
(a) the unpaved portions of a public right-ofway
located between the paved street edge and the rightof-
way property line; and,
(b) the paved portions of a public right-of-way
located between a painted solid white line and the rightof-
way property line.
“Vehicle” means any motorized device for the
transportation of people or goods containing two or more
wheels.
(2019-31, 12-04-2019) (Ord. 2019-11, 04-17-2019) (Ord.
1990-08, 06-14-1990)
10-3-2. Signs and Color Markings.
The City is authorized, subject to the provisions and
limitations of this Chapter, to place and maintain signs
and traffic markings to indicate stopping, standing, and
parking regulations. The following traffic markings shall
designate zones and have the following meanings:
(1) Red curb means no stopping, standing, or
parking at any time.
(2) Yellow curb means no stopping, standing, or
parking except as designated by signs or traffic markings.
(2019-31, 12-04-2019) (Ord. 2019-11, 04-17-2019) (Ord.
1990-08, 06-14-1990)
10-3-3. Angle Parking.
The chief of police shall determine on what public
10-5 (May 8, 2020)
rights-of-way and streets angle parking shall be permitted
and shall cause angle parking areas to be marked or
signed. Angle parking in the public rights-of-way is
prohibited unless otherwise marked or signed. Angle
parking shall not be permitted upon any federal-aid or
state right-of-way unless the Utah Department of
Transportation has determined that the right-of-way is of
sufficient configuration to permit angle parking without
interfering with the free movement of vehicular traffic,
and the angle parking is marked or signed.
(2019-31, 12-04-2019) (Ord. 2019-11, 04-17-2019) (Ord.
1990-08, 06-14-1990)
10-3-4. Parallel Parking.
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within
a public right-of-way other than parallel with the edge of
the roadway, headed in the direction of lawful traffic
movement. Where a gutter is provided, of whatever
design, the right-hand (passenger-side) tires of the vehicle
must be located entirely on the gutter, except where the
gutter is a historic deep irrigation structure, or as
otherwise provided in this Chapter. Where no gutter is
provided, vehicles shall be parked so as to not create a
risk to vehicles traveling on the roadway.
(2019-31, 12-04-2019) (Ord. 2019-11, 04-17-2019) (Ord.
1990-08, 06-14-1990)
10-3-5. Parking Not To Obstruct Traffic.
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle upon a
public right-of-way in such a manner as to leave available
less than ten feet of the width of a roadway for the free
movement of vehicular traffic.
(2019-31, 12-04-2019) (Ord. 2019-11, 04-17-2019) (Ord.
1990-08, 06-14-1990)
10-3-6. Snow Event Parking Restrictions - Removal
of Vehicles - Penalty.
(1) It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle on any
public right-of-way:
(a) when snow is falling upon that vehicle; or,
(b) when snow or ice have accumulated in any
amount on the right-of-way upon which that vehicle is
parked.
(2) Any vehicle parked in violation of this Section
may be removed at the discretion of the Tooele City
Police Department for creating public safety risks and for
obstructing the City’s snow removal efforts.
(3) The following are exempt from this Section:
(a) emergency vehicles and personnel in the
performance of their functions and duties; and,
(b) Tooele City public works vehicles and
employees in the performance of their functions and
duties.
(4) A violation of this Section is punishable by a
civil penalty of $100.
(2020-21, 05-06-2020) (2019-31, 12-04-2019) (Ord.
2019-11, 04-17-2019) (Ord. 1990-08, 06-14-1990)
10-3-7. Parking for Certain Purposes Prohibited.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any public rightof-
way for any of the following purposes:
(1) displaying the vehicle for sale;
(2) washing, greasing, or repairing the vehicle
except repairs necessitated by an emergency;
(3) displaying advertising; or,
(4) selling food or other merchandise, except as
expressly authorized in this Code.
(2019-31, 12-04-2019) (Ord. 2019-11, 04-17-2019) (Ord.
1990-08, 06-14-1990)
10-3-8. Parking at Tooele High School. (Repealed.)
(2019-31, 12-04-2019) (Ord. 1990-08, 06-14-1990)
10-3-9. Application of Provisions.
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply at all
times, or at those times specified in this Chapter, or as
indicated on official signs, except when it is necessary to
stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or
official traffic-control device.
(Ord. 2019-11, 04-17-2019) (Ord. 1990-08, 06-14-1990)
10-3-10. Provisions Not Exclusive.
The provisions of this Chapter imposing a time limit
on parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to
observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting
or limiting the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles
in specified places or at specified times.
(Ord. 2019-11, 04-17-2019) (Ord. 1990-08, 06-14-1990)
10-3-11. Vehicles - Registration and Plates.
(1) Every vehicle at all times while standing or
being stopped or parked upon a public right-of-way shall:
(a) be registered in the name of the owner
thereof in accordance with the laws of the state, unless
the vehicle is not required by the laws of Utah to be
registered in this state;
(b) display in proper position two valid,
unexpired registration plates, one on the front and one on
the rear of the vehicle; and,
(c) when required, bear current validation or
indicia of registration attached to the rear plate and in a
manner complying with the laws of the state of Utah,
which registration shall be free from defacement,
mutilation, grease, dirt, and other obscuring items, so as
to be plainly visible and legible at all times.
(2) If the vehicle is not required to be registered in
this state, and the indicia of registration issued by another
state, territory, possession, or district of the United
States, or of a foreign country, substantially complies
with the provisions hereof, such registration shall be
considered as in compliance with this Section.
(2019-31, 12-04-2019) (Ord. 2019-11, 04-17-2019) (Ord.
1990-08, 06-14-1990)
10-3-12. Parking Signs Required.
(1) When the City desires to implement any sitespecific
parking regulation that imposes a parking time
limit or parking prohibition in a specific location, the
City shall install and maintain signs and/or pavement
markings that provide notice of the regulation at the
location where enforcement is sought.
(2) This section shall not apply to the following:
10-6 (May 8, 2020)
(a) general parking regulations that apply citywide;
(b) general parking regulations that apply under
specified circumstances or to places in general that meet
specified criteria without identifying specific places by
address, street name, or other specific place description;
(c) any provision of the Tooele City Code
listed below:
i. §10-3-6
ii §10-3-11
iii §10-3-14
iv. §10-3-22
v. §10-3-23
vi. §10-3-24
vii. §10-3-25(1)
viii. §10-3-26
ix. §10-3-27; and,
(d) any State Code parking regulation of
general application.
(3) When signs or pavement markings are erected
or placed by direction of the City, it shall be a violation
for any person to park a vehicle or allow a vehicle to
remain parked upon any right-of-way for longer than the
time specified or contrary to the signs or markings.
(2019-31, 12-04-2019) (Ord. 2019-11, 04-17-2019) (Ord.
2007-31, 12-19-2007) (Ord. 1990-08, 06-14-1990)
10-3-13. Approaching a Parking Space.
(1) No person shall move a vehicle in any manner
or leave a parking space and then reenter it to avoid the
intent of this Chapter.
(2) Every driver about to enter a parking space
being vacated shall stop the vehicle and wait to the rear
of the vehicle in the actual process of vacating the
parking space, and having so waited shall have prior right
to the parking space over all other drivers.
(3) No driver shall stop a vehicle ahead of a parking
space being vacated and attempt to interfere with a driver
who has waited properly to the rear of a parking space
being vacated.
(4) No driver shall stop and wait for a parking space
unless the vehicle vacating the space is actually in
motion in the process of vacating.
(Ord. 2019-11, 04-17-2019) (Ord. 1990-08, 06-14-1990)
10-3-14. Procedure for Leaving Vehicle Unattended.
Except for emergency vehicles in the performance of
official duties, no driver or person in charge of a vehicle
shall permit it to stand unattended without first stopping
the engine, locking the ignition, and removing the key
and, when the vehicle is standing, parked, or stopped
upon any perceptible grade, without effectively setting
the brakes thereon and turning the front wheels to the
curb or side of the street.
(2019-31, 12-04-2019) (Ord. 2019-11, 04-17-2019) (Ord.
1990-08, 06-14-1990)
10-3-15. Lights on Parked Vehicles.
(1) Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked upon any
right-of-way, no lights need be displayed upon the parked
vehicle.
(2) Any lighted headlamp upon a parked vehicle,
except official emergency vehicles in the performance of
official duties, shall be depressed or dimmed.
(2019-31, 12-04-2019) (Ord. 2019-11, 04-17-2019) (Ord.
1990-08, 06-14-1990)
10-3-16.Handicap Parking - Public Property.
(1) Handicap Parking in Restricted Areas.
(a) A disabled person whose automobile has
affixed thereto, as provided by law, the handicap license
plate or a transferable motor vehicle identification card
issued by the state of Utah, shall be entitled to park in the
following identified restricted parking areas without
charge, notwithstanding any other state or municipal
parking restriction:
(i) freight loading zones;
(ii) passenger loading zones; and,
(iii) time-limited parking zones.
(b) It is unlawful for a disabled person to park
for longer than the maximum designated time at
restricted parking areas.
(2) The City is hereby authorized, at its discretion,
to reserve by appropriate signage various public areas or
property for handicap parking. It is unlawful for:
(a) any disabled person to park longer than the
time shown on the sign designating the area as “handicap
parking”; or,
(b) any vehicle to be parked in an area
designated as handicap parking, unless the vehicle has
displayed upon it the handicap parking plate or
transferable identification card issued by the state.
(3) It is unlawful for any person using a vehicle
with a handicap license plate or transferable motor
vehicle identification card who is not disabled to use
handicap parking.
(4) Restricted Areas Not Authorized for Special
Handicap Parking. Nothing herein shall be construed to
permit parking by any individual, contrary to or as an
exception to the limited purpose of any of the following
designated areas:
(a) any area where official signs or traffic
markings absolutely prohibit stopping, standing, or
parking;
(b) areas reserved for emergency use;
(c) on a sidewalk;
(d) in front of or within five feet of a private
driveway;
(e) within five feet of a fire hydrant, as
measured in both directions along the street or highway
curbline or public right-of-way property line, from a line
extending from the center of the hydrant to the curbline
or property line at its nearest point;
(f) within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an
intersection;
(g) within 30 feet of the approach to any
flashing beacon or traffic-control device located at the
side of a roadway;
(h) between a safety zone and the adjacent
curb, or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately
opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless official signs or
markings indicate a different length;
10-7 (May 8, 2020)
(i) within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a
railroad crossing;
(j) within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to
any fire station, and on the side of a street opposite the
entrance when properly signposted;
(k) alongside or opposite any street excavation
or obstruction when stopping, standing, or parking would
obstruct or be hazardous to traffic;
(l) upon any bridge or other elevated structure
upon a street;
(m) at any place in any public park, playground,
or grounds of any public building other than on the roads
and parking lots provided for public parking in
accordance with provisions of any officially installed
signs;
(n) on any footpath or trail in any park,
recreational area, or playground; or,
(o) taxi and bus stands or stops.
(2019-31, 12-04-2019) (Ord. 2019-11, 04-17-2019) (Ord.
1990-08, 06-14-1990)
10-3-17.Handicap Parking - Private Property.
Only those vehicles displaying a handicap license
plate or transferable identification card issued by the state
may park in any parking space designated for the parking
of handicapped or disabled persons. This restriction shall
apply to and be enforceable upon public property and
private property where parking is open to the general
public, whether parking is provided to the general public
for free or for a fee.
(2019-31, 12-04-2019) (Ord. 2019-11, 04-17-2019) (Ord.
1990-08, 06-14-1990)
10-3-18. Parking Lots Owned by the City.
(1) No person, on the premises of any parking lot
owned by the City where a sign or signs are posted
designating such parking lot as a parking lot of Tooele
City, shall do any of the following:
(a) park any vehicle continuously within the
parking lot in excess of 48 hours;
(b) park any boat, trailer, or recreational
vehicle;
(c) park any vehicle over 18 feet in length or
eight feet wide;
(d) abandon any vehicle;
(e) make repairs on any vehicle; or,
(f) park any vehicle thereon which does not
bear a valid license plate and current registration.
(2) Any vehicle found in violation of subsection (1)
is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be
summarily abated by removing any such vehicle by, or
under the direction of, or at the request of a police officer
or other officer charged with enforcing the parking laws
of the City to a place of storage by means of towing.
(2019-31, 12-04-2019) (Ord. 2019-11, 04-17-2019) (Ord.
1990-08, 06-14-1990)
10-3-19. Loading Zones and Restricted Parking -
Designation and Signs.
The City is hereby authorized to determine the
location of passenger and freight curb loading zones and
restricted parking zones. The City shall place and
maintain signs or markings indicating the same and
stating the hours during which the provisions of this
Section are applicable.
(Ord. 2019-11, 04-17-2019) (Ord. 1990-08, 06-14-1990)
10-3-20. Freight Curb Loading Zones.
(1) No person shall stop or park a vehicle or permit
the same to remain stopped or parked for any purpose or
length of time other than for the expeditious loading or
unloading of materials in any place marked as a freight
curb loading zone during the hours when the provisions
applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall
the stop for loading or unloading of materials exceed 30
minutes.
(2) The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop and
park at a place marked as a freight curb loading zone for
the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading passengers provided that the driver must
remain with the vehicle.
(Ord. 2019-11, 04-17-2019) (Ord. 1990-08, 06-14-1990)
10-3-21. Restricted Parking Zones.
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any
purpose or length of time in any restricted parking zone
other than for the purpose to which parking in the zone is
restricted, except that a driver of a passenger vehicle may
stop or park temporarily in the zone for the purpose of
and while actually engaged in loading or unloading of
passengers when such stopping does not interfere with
any vehicle which is waiting to enter or about to enter the
zone for the purpose of parking in accordance with the
purposes to which parking is restricted. The driver must
remain with the vehicle.
(Ord. 2019-11, 04-17-2019) (Ord. 1990-08, 06-14-1990)
10-3-22. Parking in Alleys.
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley except
during the necessary and expeditious loading and
unloading of merchandise. No person shall stop, stand,
or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to
block the driveway entrance of any abutting property, or
interfere with the free movement of traffic through the
alley.
(Ord. 2019-11, 04-17-2019) (Ord. 1990-08, 06-14-1990)
10-3-23. Double Parking, Standing, or Stopping.
No person shall park, stand, or stop a vehicle in a
public right-of-way upon the roadway side of another
vehicle which is parked, standing, or stopped in a public
right-of-way except while actually engaged in loading or
unloading passengers, or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, or
when temporarily necessary to avoid other traffic.
(2019-31, 12-04-2019) (Ord. 2019-11, 04-17-2019) (Ord.
1990-08, 06-14-1990)
10-3-24. Stopping or Parking - Roadways without
Curb.
(1) No person shall stop, park, or leave standing any
vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon any street
without a curb, when it is practical to stop, park, or so
leave such vehicle off the street. In every event, any
10-8 (May 8, 2020)
parked vehicle shall be parked in the direction of lawful
traffic movement with an unobstructed width of the street
opposite the standing vehicle left for the free passage of
other vehicles, leaving a clear view of such stopped
vehicles.
(2) This Section shall not apply to the driver of any
vehicle which is disabled while on a street in such a
manner and to such an extent that it is impossible to
avoid stopping and temporarily leaving the disabled
vehicle in that position.
(2019-31, 12-04-2019) (Ord. 2019-11, 04-17-2019) (Ord.
1990-08, 06-14-1990)
10-3-25. Stopping Standing or Parking Prohibited in
Certain Areas.
(1) No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle,
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic
or in compliance with law or the directions of a police
officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following
places:
(a) on a sidewalk or curb;
(b) in front or within five feet of a private
driveway, to include the drive approach;
(c) within an intersection;
(d) within five feet of a fire hydrant, as
measured in both directions along the street or highway
curbline or right-of-way property line from the line
extending from the center of the hydrant to the curbline
or property line at its nearest point;
(e) on a crosswalk;
(f) within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an
intersection;
(g) within 30 feet upon the approach of any
flashing beacon or traffic-control device located at the
side of a roadway;
(h) between a safety zone and the adjacent
curb, or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately
opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless authorized
signs or markings indicate a different length;
(i) within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a
railroad crossing;
(j) within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to
any fire station, and on the side of a street opposite the
entrance when properly signposted;
(k) alongside or opposite any street excavation
or obstruction, when stopping, standing, or parking
would obstruct or be hazardous to traffic;
(l) upon any bridge or other elevated structure
upon a street;
(m) where official signs or traffic markings
prohibit stopping, standing, or parking;
(n) in any public park, playground, recreational
area, or grounds of any public buildings other than on the
roads or parking lots provided for public parking and
then only in accordance with provisions of any signs,
officially installed by direction of the city;
(o) on any footpath or trail in any park,
recreational area, or playground;
(p) within a fire lane, as designated by Tooele
City, whether on public or private property;
(q) on any median or island, or on any dividing
section of a street;
(r) on any street or alley less than 20 feet wide;
or,
(s) on the south or east side of any street or
alley where the width is over 20 feet, but less than 30
feet, unless otherwise directed by traffic-control devices.
(2) No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in
any manner or position contrary to any sign or marking
officially placed by direction of the City.
(3) No person shall move a vehicle under such
person's control into any such prohibited area, or upon
any area not designated for vehicular travel or parking.
(2019-31, 12-04-2019) (Ord. 2019-11, 04-17-2019) (Ord.
1990-08, 06-14-1990)
10-3-25.1. Large Vehicle Parking.
Vehicles defined in Section 10-2-7(1):
(1) are prohibited from parking on public rights-ofway
except those routes identified in Section 10-2-7(3);
and,
(2) shall comply with the provisions of this Chapter.
(2019-31, 12-04-2019)
10-3-26. Parking between Curb and Property Line
Prohibited.
No person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle upon
any portion of a public right-of-way between the curb
lines and the adjacent property lines.
(2019-31, 12-04-2019) (Ord. 2019-11, 04-17-2019) (Ord.
1990-08, 06-14-1990)
10-3-27. Using Public Rights-of-way for Storage
Prohibited.
No person shall park a vehicle, boat, trailer, motor
home, camper, recreational vehicle, motorcycle, or other
item upon any public right-of-way for a period of time
longer than 48 hours.
(2019-31, 12-04-2019) (Ord. 2019-11, 04-17-2019) (Ord.
1990-08, 06-14-1990)
10-3-28. Presumption of Liability.
The fact that a vehicle which is parked in violation
of the provisions of this Chapter is registered in the name
of a person shall be sufficient to constitute a presumption
that such person was in control of the vehicle at the time
of its parking.
(2019-31, 12-04-2019) (Ord. 2019-11, 04-17-2019) (Ord.
1990-08, 06-14-1990)
10-3-29. Parking Violation - Owner Responsibility.
Whenever any vehicle is parked in violation of any
of the provisions of this Chapter, the person in whose
name the vehicle is registered shall be prima facie
responsible and strictly liable for the violation and
associated penalty.
(Ord. 2019-11, 04-17-2019) (Ord. 1990-08, 06-14-1990)
10-3-30.Moving Illegally Parked Vehicles - Police
Authority.
A police officer is hereby authorized to remove or
caused to be removed to a place of safety any unattended
vehicle stopped, parked, or left standing on a street or
10-8.1 (May 8, 2020)
public right-of-way in a position or under circumstances
as follows:
(1) the vehicle obstructs the normal and safe
movement of vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian traffic;
(2) the vehicle obstructs the normal and safe
movement of authorized emergency vehicles and City
service vehicles, including snow plows, in the
performance of official duties;
(3) the vehicle otherwise creates a risk of danger to
persons or damage to property; and,
(4) the vehicle is abandoned or displays common
indicia of abandonment.
(Ord. 2019-11, 04-17-2019) (Ord. 1990-08, 06-14-1990)
10-3-31. Violations - Penalties.
(1) A violation of any provision of this Chapter
shall be a civil offense.
(2) Any person violating any provision of this
Chapter shall be liable for a $50 civil penalty for each
violation. Any penalty assessed under this Chapter may
be in addition to such other penalties as may be provided
in this Title.
(3) Any penalty that is not paid within 15 calendar
days from the date of receipt of notice shall be increased
to $100.
(4) As used in this Chapter, "receipt of notice"
means the affixing of a notice to the vehicle alleged to
have been in violation, or by delivery of notice to the
owner or driver of the vehicle in violation.
(2019-31, 12-04-2019) (Ord. 2019-11, 04-17-2019) (Ord.
1990-08, 06-14-1990)
10-3-32. Parking Violations - Appeal Procedure.
Appeal of civil penalties imposed under this Chapter
shall be to the Administrative Hearing Officer under
Chapter 1-28 of this Code.
(Ord. 2019-11, 04-17-2019) (Ord. 2013-07, 04-17-2013)
(Ord. 2006-02, 01-04-2006) (Ord. 1990-08, 06-14-1990)
10-3-33. Using Parking Lots and Vacant Lots to
Display Used Vehicles for Sale.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of a vehicle or
boat, or for any other person, to park, cause to be parked,
or allow to be parked the vehicle or boat on a vacant lot
or parking lot owned by another person for the purpose
of displaying the vehicle or boat for sale unless the owner
or lessee of the property on which it is parked has given
authorization for the vehicle or boat to be so parked.
(Ord. 2019-11, 04-17-2019) (Ord. 1994-29, 07-06-1994)
(March 24, 2017)
10-9
CHAPTER 4. LOW PROFILE MOTORIZED
VEHICLES
10-4-1. DefinitionBlow profile motorized vehicle.
10-4-2. Operation restrictions.
10-4-1. Definition--low profile motorized vehicle.
For purposes of this Chapter, a low profile
motorized vehicle shall mean a motor vehicle, as
defined in '41-6-1, Utah Code Ann., that is designed to
be operated from a seated position and measures less
than 36 inches in height in its normal operating
position, notwithstanding any flag, antenna, or other
attachment or modification made thereto. This
definition shall include but is not limited to miniature
motorcycles, Apocket bikes@, Ago carts@, and other
similar vehicles characterized by short vehicle height
and a low seating position.
(Ord. 2004-23, 12-15-04)
10-4-2. Operation restrictions.
(1) It is unlawful for any person to operate a
low profile motorized vehicle upon any public property
within Tooele City including but not limited to
sidewalks, parks, recreational facilities, and parking
lots.
(2) It is unlawful for any person to operate a
low profile motorized vehicle upon a public roadway
within Tooele City unless it is properly registered,
insured, equipped, and otherwise in compliance with all
applicable laws of the State of Utah, or the vehicle is
otherwise allowed upon public roadways by the laws of
the State of Utah.
(3) If a low profile motorized vehicle is
allowed upon public roadways by the laws of the State
of Utah, the operator shall be licensed with a state
issued operator=s licence of the appropriate class, as set
forth by Utah law, and shall wear an appropriately
fastened and adjusted helmet which meets the
requirements of Utah law, unless otherwise exempted
by the laws of the State of Utah.
(4) It is unlawful for an owner of any low
profile motorized vehicle to knowingly permit the
operation of the vehicle in violation of subsections (1),
(2), and (3) above.
(5) A violation of any provision of this Chapter
is a class C misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2004-23, 12-15-04)
(May 8, 2020) 11-1
TITLE 11. CRIMINAL CODE
Chapter 1. Crimes.
Chapter 2. Noise Control.
Chapter 3. Repealed. (Ord. 94-27, 12-19-94)
Chapter 4. Graffiti.
CHAPTER 1. CRIMES
11-1-1. Utah Code Annotated criminal, alcohol,
and drug provisions adopted.
11-1-2. Contributing to the delinquency of a minor.
11-1-3. Unlawful acts in or about schools.
11-1-4. Regulation of commercial handbills.
11-1-5. Discharge of firearms and other devices
within city limits.
11-1-6. Traps prohibited.
11-1-7. Repealed.
11-1-8. Curfew.
11-1-9. Possession of Contraband by Inmates.
11-1-10. Minors and the distribution or display of
harmful sexually oriented material and
sexual paraphernalia.
11-1-11. Park closure – permits – penalty.
11-1-1. Utah Code Annotated criminal, alcohol, and
drug provisions adopted.
(1) Sections 76-1-101 et seq., and 77-1-1 et seq.,
Utah Code Annotated 1953, as last amended, which
sections are known as the Utah Criminal Code and the
Utah Code of Criminal Procedure, respectively, are
hereby adopted by reference in their entirety, save and
except such portions that refer to class A misdemeanors
and felonies. Subsequent amendments by the legislature
to such sections are hereby expressly adopted.
(2) Sections 32B-1-101 et seq., Utah Code
Annotated 1953, as last amended, which sections are
known as the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, are
hereby adopted by reference in their entirety, save and
except such portions that refer to class A misdemeanors
and felonies. Subsequent amendments by the legislature
to such sections are hereby expressly adopted.
(3) Sections 58-37-1 et seq., 58-37a-1 et seq., 58-
37b-1 et seq., and 58-37c-1 et seq., of the Utah Code
Annotated, 1953 as amended, which sections are known
as the Utah Controlled Substances Act, the Utah Drug
Paraphernalia Act, the Imitation Controlled Substances
Act, and the Controlled Substances Precursor Act,
respectively, are hereby adopted by reference in their
entirety, save and except such portions that refer to class
A misdemeanors or felonies. Subsequent amendments by
the Utah State legislature to such sections are hereby
expressly adopted by this reference. (Ord. 94-48, 08-17-
94)
(4) Where the Utah Code Annotated sections
adopted in Subsections (1), (2), and (3) refer to
jurisdiction and venue as being in the state of Utah, such
sections shall be amended to refer to jurisdiction and
venue as being in Tooele City, Utah.
(5) Violations of Subsections (1), (2), and (3) shall
be prosecuted in the name of Tooele City, using the Utah
Code Annotated section numbers in the charging
documents to describe the sections violated.
(Ord. 2020-17, 05-06-2020) (Ord. 1990-13, 08-07-1990)
11-1-2. Contributing to the delinquency of a minor.
The following persons are guilty of a class B
misdemeanor:
(1) Any person 18 years of age or older who solicits,
requests, commands, encourages, or intentionally aids or
who acts with a juvenile in the violation of any federal,
state or local law or municipal ordinance, or who tends to
cause children to become or remain delinquent, or who
aids, contributes to, or becomes responsible for the
neglect, abuse or delinquency of any child;
(2) Any person 18 years of age or older, having a
child in his legal custody, or under his care, or in his
employment, who willfully abuses or ill-treats, neglects,
or abandons the child in any manner likely to cause the
child unnecessary suffering or serious injury to his health
or morals;
(3) Any person 18 years of age or older who forcibly
takes away a child from, or wrongfully encourages him to
leave, the legal or physical custody of any person, agency,
or institution in which the child lawfully resides or has
been legally placed for the purpose of care, support,
education, or adoption, or any person who knowingly
detains or harbors a child whom he has reasonable
grounds to believe has escaped or fled the custody of any
agency or institution in which the child lawfully resides or
has run away from his parent, guardian, or custodian;
(4) Any person 18 years of age or older who
provides a child with an alcoholic beverage or a
controlled substance or who encourages or permits a child
to consume an alcoholic beverage or controlled substance;
or
(5) Any person 18 years of age or older who fails to
report child abuse, as required by Section 78-36-10, Utah
Code Annotated.
(Ord. 1988-12, 03-16-1988)
11-1-3. Unlawful acts in or about schools.
(1) It is a Class "B" misdemeanor for any person to
annoy, disturb or otherwise prevent the orderly conduct of
the activities, administration or classes of any elementary,
junior high or high school.
(2) It is a Class "B" misdemeanor for any person to
annoy, idle about, wander about or play in, about, or on
any elementary, junior high or high school grounds or
buildings, while school is in session, whether on foot, or
in or on any vehicle, without being engaged in some
activity sanctioned by the administration of the particular
school involved.
(Ord. 1988-12, 03-16-1988)
11-1-4. Regulation of commercial handbills.
(1) Definition. “Commercial Handbill” means any
(May 8, 2020) 11-2
printed or written material that:
(a) advertises for sale any merchandise, product,
commodity, service, or thing;
(b) directs attention to any commercial
establishment or activity;
(c) directs attention to any meeting,
performance, exhibition, or event; or,
(d) is predominantly and essentially an
advertisement though containing material other than
advertising material.
(2) Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any
person or business entity to do, or to cause to be done, any
of the following:
(a) to throw or deposit a commercial handbill
upon public property, including parks, streets, and
sidewalks;
(b) to throw a commercial handbill upon private
property without the express consent of the property
owner;
(c) to throw a commercial handbill from a
moving vehicle;
(d) to throw or deposit a commercial handbill on
vacant or uninhabited property;
(e) to throw or deposit a commercial handbill on
property where any portion of the property is marked with
the words “no soliciting,” “no trespassing,” or similar such
words.
(3) Penalty. A violation of this Section shall be an
Infraction.
(Ord. 2017-28, 11-01-2017) (Ord. 2016-08, 05-04-2016)
(Ord. 1988-12, 03-16-1988)
11-1-5. Discharge of firearms and other devices within
the City limits.
(1) Any person who discharges a firearm within the
City limits, without a permit to do so, is guilty of a class
B misdemeanor.
(2) Any person who discharges within the City limits
any device which is designed to propel projectiles at a
high rate of speed, and who creates a substantial risk of
injury to persons or property, is guilty of a class B
misdemeanor.
(3) Peace officers of the State of Utah, while acting
within the scope and line of duty, are exempt from the
provisions of this Section, as is any person acting in
defense of self, another, or property as permitted by law.
(Ord. 1996-18, 06-19-1996) (Ord. 1988-12, 03-16-1988)
11-1-6. Traps prohibited.
(1) Every person who sets a trap is guilty of a Class
"B" misdemeanor.
(2) Each separate trap that is set constitutes an
individual and separate offense.
(3) As used within this section:
(a) "Set" means:
(i) To cock, open or put a trap in such a
condition that it would clamp closed when an object or
person touches a trigger device; or,
(ii) To place a trap which has been opened
or fixed so that it would close upon the triggering device
being touched upon the ground or in a position where a
person or animal could become caught therein.
(b) "Trap" means a clamp-like apparatus which
is utilized to catch animals, objects or persons when, after
being set and the triggering device being activated, clamplike
jaws are designed to come together with force so as
to clamp upon the person or object activating the
triggering device.
(Ord. 1988-12, 03-16-1988)
11-1-7. Repealed. (Ord 1990-20, 12-11-1990)
11-1-8. Curfew.
(1) It is an Infraction for anyone 17 years of age or
younger to be in or on a sidewalk, street, or alley or in any
public place between 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. unless
accompanied by a parent or guardian.
(Ord. 2010-02, 01-07-2010) (Ord. 1988-12, 03-16-1988)
11-1-9. Possession of contraband by inmates.
(1) Definitions.
(a) “Inmate” means any person in official
custody or under commitment to be in official custody at
the Tooele County Detention Center (hereinafter “the
jail”) and includes the following: persons on trusty or
work duty status; persons released temporarily for work
release, medical treatment, psychological or other
counseling, court appearances, or other temporary release
conditions; and, persons in the custody of the jail but not
yet booked into the jail.
(b) “Contraband” means any item the possession
of which affects the safe, efficient, and orderly operation
of the jail, and includes but is not limited to cigarettes,
other tobacco products, and any medication unless
approved by jail medical staff. “Contraband” does not
include items listed in Utah Code Annotated 76-8-
311.3(2) or 58-37-4 (1953) as amended.
(c) “Possession” means to have on one’s person,
to have in one’s clothing or other personal property, or to
have within one’s dominion or control.
(d) “Conspire” means that a person agrees with
one or more other persons to engage in conduct that
would facilitate the possession of contraband by an inmate
and commits an overt act in pursuance of the agreement.
For purposes of this ordinance, the other person involved
may be an inmate.
(e) “Jail” means the Tooele County Detention
Center and includes the grounds of the Tooele County
Courthouse building upon which the jail is located.
(2) Prohibited Acts.
(a) It shall be illegal for any inmate to possess
contraband or for any person to possess contraband with
the intent to provide contraband to an inmate.
(b) It shall be illegal for any person to conspire
to provide contraband to an inmate.
(3) Penalty.
(a) A violation of (2)(a) is a class B
misdemeanor.
(b) A violation of (2)(b) is a class C
misdemeanor.
(May 8, 2020) 11-2.1
(Ord. 1995-15, 09-16-1995)
11-1-10. Minors and the distribution or display of
harmful sexually oriented material and sexual
paraphernalia
(1) Title for Citation. The ordinance codified in this
chapter shall be known as “Minors and the Distribution or
Display of Harmful Sexually Oriented Material and
Sexual Paraphernalia.”
(2) Purpose. The purpose and object of this chapter
is to prevent persons or businesses from supplying or
displaying harmful, sexually-oriented materials or devices
to minors.
(3) Definitions. Any terms not specifically defined
herein shall be construed according to common dictionary
or community usage. For the purpose of this Chapter, the
following words shall have the following meanings:
(a) “Adult person” shall mean any person who
has reached his or her nineteenth birthday.
(b) “Display” shall mean to show an item or
image in such a manner that any portion of it may be
viewed or examined by patrons or members of the general
public.
(c) “Distribute” shall mean to transfer
possession of something from one person to another,
whether or not consideration is provided.
(d) “Harmful material” shall mean any printed
material, photograph, film, video, or other visual or nonvisual
representation which is characterized primarily by
depictions or descriptions of nudity, specified sexual
activities, or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein,
and which:
(i) Taken as a whole, is offensive to
prevailing community standards with respect to what is
suitable for minors; and
(ii) Taken as a whole, does not have
substantial educational merit for minors arising from
serious literary, scientific, or political value.
(e) “Minor” shall mean any person who has not
yet reached his or her nineteenth birthday.
(f) “Nudity” shall mean any image portraying a
state of dress in which:
(i) any portion of the female breast below
the uppermost point of the areola is exposed to view or is
covered by a covering which is less than opaque; or
(ii) any portion of the female or male
genitalia, pubic region, or the cleft of the buttocks is
exposed to view or is covered by a covering which is less
than opaque; or
(iii) any covered portion of the male
genitalia is portrayed in a discernibly turgid state; or
(iv) coverings or costumes are worn or
depicted which simulate any portion of the body described
in (i), (ii), or (iii) above.
(g) “Reasonable care” shall mean the use of
such care as a reasonably prudent and careful person
would use under the circumstances.
(h) “Sexually Oriented Material” shall mean
printed material, photographs, films, computer programs,
video recordings, slides, audio recordings, or other visual
or nonvisual representations which depict or describe as
a central theme specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, as defined herein.
(i) “Sexual paraphernalia” shall mean any
instrument, device, or object designed for use in
connection with specified sexual activity, as defined
herein, except for medically approved contraceptives or
other medical devices generally accepted within the
medical community for use in treating a medical
condition.
(j) “Specified anatomical area” means any
portion of:
(i) human genitalia;
(ii) human pubic hair or pubic area;
(iii) any portion of the female breast below
the uppermost point of the areola;
(iv) anus; and
(v) cleft of the buttocks.
(k) “Specified sexual activity” means:
(i) any act of:
(a) masturbation;
(b) sexual intercourse between persons;
(c) fellatio;
(d) cunnilingus;
(e) bestiality;
(f) sodomy; and
(g) sadomasochism, sadism, or other
acts involving torture, flagellation, or bodily restraint
accompanied by the intentional infliction of pain, for the
purpose of providing sexual gratification or enacting
sexual fantasy; and
(ii) manipulation, caressing, fondling
(directly or with an object), or oral touching by any
person of:
(a) human genitalia
(b) human pubic area or pubic hair
(c) the nipple or areola of the female
breast, or any portion of the female breast below the
uppermost part of the areola;
(d) any portion of the buttocks or anus.
(4) Distributing Harmful Material to Minors.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person or entity
to knowingly distribute, offer to distribute, or agree to
distribute harmful material or sexual paraphernalia to a
minor, when the individual or entity knows that the
recipient or intended recipient is a minor, or fails to
exercise reasonable care to ascertain the age of the
recipient or intended recipient, who is a minor.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person or entity
to display for sale, rental, or exhibition any harmful
material or sexual paraphernalia, as defined herein, in
such a way that it may be viewed or examined by minors.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person or entity
to display for sale, rental, or exhibition any harmful
material or sexual paraphernalia in any portion of a
business premises which is open to minors.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any entity which sells
sexual paraphernalia or harmful material, or any
authorized representative of the entity, to allow a minor to
enter any portion of the business premises which is closed
(May 8, 2020) 11-2.2
to minors pursuant to the requirements of this chapter; the
standard of care imposed is negligence.
(e) It shall be unlawful for any adult person
having care, custody, or control of a minor, or any adult
person directly accompanying a minor, to knowingly
permit the minor to enter any portion of a business which
is closed to minors pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
(f) It shall be unlawful for the owner or lessor
of any real property to knowingly allow the property to be
used in violation of any part of this chapter.
(g) It shall be an affirmative defense to
prosecution under this chapter that the minor produced
state-issued, picture identification which indicated that the
minor was nineteen or older, and after examining the
identification and observing the minor, a reasonable
person would have concluded that the minor was nineteen
or older; a person or entity may not reasonably rely upon
any form of identification which readily appears to have
been altered or fraudulently used.
(h) The prosecution shall not be required to
introduce expert testimony or scientific evidence to
establish a community standard with respect to minors and
harmful material.
(i) A violation of any portion of this subsection
shall be a class B misdemeanor with a minimum fine of
$400 for each separate offense. Upon a second conviction
and all subsequent convictions, the minimum fine shall be
$600. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute
a separate offense.
(5) Severability.
In the event that any provision of this Chapter is
declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remaining provisions shall continue in effect.
(Ord. 1999-18, 06-16-1999)
11-1-11. Park closure – permits – penalty.
(1) All city-owned public parks shall be closed to all
persons between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
unless otherwise signed. All city-owned skating facilities
shall be closed to all persons between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless otherwise signed. For purposes
of this Section, the public right-of-way (including streets,
sidewalks, and park strips) adjacent to a park is not
considered part of the park. In exceptional circumstances,
and for periods not to exceed 60 days, the Mayor may
authorize signage setting different closure hours for
individual parks.
(2) The Parks and Recreation Department may issue
permits to persons desiring to occupy a public park or
skating facility during closure hours.
(3) All persons in a city-owned public park or
skating facility during closure hours, without a valid
permit, shall be in violation of Utah Code §76-6-206
(Criminal Trespass), as amended.
(Ord. 2010-08, 10-06-2010)
(December 18, 1991) 11-3
CHAPTER 2. NOISE CONTROL
11-2-1. Declaration of policy.
11-2-2. Definitions and standards.
11-2-3. Sound level - Measurement method.
11-2-4. Noises prohibited.
11-2-5. Exempt uses and activities.
11-2-6. Zoning districts and permitted noise levels.
11-2-7. Permit for relief from restrictions -
Conditions.
11-2-8. Enforcement responsibility.
11-2-9. Violation - Penalty.
11-2-10. Violation - Additional remedies.
11-2-1. Declaration of policy.
It is declared to be the policy of Tooele City to
prohibit the making, creation or maintenance of excessive,
unnecessary, unnatural or unusually loud noises which are
prolonged, unusual or unnatural in their time, place and
use, and which are a detriment to the public health,
comfort, convenience, safety, welfare, prosperity, and
peace and quiet of the residents of the city. (Ord. 91-26,
12-12-91)
11-2-2. Definitions and standards.
(1) All terminology used in this chapter and not
defined in this chapter shall be interpreted in conformance
with applicable American National Standards Institute
Publications, including but not limited to SI. 1-1960, R
1971, or those from its successor publications or bodies.
(2) For purposes of this chapter:
(a) "Ambient sound pressure level" means the
sound pressure level of the all-encompassing noise
associated with a given environment, usually a composite
of sounds from many sources. It is also the A-weighted
sound pressure level exceeded ninety percent of the time
based on a measurement period which shall not be less
than ten minutes.
(b) "A-weighted sound pressure level" means
the sound pressure level as measured with a sound level
meter using the A-weighting network. The standard
notation is "dB(A)" or "dBA."
(c) "Continuous sound" means any sound which
exists, essentially without interruption, for a period of ten
minutes or more.
(d) "Cyclically varying noise" means any sound
which varies in sound level such that the same level is
obtained repetitively at reasonable uniform intervals of
time.
(e) "Decibel" means a logarithmic and
dimensionless unit of measure often used in describing the
amplitude of sound. Decibel is denoted as "dB."
(f) "Device" means any mechanism which is
intended to produce, or which actually produces, noise
when operated or handled.
(g) "Dynamic braking device" (commonly
referred to as "jacobs brake") means a device used
primarily on trucks for the conversions of the engine from
an internal combustion engine to an air compressor for the
purpose of braking without the use of wheel brakes.
(h) "Emergency vehicle" means a motor vehicle
used in response to a public calamity or to protect persons
or property from an imminent exposure to danger.
(i) "Emergency work" means work made
necessary to restore property to a safe condition following
a public calamity, or work required to protect persons or
property from an imminent exposure to danger.
(j) "Impulsive noise" means a noise containing
excursions usually less than one second, or sound pressure
level using the "fast" meter characteristic.
(k) "Motor vehicle" means any vehicle which is
self-propelled by mechanical power, including but not
limited to passenger cars, trucks, truck-trailers,
semitrailers, campers, motorcycles, minibikes, go-carts,
snowmobiles and racing vehicles.
(l) "Muffler" means an apparatus consisting of
a series of chambers of baffle plates designed for the
purpose of transmitting gases while reducing sound
emanating from such apparatus.
(m) "Ninetieth percentile noise level" means the
A-weighted sound pressure level that is exceeded ninety
percent of the time in any measurement period, such as the
level that is exceeded for nine minutes in a ten-minute
period, and is denoted "L90."
(n) "Noise" means any sound which is unwanted
or which causes or tends to cause an adverse
psychological or physiological effect on human beings.
(o) "Noise disturbance" means any sound which
annoys or disturbs reasonable persons with normal
sensitivities, or which injures or endangers the comfort,
repose, health, hearing, peace or safety of other persons.
(p) "Percentile sound pressure level" means
tenth percentile noise level; the A-weighted sound
pressure level that is exceeded ten percent of the time in
any measurement period, such as the level that is
exceeded for one minute in a ten-minute period, and is
denoted "L10."
(q) "Person" means any human being, firm,
association, organization, partnership, business, trust,
corporation, company, contractor, supplier, installer, user,
owner or operator, including any municipal corporation or
its officers or employees.
(r) "Plainly audible noise" means any noise for
which the information content of that noise is
unambiguously transferred to the listener, such as but not
limited to understanding of spoken speech, comprehension
of whether a voice is raised or normal, or comprehension
of musical rhythms.
(s) "Property boundary" means an imaginary
line exterior to any enclosed structure, at the ground
surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real
property owned by one person from that owned by another
person.
(t) "Public place" means any place to which the
public or a substantial group of the public has access and
includes but is not limited to streets, highways, and the
common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses,
(December 18, 1991) 11-4
office buildings, transport facilities, and shops.
(u) "Public right-of-way" means any street,
avenue, boulevard, highway or alley, or similar place,
which is owned or controlled by a public governmental
entity.
(v) "Pure tone" means any sound which can be
distinctly heard as a single pitch or a set of single pitches.
For the purposes of measurement, a pure tone shall exist
of the one-third octave band sound-pressure level in the
band when the tone exceeds the arithmetic average of the
sound pressure levels of the two contiguous one-third
octave bands by five dB for frequencies of five hundred
hertz (Hz) and above, by eight dB for frequencies between
one hundred sixty and four hundred Hz, and by fifteen dB
for frequencies less than or equal to one hundred twentyfive
Hz.
(w) "Repetitive impulsive noise" means any
noise which is composed of impulsive noises that are
repeated at sufficiently slow rates such that a sound level
meter set at the "fast" meter characteristic will show
changes in sound pressure level greater than ten dB(A).
(x) "Sound" means a temporal and spatial
oscillation in pressure, or other physical quantity, in a
medium with interval forces that causes compression and
rarefaction of that medium, and which propagates at finite
speed to distant points.
(y) "Sound level meter" means an instrument,
including a microphone, amplifier, RMS detector and
integrator, time averager, output meter and/or visual
display and weighing networks, that is sensitive to
pressure fluctuations. The instrument reads sound
pressure level when properly calibrated and is of Type 2
or better as specified in American National Standards
Institute Publication S1. 4-1971 or its successor
publication.
(z) "Sound pressure" means the instantaneous
difference between the actual pressure and the average or
barometric pressure at a given point in space due to sound.
(aa) "Sound pressure level" means twenty
times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the RMS
sound pressure to the reference pressure, which shall be
twenty micropascals, denoted LP or SPL.
(ab) "Stationary noise source" means any
device, fixed or movable, which is located or used on
property other than a public right-of-way.
(ac) "Steady noise" means a sound pressure
level which remains essentially constant during the period
of observation, that is, that it does not vary more than six
dB(A) when measured with the "slow" meter
characteristic of a sound level meter. (Ord. 91-26, 12-12-
91)
11-2-3. Sound level - Measurement method.
Sound level measurements shall be made with a
sound level meter using the "A" weighting scale, in
accordance with standards promulgated by the American
National Standards Institute or other reasonable standards
adopted and tested by the county health department. (Ord.
91-26, 12-12-91)
11-2-4. Noises prohibited.
(1) In addition to the specific prohibitions outlined in
subsection (2) and Sections 11-2-6 and 11-2-9, or their
successors, it is unlawful for any person to make,
continue, or cause to be made or continued any noise
disturbance within the limits of the city.
(2) The following acts are declared to be in violation
of this chapter:
(a) sounding any horn or signaling device on
any truck, automobile, motorcycle, emergency vehicle or
other vehicle on any street or public place within the city,
except as a danger warning signal as provided in Title 41
of the Utah Code, or the sounding of any such signaling
device for an unnecessary or unreasonable period of time;
(b) (i) using, operating or permitting the use or
operation of any radio receiving set, musical instrument,
television, phonograph, drum or other machine or device
for the production or reproduction of sound, except as
provided for in subsection (2)(c), in such a manner as to
violate Section 11-2-6 or its successor, or cause a noise
disturbance.
(ii) operating any device listed in subsection
(2)(b)(i) between the hours of ten p.m. and six a.m.
Monday through Friday, and between the hours of ten
p.m. through eight a.m. Saturday and Sunday in such a
manner as to be plainly audible at the property boundary
of the source or plainly audible at fifty feet (fifteen
meters) from such device when operated within a vehicle
parked in a public place or on a public right-of-way;
(c) using or operating a loudspeaker or soundamplifying
equipment in a fixed or movable position or
mounted upon any sound vehicle in or upon any street,
alley, sidewalk, park, place, or public property for the
purpose of commercial advertising, giving instructions,
directions, talks, addresses, lectures, or transmitting music
to any persons or assemblages of persons in such a
manner as to violate Section 11-2-6, or its successor, or
cause a noise disturbance unless a permit as provided by
Section 11-2-7 or its successor, is first obtained;
(d) selling anything by outcry within any area of
the city zoned primarily for residential uses in such a
manner as to violate Section 11-2-6 or its successor, or
cause a noise disturbance. The provisions of this section
shall not be construed to prohibit the selling by outcry of
merchandise, food and beverages at licensed sporting
events, parades, fairs, circuses and other similarly licensed
public entertainment events;
(e) owning, keeping, possessing or harboring
any animal or animals which, by frequent or habitual
noisemaking, violate Section 11-2-6 or its successor, or
causes a noise disturbance. The provisions of this section
shall apply to all private and public facilities, including
any animal pounds which hold or treat animals;
(f) loading, unloading, opening or otherwise
handling boxes, crates, containers, garbage containers or
other objects between the hours of nine p.m. and seven
a.m. the following day in such a manner as to violate
Section 11-2-6 or its successor, or cause a noise
disturbance;
(December 18, 1991) 11-5
(g) operating or causing to be used or operated
any equipment used in construction, repair, alteration or
demolition work on buildings, structures, streets, alleys, or
appurtenances thereto, either:
(i) in residential or commercial zoning
districts between the hours of nine p.m. and seven a.m. the
following day; or
(ii) in any zoning district where such
operation exceeds the second-level limits for an industrial
land use as set forth in Section 11-2-6 or its successor;
(h) operating or permitting to be operated any
power equipment rated five horsepower or less used for
home or building repair or grounds maintenance,
including, but not limited to a power saw, sander,
lawnmower, garden equipment or snow removal
equipment, in residential or commercial zones:
(i) outdoors between the hours of nine p.m.
and seven a.m. the following day; or
(ii) any such power equipment which emits
a sound pressure level in excess of seventy-four dB(A)
measured at a distance of fifty feet (fifteen meters);
(i) operating or permitting to be operated, any
power equipment, except construction equipment used for
construction activities, rated more than five horsepower,
including but not limited to chain saws, pavement
breakers, log chippers, powered hand tools:
(i) in residential or commercial zoning
districts between the hours of nine p.m. and seven a.m. the
following day;
(ii) in any zoning district if such equipment
emits a sound pressure level in excess of eighty-two
dB(A) measured at a distance of fifty feet (fifteen meters);
(j) operating or permitting to be operated in any
place of public entertainment any loudspeaker or other
source of sound which produces, at appoint that is
normally occupied by a customer, maximum sound
pressure levels of one hundred dB(A), as read with the
slow response on a sound level meter, unless a
conspicuous and legible sign at least two hundred twentyfive
square inches in area is posted near each public
entrance stating: "WARNING: SOUND LEVELS MAY
CAUSE HEARING IMPAIRMENT." This provision
shall not be construed to allow the operation of any
loudspeaker or other source of sound in such a manner as
to violate Section 11-2-6 or its successor;
(k) permitting any motor vehicle racing event at
any place in such a manner as to violate Section 11-2-6, or
cause a noise disturbance, without first obtaining a permit
as provided by Section 11-2-7 or successor sections;
(l) flying a model aircraft powered by internal
combustion engines, whether tethered or not, or firing or
operating model rocket vehicles or other similar noiseproducing
devices, between the hours of nine p.m. and
seven a.m. the following day, or in such a manner as to
violate Section 11-2-6 or its successor, or cause a noise
disturbance;
(m) operating any motor vehicle with a dynamic
braking device engaged, except for the aversion of
imminent danger;
(n) operating or permitting to be operated or
used any truck, automobile, motorcycle or other motor
vehicle which, by virtue of disrepair or manner of
operation, violates Section 11-2-6 or its successor, or
causes a noise disturbance;
(o) operating or causing or permitting to be
operated or used, any refuse-compacting vehicle which
creates a sound pressure level in excess of seventy-four
dB(A) at fifty feet (fifteen meters) from the vehicle;
(p) collecting garbage, waste or refuse between
the hours of nine p.m. and seven a.m. the following day:
(i) in any area zoned residential, or within
three hundred feet of an area zoned residential,
(ii) in any zoning district so as to cause a
noise disturbance;
(q) operating or causing or permitting to be
operated any motor vehicle or any auxiliary equipment
attached thereto in such a manner as to violate Section 11-
2-6 or its successor, or cause a noise disturbance for a
consecutive period longer than fifteen minutes during
which such vehicle is stationary in a residential zone;
(r) creating noise in excess of the residential
standard, as defined in Section 11-2-6 or its successor,
within the vicinity of any school, hospital, institution of
learning, court, or other designated area where exceptional
quiet is necessary, while the same is in use, provided
conspicuous signs are displayed in the streets indicating
that the same is a quiet zone;
(s) sounding, operating or permitting to sound
or operate an electronically amplified signal from any
burglar alarm, bell, chime or clock, including but not
limited to bells, chimes or clocks in schools, houses of
religious worship or governmental buildings, which fails
to meet the standards set forth in Section 11-2-6 or its
successor, for more than five minutes in any hour;
(t) sounding or causing the sounding of any
whistle, horn or siren as a signal for commencing or
suspending work, or for any other purpose except as a
sound signal of imminent danger, in such a manner as to
violate Section 11-2-6 or its successor, or cause a noise
disturbance;
(u) (i) operating a recreational vehicle or
snowmobile in a manner which violates Section 11-2-6 or
its successor, or causes a noise disturbance,
(ii) selling or operating any recreational
vehicle or snowmobile, manufactured after 1977, in the
city unless such vehicle produces no more than a
maximum sound level of eighty-two dB(A) at fifty feet
(fifteen meters).
(Ord. 2011-18, 10-19-11); (Ord. 91-26, 12-12-91)
11-2-5. Exempt uses and activities.
The following uses and activities shall be exempt
from noise level regulations:
(1) noise of safety signals, warning devices and
emergency pressure-relief valves;
(2) noise resulting from any authorized emergency
vehicle when responding to an emergency call or acting in
time of emergency;
(December 18, 1991) 11-6
(3) noise resulting from emergency work, as
determined by the director of the county board of health
or such director's designee;
(4) noise resulting from lawful fireworks and
noisemakers used in celebration of an official holiday;
(5) any noise resulting from activities of temporary
duration permitted by law for which a license or permit
has been approved by the director of the county health
department in accordance with Section 11-2-7 or its
successor. (Ord. 91-26, 12-12-91)
11-2-6. Zoning districts and permitted noise levels.
(1) It is a violation of this chapter for any person to
operate or permit to be operated any stationary source of
sound in such a manner as to create a ninetieth percentile
sound pressure level (L90) of any measurement period of
not less than ten minutes unless otherwise provided in this
chapter, and which exceeds the limits set forth for the
following receiving zoning districts, when measured at the
boundary or at any point within the property affected by
the noise:
Zoning District 9 p.m. - 7 a.m. 7 a.m. - 9 p.m.
Residential 50 dB(A) 55 dB(A)
Commercial 55 dB(A) 60 dB(A)
Manufacturing 75 dB(A) 80 dB(A)
When a noise source can be identified and its noise
measured in more than one zoning district, the limits of
the most restrictive district shall apply at the boundaries
between the different zoning districts.
(2) (a) It is a violation of this chapter for any person
to operate, or permit to be operated, any stationary source
of sound within any zoning district which creates a tenth
percentile sound pressure level (L10) of fifteen dB(A)
greater than the levels set forth for the receiving zoning
districts in subsection (1) for any measurement period.
Such period shall not be less than ten minutes.
(b) Notwithstanding subsection (2)(a), it is a
violation of this chapter for any person to operate, or
permit to be operated, any stationary source of sound
within any zoning district which creates a tenth percentile
sound pressure level (L10) greater than fifteen dB(A)
above the ambient and sound pressure level (L90) of any
measurement period. Such period shall not be less than
ten minutes.
(3) (a) For any stationary source of sound which
emits a pure tone, cyclically varying sound or repetitive
impulsive sound, the limits set forth in subsection (1) shall
be reduced by five dB(A).
(b) Notwithstanding compliance with subsection
(3)(a), it is a violation of this chapter for any person to
operate or permit to be operated any stationary source of
sound which emits a pure tone, cyclically varying or
repetitive impulsive sound which creates a noise
disturbance. (Ord. 91-26, 12-12-91)
11-2-7. Permit for relief from restrictions -
Conditions.
(1) Applications for a permit for relief from the noise
restrictions in this chapter on the basis of undue hardship
may be made to the county health department. Any permit
granted by the director of the county health department an
authorized representative shall contain all conditions upon
which the permit has been granted, including the effective
dates, any time of day, location, sound pressure level, or
equipment limitation.
(2) The relief requested may be granted upon good
and sufficient showing:
(a) that additional time is necessary for the
applicant to alter or modify such applicant's activity or
operation to comply with this chapter;
(b) that the activity, operation or noise source
will be of temporary duration and cannot be done in a
manner that would comply with this chapter; or,
(c) that no reasonable alternative is available to
the applicant.
(3) The director of health may prescribe any
reasonable conditions or requirements deemed necessary
to minimize adverse effects upon a community or the
surrounding neighborhood. (Ord. 91-26, 12-12-91)
11-2-8. Enforcement responsibility.
The county health department shall have primary, but
not exclusive, enforcement responsibility for this chapter
as it relates to stationary sources, and joint enforcement
responsibility with appropriate law enforcement agencies
as it relates to vehicular or portable sources. (Ord. 91-26,
12-12-91)
11-2-9. Violation - Penalty.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor. Each day such
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as
such. (Ord. 91-26, 12-12-91)
11-2-10. Violation - Additional remedies.
Violations of Sections 11-2-3 through 11-2-9 of this
chapter or their successor sections, are deemed and
declared to be a nuisance, and as such may be subject to
summary abatement by means of a restraining order or
injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 91-26, 12-12-91)
11-7 (December 5, 1994)
CHAPTER 3. CAMPAIGN SIGNS
11-3-1 through 11-3-10. Repealed. (Ord. 94-27, 12-
19-94)
(Sepetember 02, 1993) 11-8
CHAPTER 4. GRAFFITI
11-4-1. Legislative determination.
11-4-2. Definitions.
11-4-3. Graffiti prohibited.
11-4-4. Spray paint and markers - Sale to minors
prohibited.
11-4-5. Spray paint and markers - Prohibited
possession.
11-4-6. Penalty.
11-4-7. Reward for information leading to arrest of
perpetrator.
11-4-1. Legislative determination.
The city council hereby declares as a matter of
legislative determination that:
(1) The increasing incidents of the defacement of
public and private property through the application of
graffiti upon walls, rocks, bridges, buildings, fences,
gates, other structures, trees and other real and personal
property within the corporate boundaries of the city
constitutes a blight on this community, and, in the
interests of the health, safety and general welfare of the
residents and taxpayers of the city, immediate steps must
be taken to remove this blight.
(2) Based upon reports which the city council has
received, such defacement of property is most often
committed by persons under the age of eighteen years
using aerosol containers of spray paint, broad tipped
indelible markers.
(3) When any such person has a legitimate need for
such aerosol containers and markers, the same may be
furnished by a parent or guardian.
(4) Such aerosol containers and markers are
frequently stolen from retail stores by such persons.
(5) The sale of such aerosol containers and markers
to such persons should therefore be prohibited, and
persons who are engaged in the retail sale of such aerosol
containers and markers should be required to take
reasonable steps to prevent the theft of such aerosol
containers and markers.
(6) When appropriate, the courts should require those
who commit acts of defacement of public or private
property through the application of graffiti to restore the
property so defaced, damaged or destroyed.
(7) Obtaining convictions for the application of
graffiti is difficult due to the fact that the offense can be
committed so very quickly and secretively that witnesses
to the act are frequently nonexistent.
(8) The public should be encouraged, through the
promise of a reward, to cooperate in the elimination of
graffiti by reporting to the proper authorities the incidents
of the application of graffiti which the members thereof
observe.
11-4-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter and except as otherwise
required by the context:
(1) "Application of graffiti" means the act of
defacing, damaging or destroying any real or personal
property of anotherthrough the use of an aerosol container
of spray paint or a broad tipped indelible marker.
(2) "Broad tipped indelible marker" means any felt
tipped marker or similar implement which contains a fluid
which is not soluble in water and has a flat or angled
writing surface of a width of one-half inch or greater.
11-4-3. Graffiti prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to write, paint or
draw upon any wall, rock, bridge, building, fence, gate,
other structure, tree or other real or personal property,
either publicly or privately owned, any drawing,
inscription, figure or mark of the type which is commonly
known and referred to as graffiti without the permission
of the owner or operator of such property.
11-4-4. Spray paint and markers - Sale to minors
prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell
or to cause to be sold any aerosol container of spray paint
or broad tipped indelible marker to any person under the
age of eighteen years.
11-4-5. Spray paint and markers - Prohibited
possession.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person under the age
of 18 years to purchase or possess any aerosol container
of spray paint or broad tipped indelible marker unless
accompanied by a parent or guardian, or while involved
in an activity sponsored by a school, church or
community.
(2) It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18
years to misrepresent his age, or for any other person to
misrepresent the age of a person under 18 years of age for
the purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining aerosol
spray paint or broad tipped indelible markers for a person
under 18 years of age.
11-4-6. Penalty.
Any person who is convicted of violating any
provision of this Chapter shall be punished by a fine of
not less than five hundred dollars nor more than one
thousand dollars or by imprisonment for a term of not less
than six months, or by any combination of such fine and
imprisonment. In addition to such punishment, the court
may, in imposing sentence, order the defendant to restore
the property so defaced, damaged or destroyed.
11-4-7. Reward for information leading to arrest of
perpetrator.
(1) The city will pay to any person who provides
information which leads to the arrest and conviction of
any person who applies any drawing, inscription, figure or
mark of the type which is commonly known and refereed
to as "graffiti" to any wall, rock, bridge, building, fence,
gate, other structure, tree or other real or personal property
a reward in the amount of $250.00.
(2) The reward shall be paid to the person who
provides such information immediately upon the
(Sepetember 02, 1993) 11-9
conviction of the person so arrested.